CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF EUREKA, ILLINOIS 
____________ 
Published in 2017 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

EUREKA OFFICIALS 
____________ 
Scott Zimmer 
Mayor 
____________ 
Milt Hinnen, Ward I 
Laurie Klaus, Ward I 
Charles Germann, Ward II 
Richard Teegarden, Ward II 
Eric Lind, Ward III 
Bob Prather, Ward III 
Tim Getz, Ward IV 
Gene Rossetti, Ward IV 
City Council 
____________ 
Melissa Brown 
City Administrator 
____________ 
Richard Joseph 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Lynn Hinnen 
Treasurer 
____________ 
Marilyn Walter 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Eureka, Illinois. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 2008 Code and ordinances subsequently adopted by the City Council on or before May 15, 2017. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 2008 Code, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 RELATED LAWS RL:1 SPECIAL ACTS SA:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE RLCT:1 SPECIAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE SACT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Index 
    The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Julie E. Lovelace, Senior Code Attorney, and Howard George, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Melissa Brown, City Administrator, and Richard Joseph, City Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the City readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the City's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Eureka, Illinois. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Eureka, Illinois. 
(c)  Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Eureka, Illinois. 2017. 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
    The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Eureka, Illinois." 
State Law reference- Revision of ordinances, 65 ILCS 5/1-2-3. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Code, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    City. The term "city" means the City of Eureka, Illinois, or the area within the territorial limits of the City of Eureka, Illinois, and such territory outside of the city over which the city has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional or statutory provision. 
    Computation of time. The time within which any act provided by ordinance is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last, unless the last day is Saturday or Sunday or is a holiday as defined or fixed in any statute now or hereafter in force in this state, and then it shall also be excluded. If the day succeeding such Saturday, Sunday or holiday is also a holiday or a Saturday or Sunday then such succeeding day shall also be excluded. 
    Conjunctions. In a provision involving two or more items, conditions, provisions or events, which items, conditions, provisions or events are connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either ... or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows, except that the terms "and" and "or may be interchangeable: 
(1)  The term "and" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply. 
(2)  The term "or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)  The term "either ... or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly but not in combination. 
    Construction. The provisions of the ordinances of the City of Eureka, and all proceedings under them are to be construed with a view to affect their objects and to promote justice. 
    Council. The term "council" means the city council of the City of Eureka. The term "all its members" or "all councilmen/women" means the total number of councilmen/women holding office. 
    County. The term "county" means the County of Woodford. 
    Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a city department or city officer to do some act or make certain inspections, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or make the required inspection unless the terms of the provision or section specifically provide otherwise. 
    Gender. Words of one gender include all other genders. 
    ILCS. The abbreviation "ILCS" refers to the Illinois Compiled Statutes, as amended. Any reference to an act by short title is a reference to such act as amended. 
    Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words, technical phrases and words and phrases that have acquired peculiar and appropriate meanings in law shall be construed according to such meanings. 
    Law. The term "law" denotes applicable federal law, the Constitution and statutes of the State of Illinois, the ordinances of the City of Eureka, and, when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations which may be promulgated thereunder. 
    Limits, corporate, city. The term "corporate limits of the city" means the legal boundary of the City of Eureka. 
    May. The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive and not mandatory. 
    May not. The term "may not" has a prohibitory effect. 
    Mayor. The term "mayor" means the mayor of the city. 
    Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
    Must. The term "must" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
    Number. The singular includes the plural and the plural includes the singular. 
    Oath. The term "oath" includes an affirmation or declaration in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath and in such cases the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed." 
    Officers, departments, etc. References to officers, departments, boards, commissions or employees are to city officers, city departments, city boards, city commissions and city employees. 
    Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant, tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
    Person. The term "person" includes, means and shall be applied to any natural individual, firm, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint adventure, public or private corporation, or a receiver, executor, trustee, conservator or other representative appointed by orders of any court or in any other manner. 
    Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property. 
    Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Premises. The term "premises" means such land, lot parcel, real property, building or place as the text indicates. 
    Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
    Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Seal. The term "seal" means the city corporate seal. 
    Shall. The term "shall" is to be construed as being mandatory and not discretionary. 
    Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means that portion of a street between the curb line and adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    State. The term "state" means the State of Illinois. 
    Street. The term "street" includes all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares, curbs, or other public ways in this city which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of this state. 
    Tenant, occupant. The terms "tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building or land, include any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
    Tense. The present tense includes the past and future tenses. The future tense includes the present tense. 
    Week. The term "week" means a period of seven consecutive days. 
    Written, in writing. The term "written" or "in writing" includes printing and any other mode of representing words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by law of any official, public writing or bond, it shall be in the proper handwriting of such person, or in case he is unable to write, by his proper mark. 
    Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Code 2008, §§ 1.04.010, 1.04.080) 
State Law reference- Definitions and rules of construction applicable to statutes, 5 ILCS 70/1.01 et seq. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; history notes; references. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be the title of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after a section in this Code have no legal effect and only indicate legislative history. Cross references, editor's notes, and state law references that appear in this Code after sections or subsections or that otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of this Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  Unless specified otherwise, all references to chapters or sections are to chapters or sections of this Code. 
Sec. 1-4. - Publication of ordinances. 
    All ordinances imposing any fine, penalty, imprisonment, or forfeiture, or making any appropriation, shall be printed or published in book or pamphlet form, published by authority of city council. 
Sec. 1-5. - Altering Code. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend by addition or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. 
Sec. 1-6. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  All ordinances adopted subsequent to this Code that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. Portions of this Code repealed by subsequent ordinances may be excluded from this Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. 
(b)  Amendments to provisions of this Code may be made with the following language: "Section (chapter, article, division or subdivision, as appropriate) of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Eureka, Illinois is hereby amended to read as follows:...." 
(c)  If a new section, subdivision, division, article or chapter is to be added to this Code, the following language may be used: "Section (chapter, article, division or subdivision, as appropriate) of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Eureka, Illinois is hereby created to read as follows:...." 
(d)  All provisions desired to be repealed should be repealed specifically by section, subdivision, division, article or chapter number, as appropriate, or by setting out the repealed provisions in full in the repealing ordinance. 
Sec. 1-7. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  Supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city. A supplement to this Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in this Code. The pages of the supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into this Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete. The new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, this Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of this Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from this Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the person authorized to prepare the supplement may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as necessary to do so in order to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the person may: 
(1)  Arrange the material into appropriate organizational units. 
(2)  Supply appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions and sections to be included in this Code and make changes in any such catchlines, headings and titles or in any such catchlines, headings and titles already in this Code. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions and sections to be added to this Code. 
(4)  Where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing numbers assigned to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections. 
(5)  Change the words "this ordinance" or similar words to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," "this subdivision," "this section" or "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of this Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated in this Code). 
(6)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of the ordinances inserted in this Code. 
Sec. 1-8. - General penalty; continuing violations; notices to appear. 
(a)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" means any of the following: 
(1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense, or a violation by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is prohibited or is made or declared unlawful, an offense, or a violation by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a city officer or city employee to perform an official duty unless it is specifically provided that the failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance, a person convicted of a violation of this Code shall be punished by a fine by a fine of not less than $100.00 and not more $750.00. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance: 
(1)  With respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day that the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(2)  As to other violations, each violation constitutes a separate offense. 
(e)  The imposition of a penalty does not prevent suspension or revocation of a license, permit or franchise or other administrative sanctions. 
(f)  Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. 
(g)  The imposition of a penalty does not prevent injunctive relief or civil or quasi-judicial enforcement. 
(Code 2008, § 1.16.010; Ord. No. 07-14, 9-14-2007) 
State Law reference- Penalty for ordinance violations, 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1, 5/1-2-1.1. 
Sec. 1-9. - Acts by agents. 
    When an act is required by an ordinance, the same being such that it may be done as well by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be construed to include all such acts performed by an authorized agent. 
(Code 2008, § 1.04.050) 
Sec. 1-10. - Prohibited acts include causing and permitting. 
    Whenever in the ordinances of the city any act or commission is made unlawful, it includes causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering, or concealing the fact of such act or omission. 
(Code 2008, § 1.04.060) 
Sec. 1-11. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  Unless specifically provided otherwise, the repeal of a repealing ordinance does not revive the ordinance originally repealed or impair the effect of any savings provision in it. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 2008, § 1.04.090) 
Sec. 1-12. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence or paragraph of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
Sec. 1-13. - Provisions deemed continuation of existing ordinances. 
    The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantially the same as legislation adopted by the city relating to the same subject matter, shall be construed as restatements and continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-14. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects the validity of any ordinance or portion of an ordinance enumerated as follows: 
(1)  Annexing property into the city or describing the corporate limits. 
(2)  Deannexing property or excluding property from the city. 
(3)  Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance of bonds or other instruments of indebtedness. 
(4)  Authorizing or approving any contract, deed, or agreement. 
(5)  Making or approving any appropriation or budget. 
(6)  Providing for salaries of employees or other employee benefits or job descriptions for employee positions. 
(7)  Granting any right or franchise. 
(8)  Any ordinance establishing the boundaries of any wards in the city. 
(9)  Pertaining to a specific election. 
(10)  Establishing the prevailing wage. 
(11)  Adopting or amending the comprehensive plan. 
(12)  Levying or imposing any special assessment or local improvement. 
(13)  Dedicating, establishing, naming, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any street. 
(14)  Establishing the grade of any street or sidewalk. 
(15)  Dedicating, accepting or vacating any plat or subdivision. 
(16)  Levying or imposing or otherwise related to taxes not codified in this Code. 
(17)  Any ordinance regulating or restricting traffic or parking on particular streets or in particular places. 
(18)  Constituting the building code, electrical code or plumbing code or amending same. 
(19)  That is temporary, although general in effect. 
(20)  That is special, although permanent in effect. 
(21)  The purpose of which has been accomplished. 
Sec. 1-15. - Code does not affect prior offenses or rights. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects any offense or act committed or done, any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  The adoption of this Code does not authorize any use or the continuation of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any city ordinance on the effective date of this Code. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Adoption. 
(a)  The seal adopted for the city shall be circular in form, and shall be so constructed as to impress upon paper when in use the words "City Seal" in a circle formed by the words: "City of Eureka, Woodford County, Illinois." 
(b)  The city clerk shall be the keeper of the seal and the same shall remain in his custody. 
(Code 2008, § 1.08.010; Ord. No. 10, § 1, 1912) 
State Law reference- Authority to have a corporate seal, 65 ILCS 5/2-2-12. 
Sec. 2-2. - Designated. 
    The city is divided into four wards as follows: 
(1)  All of the territory within the city limits north of U.S. Route 24 (Center Street) is the first ward of the city. 
(2)  All of the territory within the city limits south of U.S. Route 24 (Center Street) and east of Main Street is the second ward of the city. 
(3)  All of the territory within the city limits south of U.S. Route 24 and west of Main Street is the third ward of the city. 
(4)  All of the territory within the city limits south of Reagan Drive and Sunny Lane is the fourth ward of the city. 
(Code 2008, § 1.12.010; Ord. No. 3-77, 3-14-1977) 
State Law reference- Division of city into wards, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-20-15. 
Sec. 2-3. - Freedom of Information Act. 
    The city adopts by reference the Illinois Freedom of Information Act (FOIA), 5 ILCS 140/1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-4. - City clerk designated as FOIA officer. 
    The city clerk is hereby designated as the FOIA officer to whom all initial requests for access to the records of the city are to be referred. Such requests are to be made at the offices of the city clerk at 128 N. Main, Eureka Illinois, between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m., Monday through Friday. In the event that the city clerk is not available during the times described above, the deputy city clerk is designated as the deputy FOIA officer to whom such initial requests are to be made. Except in instances when records are furnished immediately, the FOIA officer, or his designees, shall receive request submitted to the city under the Freedom of Information Act, ensure that the city responds to requests in a timely fashion, and issue responses under the Act. The FOIA officer shall develop a list of documents, or categories of records that the city shall immediately disclose upon request. 
(Ord. No. 10-02, § 1, 2-15-2010) 
Secs. 2-5-2-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Functions and duties of certain municipal officers, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-5 et seq.; city council, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-5 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-27. - Membership designated. 
    The city council shall consist of the mayor and aldermen. 
(Code 2008, § 2.08.010) 
Sec. 2-28. - Term, mayor pro-tem. 
    The chief executive officer of the city is the mayor, who shall have the qualifications required by section 2-112, and who shall hold his office for the term of four years and until his successor is elected and qualified. During a temporary absence or disability of the mayor, the mayor shall appoint a mayor pro-tem, if the mayor is unable to appoint a mayor pro-tem, the city council may elect one of its number to act as mayor pro-tem, who during such absence or disability, shall possess the powers of mayor. If the mayor is temporarily absent because of an incapacity to perform official duties, but the incapacity does not create a vacancy in the office, the city council shall elect one of their members to act as mayor pro-tem. The mayor pro-tem, during this absence or disability, shall perform the duties and possess all the rights and powers of the mayor but shall not be entitled to vote both as mayor pro-tem and as alderman. 
(Code 2008, § 2.04.010) 
Sec. 2-29. - Mayor powers and duties. 
(a)  Duties generally. The mayor shall preside at all meetings of the city council, perform all such duties as are or may be prescribed by law or by the city ordinances, and shall take care that the laws and ordinances are faithfully executed. 
(b)  Reports, recommendations to city council. The mayor shall annually and from time to time give the council information relative to the affairs of the city, and shall recommend for its consideration such measures as he may deem expedient. 
(c)  Voting. The mayor shall preside at all meetings of the city council. The mayor shall not vote on any ordinance, resolution, or motion except the following: 
(1)  Where the vote of the aldermen has resulted in a tie; 
(2)  Where one-half of the aldermen elected have voted in favor of an ordinance, resolution, or motion even though there is no tie vote; or 
(3)  Where a vote greater than a majority of the corporate authorities is required by this Code or an ordinance to adopt an ordinance, resolution, or motion. 
Nothing in this section shall deprive an acting mayor or mayor pro-tem from voting in the capacity as alderman, but he shall not be entitled to another vote in the capacity as acting mayor or mayor pro-tem, unless he resigns from the office of alderman following his election as acting mayor. 
(d)  Appointment powers-Designated officials. At the first or some subsequent meeting of the city council after the beginning of each city fiscal year the mayor shall appoint, with the approval of the city council, a building inspector, chief of police, director of public works, and city administrator. 
(e)  Appointment powers-Generally. All officers of the city, except where as otherwise provided in this article, shall be appointed by the mayor (and vacancies in all offices except the mayor shall be filled by like appointment) by and with the advice and consent of the city council, and all vacancies in such appointed offices shall be filled in the same manner. 
(f)  Mayor removal of appointed officer. Except where otherwise provided by statute, the mayor may remove any officer appointed by the mayor under this Code, on any written charge, whenever the mayor is of the opinion that the interests of the municipality demand removal. The mayor shall report the reasons for the removal to the corporate authorities at a meeting to be held not less than five nor more than ten days after the removal. If the mayor fails or refuses to report to the corporate authorities the reasons for the removal, or if the corporate authorities by a two-thirds vote of all members authorized by law to be elected disapprove of the removal, the officer thereupon shall be restored to the office from which the officer was removed. The vote shall be by yeas and nays, which shall be entered upon the journal of the corporate authorities. Upon restoration, the officer shall give a new bond and take a new oath of office. No officer shall be removed a second time for the same offense. 
(g)  Ordinances; approval, veto powers. All ordinances passed by the city council shall, before they take effect, be deposited in the office of the city clerk. If the mayor approves those ordinances, he shall sign the same. Those which he does not approve he shall return to the council, with his objections thereto in writing, at the next regular meeting of the council occurring not less than five days after the passage thereof. Such veto may extend to any one or more items or appropriations contained in any ordinance making an appropriation or to the entire ordinance. In case the veto extends to a part of such ordinance, the residue thereof shall take effect and be in force. In case the mayor fails to return any ordinance with his objections thereto by the time designated in this section, he shall be deemed to have approved such ordinance, and the same shall take effect accordingly. 
(h)  Inspection of records. The mayor shall have power at all times to examine and inspect the books, records and papers of any agent, employee or officer of the city. 
(i)  Peace keeping duties. The mayor, after receiving a certificate attesting to the successful completion of a training course administered by the state law enforcement training standards board, shall be a conservator of the peace. He shall have the power: 
(1)  To arrest or cause to be arrested, with or without process, all persons who break the peace or are found violating any ordinance or any criminal law of the state; 
(2)  To commit arrested persons for examination; and 
(3)  If necessary, to detain arrested persons in custody over night or Sunday in any safe place or until they can be brought before the proper court. 
(j)  Law enforcement, military powers. The mayor shall have the power when necessary to call out the National Guard to aid in suppressing riots and other disorderly conduct, or carrying into effect any law or ordinance, subject to the authority of the governor as commander-in-chief of the National Guard. 
(Code 2008, §§ 2.04.050-2.04.070, 2.04.090-2.04.150; Ord. No. 2, div. 2, §§ 9-11, 1912) 
Sec. 2-30. - Aldermen-Number; election. 
    The number of aldermen to be elected shall be eight. Each ward is entitled to two representatives, one of whom shall be elected at each municipal election, and each alderman shall hold his office for the term of four years and until his successor is elected and qualified. 
(Code 2008, § 2.08.020) 
Sec. 2-31. - Aldermen-Qualifications. 
    The qualification for those persons to be elected as alderman shall be those determined by state law, provided that no person shall be eligible to the office of alderman unless he is a qualified elector and resides within the ward for which he is elected, nor shall he be eligible if he is in arrears in the payment of any tax or other liability due to the city, nor shall he be directly or indirectly interested in any contract whatever to which the city is a party, nor shall he be eligible if he has been convicted of malfeasance, bribery or other corrupt practices or crimes, nor shall he be eligible to any office the salary of which is payable out of the city treasury if at the time of the appointment he is a member of the city council; nor shall any member of the city council at the same time hold any other office under the city government; nor shall he be engaged either directly or indirectly, individually or as a member of a firm, in any business transaction (other than official) with the city through its mayor or any of its authorized boards, agents or attorneys, whereby any money is to be paid directly or indirectly out of the city treasury to such member or firm. 
(Code 2008, § 2.08.040) 
Sec. 2-32. - Standing committees designated. 
    The standing committees shall consist of four members each, unless otherwise noted below, and shall be appointed by the mayor annually; the member first named on the committee shall be chairman thereof. The following shall be the standing committees: 
(1)  Public safety; 
(2)  Enterprise; 
(3)  Maintenance; 
(4)  Park; 
(5)  Budget; 
(6)  Administration and personnel; 
(7)  Economic development; 
(8)  Liquor commission (three members). 
(Code 2008, § 2.08.350) 
Secs. 2-33-2-52. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MEETINGS 

Sec. 2-53. - Meetings. 
    The city council shall sit with open doors, and its regular time of meeting shall be at 7:30 p.m. on the first and third Mondays of each month, at the city building. Adjourned meetings may be held for the purpose of completing the unfinished business of the regular meetings, at such time may be determined by the council. 
(Code 2008, § 2.08.060; Amendment to Ord. No. 2, 5-1-1978; Council action of 2-7-1983) 
Sec. 2-54. - Quorum; summoning absent members. 
    A majority of the aldermen constitutes a quorum to do business, but a smaller number may adjourn from time to time, and may compel the attendance of absentees. 
(Code 2008, § 2.08.070) 
Sec. 2-55. - Special meetings. 
(a)  Calling. Special meetings may be called by the mayor or by any three aldermen by leaving with the city clerk a call in writing, in which shall be stated the time and place of holding such special meeting and the purpose for which it is called. 
(b)  Notice. The notice provided for in subsection (a) of this section may be substantially in the following form: 
SPECIAL MEETING OF THE EUREKA CITY COUNCIL WILL BE HELD 
DATE TIME AND PLACE 
AGENDA 
Signature of City Clerk 
Date and time of posting 
Give the date and time the posting was made in the office for the public ____________ ____________ 
(c)  Voting procedure. No vote of the city council shall be reconsidered or rescinded at a special meeting unless at such special meeting there is present the number of aldermen as were present when such vote was taken. 
(Code 2008, §§ 2.08.080-2.08.100; Ord. No. 2, div. 3, § 10, 1912) 
Sec. 2-56. - Journal of proceedings; passage of ordinances, propositions. 
    The city clerk shall keep a journal of the council proceedings, and the yeas and nays shall be taken upon the passage of all ordinances, and upon all propositions to create any liability against the city or for the expenditure or appropriation of its money, and in all other cases at the request of any member, which yeas and nays shall be entered upon the journal of its proceedings. The concurrence of a majority of all the members elected shall be necessary to the passage of any such ordinance or propositions, provided that it shall require three-fourths of all the aldermen-elect to sell any city property. 
(Code 2008, § 2.08.120) 
Sec. 2-57. - Mayoral veto. 
    In case of the mayor's veto of any ordinance, or any resolution or motion provided in § 3.1-40-45 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-45), such ordinance, resolution or motion shall be reconsidered by the city council at the next regular meeting following the regular meeting at which the city council received the mayor's veto. Two-thirds of all the aldermen then holding office may agree at that regular meeting to pass an ordinance, resolution or motion over the mayor's veto by a vote of yeas and nays and entered on the journal. 
(Code 2008, § 2.08.130; Ord. No. 2, div. 3, § 19, 1912) 
Sec. 2-58. - Expulsion. 
    The city council may, by a two-thirds vote of the aldermen-elect, expel any member of the council who is intoxicated or who is guilty of disorderly conduct of any kind at any regular adjourned or special meeting. 
(Code 2008, § 2.08.140) 
State Law reference- Authority to compel attendance, provide fine, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-20. 
Sec. 2-59. - Designated. 
    At the hour appointed for meeting, the clerk (or someone appointed to serve in his absence) shall proceed to call the role of members, marking the absentees, and announce whether a quorum is present. Upon the appearance of a quorum, the council shall be called to order, the mayor, if present, taking the chair, and the mayor pro-tem if mayor should be absent. The council shall then proceed to the business before them, which shall be conducted in the following order: 
(1)  Approval of the minutes of the proceedings of the last meeting or meetings, amendment and approval of the same. 
(2)  The taking of public comment or questions on any item on the agenda. 
(3)  Presentation of accounts payable by fund and department. 
(4)  Approval of the treasurer's report at the second meeting of each month. 
(5)  Business to be brought before the council. 
(6)  Motions, resolutions and notices. 
(7)  The reports of standing committees. 
(8)  Adjournment. 
(Code 2008, § 2.08.150) 
Sec. 2-60. - Rules of procedure. 
(a)  Questions relating to priority of business. All questions relating to the priority of business shall be decided without debate by the mayor. 
(b)  Preservation of order. The mayor shall preserve order and decorum, and shall decide all questions of order, subject to an appeal to the city council. 
(c)  Putting question. While the mayor is stating a question, no member shall entertain any private discourse or pass between him and to another member. While a member is speaking, no other member shall entertain any private discourse, or pass between him and the chair. 
(d)  Determination of right to speak. When two or more members speak at once, the mayor shall name the member who is first to speak. 
(e)  Speaking on question. No member shall speak more than twice to the same general question, or more than once to a "previous question" without leave of the city council; nor more than once in any case, until every member choosing to speak has spoken. 
(f)  Member called to order. A member called to order shall immediately cease unless permitted to explain. If there is no appeal, the decision of the chair shall be conclusive; but if the member appeals to the city council from the decision of the chair, the city council shall decide on the case without debate. 
(g)  Motion-Presentation. No motion shall be debated or put, unless it is seconded. When a motion is seconded, it shall be stated by the mayor before debate. Every such motion shall be reduced to writing, if required by a member. 
(h)  Motion-In possession of city council. After a motion or resolution is stated by the mayor, it shall be deemed to be in possession of the city council but may be withdrawn at any time before a decision or amendment. 
(i)  Motion-Division. If the question in debate contains several distinct propositions, any member may have the same divided. 
(j)  Motion-Deciding sums and times. When a blank is to be filled, and different sums or times are proposed, the question shall first be put upon the largest sum and longest time. 
(k)  Motion-Procedure when question under debate. When a question is under debate, no motion shall be received unless for the "previous question" to postpone it indefinitely, to adjourn it to a certain day, to lay it on the table, to amend it, or to adjourn the city council. 
(l)  Motion-Priorities of procedures. A motion for the "previous question" to lay the question on the table, or to commit it, until it is decided, shall preclude all amendment and debate on the main question. A motion to postpone a question indefinitely, or to adjourn it to a certain day shall, until it is decided, preclude all amendments to the main question. 
(m)  Motion-Calling for "previous question." The previous question shall be as follows: "Shall the main question now be put?" 
(n)  Adjournment-Motion to initiate. A motion to adjourn the city council shall always be in order, except: 
(1)  When a member is in possession of the floor; 
(2)  While the yeas and nays are being called; 
(3)  When the members are voting; 
(4)  When adjournment was the last preceding motion; or 
(5)  When it has been decided that the previous question shall be taken. 
(o)  Adjournment-Leaving meeting. The city council shall keep their seats until the meeting is adjourned. 
(p)  Motion; recordation to include name. In all cases when a resolution or motion is entered in the minutes of the city council, the name of the member moving the same shall be also entered on the minutes. 
(q)  Committee reports-Presentation. Standing and select committees to whom references are made shall in all cases report at each council meeting the state of facts, with their opinions thereon. All reports of committees shall be addressed to the mayor and city council. 
(r)  Committee reports-Final action. Any report of a committee shall be deferred for final action thereon to the next regular meeting after the report is made, upon the request of any two members present. 
(s)  Application of Robert's Rules of Order. Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, shall be the guide in questions arising which are not settled by the rules set forth in this article. 
(Code 2008, §§ 2.08.160-2.08.330, 2.08.360) 
Sec. 2-61. - Suspension of rules. 
    To the extent permitted by law, these rules may be temporarily suspended by unanimous consent of all members present; but shall not be repealed, altered, or amended, unless by concurrence of two-thirds of all the aldermen-elect. 
(Code 2008, § 2.08.340) 
Secs. 2-62-2-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ETHICAL CONDUCT 

Sec. 2-81. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Campaign for elective office means any activity in furtherance of an effort to influence the selection, nomination, election, or appointment of any individual to any federal, state, or local public office or office in a political organization, or the selection, nomination, or election of presidential or vice-presidential electors, but does not include activities: 
(1)  Relating to the support or opposition of any executive, legislative, or administrative action; 
(2)  Relating to collective bargaining; or 
(3)  That are otherwise in furtherance of the person's official duties. 
    Candidate means a person who has filed nominating papers or petitions for nomination or election to an elected office, or who has been appointed to fill a vacancy in nomination, and who remains eligible for placement on the ballot at a regular election, as defined in section 13 of the Election Code (10 ILCS 5/1-3). 
    Collective bargaining has the same meaning as that term is defined in section 3 of the Illinois Public Labor Relations Act (5 ILCS 315/3). 
    Compensated time means, with respect to an employee, any time worked by or credited to the employee that counts toward any minimum work time requirement imposed as a condition of his employment, but for purposes of this chapter, does not include any designated holidays, vacation periods, personal time, compensatory time off or any period when the employee is on a leave of absence. With respect to officers or employees whose hours are not fixed, the term "compensated time" includes any period of time when the officer is on premises under the control of the employer and any other time when the officer or employee is executing his official duties, regardless of location. 
    Compensatory time off means authorized time off earned by or awarded to an employee to compensate in whole or in part for time worked in excess of the minimum work time required of that employee as a condition of his employment. 
    Contribution has the same meaning as that term is defined in section 9-1.4 of the Election Code (10 ILCS 5/9-1.4). 
    Employee means a person employed by the City of Eureka, Woodford County, Illinois, whether on a full-time or part-time basis or pursuant to a contract, whose duties are subject to the direction and control of an employer with regard to the material details of how the work is to be performed, but does not include an independent contractor. 
    Employer means the City of Eureka, Woodford County, Illinois. 
    Gift means any gratuity, discount, entertainment, hospitality, loan, forbearance, or other tangible or intangible item having monetary value, including, but not limited to, cash, food and drink, and honoraria for speaking engagements related to or attributable to government employment or the official position of an officer or employee. 
    Leave of absence means any period during which an employee does not receive: 
(1)  Compensation for employment; 
(2)  Service credit towards pension benefits; and 
(3)  Health insurance benefits paid for by the employer. 
    Officer means a person who holds, by election or appointment, an office created by statute or ordinance, regardless of whether the officer is compensated for service in his official capacity. 
    Political activity means any activity in support of or in connection with any campaign for elective office or any political organization, but does not include activities: 
(1)  Relating to the support or opposition of any executive, legislative, or administrative action; 
(2)  Relating to collective bargaining; or 
(3)  That are otherwise in furtherance of the person's official duties. 
    Political organization means a party, committee, association, fund, or other organization (whether or not incorporated) that is required to file a statement of organization with the state board of elections or a county clerk under section 9-3 of the Election Code (10 ILCS 5/9-3), but only with regard to those activities that require filing with the state board of elections or a county clerk. 
    Prohibited political activity means: 
(1)  Preparing for, organizing, or participating in any political meeting, political rally, political demonstration, or other political event. 
(2)  Soliciting contributions, including, but not limited to, the purchase of, selling, distributing, or receiving payment for tickets for any political fundraiser, political meeting, or other political event. 
(3)  Soliciting, planning the solicitation of, or preparing any document or report regarding anything of value intended as a campaign contribution. 
(4)  Planning, conducting, or participating in a public opinion poll in connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political organization for political purposes or for or against any referendum question. 
(5)  Surveying or gathering information from potential or actual voters in an election to determine probable vote outcome in connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political organization for political purposes or for or against any referendum question. 
(6)  Assisting at the polls on election day on behalf of any political organization or candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question. 
(7)  Soliciting votes on behalf of a candidate for elective office or a political organization or for or against any referendum question or helping in an effort to get voters to the polls. 
(8)  Initiating for circulation, preparing, circulating, reviewing, or filing any petition on behalf of a candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question. 
(9)  Making contributions on behalf of any candidate for elective office in that capacity or in connection with a campaign for elective office. 
(10)  Preparing or reviewing responses to candidate questionnaires. 
(11)  Distributing, preparing for distribution, or mailing campaign literature, campaign signs, or other campaign material on behalf of any candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question. 
(12)  Campaigning for any elective office or for or against any referendum question. 
(13)  Managing or working on a campaign for elective office or for or against any referendum question. 
(14)  Serving as a delegate, alternate, or proxy to a political party convention. 
(15)  Participating in any recount or challenge to the outcome of any election. 
    Prohibited source means any person or entity who: 
(1)  Is seeking official action: 
a.  By an officer; or 
b.  By an employee, or by the officer or another employee directing that employee; 
(2)  Does business or seeks to do business: 
a.  With the officer; or 
b.  With an employee, or with the officer or another employee directing that employee; 
(3)  Conducts activities regulated: 
a.  By the officer; 
b.  By an employee, or by the officer or another employee directing that employee; or 
(4)  Has interests that may be substantially affected by the performance or nonperformance of the official duties of the officer or employee. 
(Code 2008, § 2.74.010; Ord. No. 5-04, § 2(part), 2004) 
Sec. 2-82. - Prohibited political activities. 
(a)  No officer or employee shall intentionally perform any prohibited political activity during any compensated time, as defined herein. No officer or employee shall intentionally use any property or resources of the city in connection with any prohibited political activity. 
(b)  At no time shall any officer or employee intentionally require any other officer or employee to perform any prohibited political activity: 
(1)  As part of that officer or employee's duties; 
(2)  As a condition of employment; or 
(3)  During any compensated time off (such as holidays, vacation or personal time off). 
(c)  No officer or employee shall be required at any time to participate in any prohibited political activity in consideration for that officer or employee being awarded additional compensation or any benefit, whether in the form of a salary adjustment, bonus, compensatory time off, continued employment or otherwise, nor shall any officer or employee be awarded additional compensation or any benefit in consideration for his participation in any prohibited political activity. 
(d)  Nothing in this section prohibits activities that are permissible for an officer or employee to engage in as part of his official duties, or activities that are undertaken by an officer or employee on a voluntary basis which are not prohibited by this article. 
(e)  No person either: 
(1)  In a position that is subject to recognized merit principles of public employment; or 
(2)  In a position the salary for which is paid in whole or in part by federal funds and that is subject to the federal standards for a merit system of personnel administration applicable to grant-in-aid programs; 
shall be denied or deprived of employment or tenure solely because he is a member or an officer of a political committee, of a political party, or of a political organization or club. 
(Code 2008, § 2.74.020; Ord. No. 5-04, § 2(part), 2004) 
Sec. 2-83. - Gift ban. 
(a)  Gift ban. Except as permitted by this section, no officer or employee, and no spouse of or immediate family member living with any officer or employee (collectively referred to herein as "recipients"), shall intentionally solicit or accept any gift from any prohibited source, as defined herein, or which is otherwise prohibited by law or ordinance. No prohibited source shall intentionally offer or make a gift that violates this section. 
(b)  Exceptions. Subsection (a) of this section is not applicable to the following: 
(1)  Opportunities, benefits, and services that are available on the same conditions as for the general public; 
(2)  Anything for which the officer or employee, or his spouse or immediate family member, pays the fair market value; 
(3)  Any: 
a.  Contribution that is lawfully made under the Election Code; or 
b.  Activities associated with a fundraising event in support of a political organization or candidate; 
(4)  Educational materials and missions; 
(5)  Travel expenses for a meeting to discuss business; 
(6)  A gift from a relative, meaning those people related to the individual as father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, uncle, aunt, great aunt, great uncle, first cousin, nephew, niece, husband, wife, grandfather, grandmother, grandson, granddaughter, father-in-law, mother-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, brother-in-law, stepbrother, stepsister, half-brother, half-sister, and in-law, sister-in-law, stepfather, stepmother, stepson, stepdaughter, excluding the father, mother, grandfather, or grandmother of the individual's spouse and the individual's fiance or fiancee; 
(7)  Anything provided by an individual on the basis of a personal friendship unless the recipient has reason to believe that, under the circumstances, the gift was provided because of the official position or employment of the recipient or his spouse or immediate family member and not because of the personal friendship. In determining whether a gift is provided on the basis of personal friendship, the recipient shall consider the circumstances under which the gift was offered, such as: 
a.  The history of the relationship between the individual giving the gift and the recipient of the gift, including any previous exchange of gifts between those individuals; 
b.  Whether to the actual knowledge of the recipient the individual who gave the gift personally paid for the gift or sought a tax deduction or business reimbursement for the gift; and 
c.  Whether to the actual knowledge of the recipient the individual who gave the gift also at the same time gave the same or similar gifts to other officers or employees, or their spouses or immediate family members; 
(8)  Food or refreshments not exceeding $75.00 per person in value on a single calendar day, provided that the food or refreshments are: 
a.  Consumed on the premises from which they were purchased or prepared; or 
b.  Catered. For the purposes of this section, the term "catered" means food or refreshments that are purchased ready to consume which are delivered by any means; 
(9)  Food, refreshments, lodging, transportation, and other benefits resulting from outside business or employment activities (or outside activities that are not connected to the official duties of an officer or employee), if the benefits have not been offered or enhanced because of the official position or employment of the officer or employee, and are customarily provided to others in similar circumstances; 
(10)  Intragovernmental and intergovernmental gifts. For the purpose of this section, the term "intragovernmental gift" means any gift given to an officer or employee from another officer or employee and the term "intergovernmental gift" means any gift given to an officer or employee by an officer or employee of another governmental entity; 
(11)  Bequests, inheritances, and other transfers at death; 
(12)  Any item or items from anyone prohibited source during any calendar year having a cumulative total value of less than $100.00. 
Each of the exceptions listed in this section is mutually exclusive and independent of every other. 
(c)  Disposition of gifts. An officer or employee, his spouse or an immediate family member living with the officer or employee, does not violate this article if the recipient promptly takes reasonable action to return a gift from a prohibited source to its source or gives the gift or an amount equal to its value to an appropriate charity that is exempt from income taxation under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as now or hereafter amended, renumbered, or succeeded. 
(Code 2008, § 2.74.030) 
Sec. 2-84. - Discipline or discharge. 
    In addition to any other penalty that may be applicable, an officer or employee who intentionally violates any provisions of section 2-82 or 2-83 is subject to discipline or discharge. 
(Code 2008, § 2.74.040; Ord. No. 5-04, § 2(part), 2004) 
Secs. 2-85-2-111. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-112. - Eligibility. 
    No person shall be eligible to any office in the city who is not a qualified elector of the city and who has not resided therein at least one year next preceding his election or appointment, and no person who is a defaulter to the city shall be eligible to any office in the city. 
(Code 2008, § 2.12.010; Ord. No. 2, div. 1, § 1, 1912) 
Sec. 2-113. - Office holder restricted to single position. 
    Except as otherwise permitted by law, no mayor, member of the council, city clerk or treasurer shall hold any other office under the city government during his term of office without city council approval. 
(Code 2008, § 2.12.020; Ord. No. 2, div. 1, § 2, 1912) 
Sec. 2-114. - Conflict of interest designated; prohibited. 
    No officer shall be interested, directly or indirectly, in any contract, work or business of the city, except in his official capacity for the city, nor shall any officer directly or indirectly take, receive, or offer to take or receive any bribe of any kind; and any and all contracts made and procured, in whole or in part, in violation of this section shall be null and void. 
(Code 2008, § 2.12.030; Ord. No. 2, div. 1, § 3, 1912) 
Sec. 2-115. - Term. 
    All officers of the city shall hold their respective offices for and during the respective terms for which they are elected or appointed, and until their successors are elected, or appointed and qualified. 
(Code 2008, § 2.12.040; Ord. No. 2, div. 1, § 4, 1912) 
Sec. 2-116. - Oath of office. 
    All officers of the city, whether elected or appointed, shall, before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, take and subscribe the following oath or affirmation: "I do solemnly swear (or affirm as the case may be) that I will support the Constitution of the United States, and the Constitution of the State of Illinois, and that I will faithfully discharge the duties of the office of the City of Eureka to the best of my ability," which oath or affirmation so subscribed shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and copied upon the records of the city. 
(Code 2008, § 2.12.050; Ord. No. 2, div. 1, § 5, 1912) 
Sec. 2-117. - Bond-Requirement; amount. 
    All officers of the city, except members of the city council, shall, before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, execute a bond with security to be approved by the city council, payable to the city, conditioned for the faithful performance of the duties of their respective offices and for the payment of all money received by them according to law and the ordinances of the city. The bonds shall be as follows: 
(1)  The bond of the treasurer shall be in the penal sum of $50,000.00, which penal sum may be increased or diminished at the beginning of each or any fiscal year as the mayor and city council may determine; provided, however, that in no case shall the treasurer's bond be fixed at a less sum than double the amount of the estimated tax and assessments for the current year. 
(2)  All officers and employees who are compelled to give official bonds may be required by the city council, whose duty it is to approve such bonds, to give additional surety or new bonds whenever the security of the original bond has become insufficient by the subsequent insolvency, death or removal of the sureties, or any of them; or when for any cause any such bond is deemed insufficient. Any officer or employee failing to give bond when required, pursuant to this section, within ten days after he is so notified in writing of such request, shall be deemed to have vacated his office, and such vacancy shall be filled as required by law. 
(Code 2008, § 2.12.060; Ord. No. 2, div. 1, § 7, 1912) 
Sec. 2-118. - Bond-Form. 
(a)  The bond required by section 2-117 shall be substantially in the following form: 
"KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, 
"That We, ____________ , as principal, and ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , as sureties, of the County of Woodford, and State of Illinois, are held and firmly bound unto the City of Eureka, in the penal sum of ____________ Dollars ($) for the payment of which, well and truly to be made, we bind ourselves, our heirs, executors and administrators firmly by these presents. 
The condition of the above obligation is such that whereas the above bounden ____________ was on the ____________ day of A.D. 20 ____________ , of the City of Eureka. Now if ____________ , the said officer shall faithfully perform the duties of this said office of ____________ , the City of Eureka, and pay over all moneys of said City received by him as and turn over to his successor in office, all books or other property in his possession, belonging to said City, according to law and the ordinances of said City, then this obligation shall be void, otherwise to remain in full force and effect. 
"Which bond shall be signed and sealed by said officer and at least two sureties, and acknowledged before some officer authorized by law to take acknowledgements of instruments, which said acknowledgment shall be substantially in the following form: 
"STATE OF ILLINOIS, 
County of Woodford. 
"I, ____________ , hereby certify that ____________ , who are each personally known to me to be the same persons whose names are subscribed to the foregoing instrument appeared before me this day in person and acknowledged that they signed, sealed and delivered said instrument as their free and voluntary act for the uses and purposes therein set forth Given under my hand and seal this ____________ day of A. D. 20 ____________ . Sealed with our seals, and dated this day of A.D. 20 ____________ ." 
(b)  The bonds of each and all of the other officers of the city shall be determined in accordance with the most current state statute. 
(Code 2008, § 2.12.070) 
Sec. 2-119. - Bond-Failure to maintain. 
    It shall be the duty of the city administrator, if he fails to give a new bond or additional security, forthwith to deliver over to his sureties all books, moneys, vouchers, papers and every description of property whatever pertaining to his office. The sureties may at any time after the failure to file the bond maintain an action of replevin or other appropriate action to recover such property, money or effects from their said principal. 
(Code 2008, § 2.12.080; Ord. No. 2, div. 1, § 8, 1912) 
Sec. 2-120. - Bond-Office holder not deemed surety. 
    No person holding any city office shall be taken as surety on any bond payable to the city. 
(Code 2008, § 2.12.090; Ord. No. 2, div. 1, § 9, 1912) 
Sec. 2-121. - Bond-Filing, recordation. 
    All bonds required by this chapter shall be filed with the city clerk, except the bond of the city clerk, which shall be filed with the city treasurer. All bonds shall be copied upon the records of the city. 
(Code 2008, § 2.12.100; Ord. No. 2, div. 1, § 10, 1912) 
Sec. 2-122. - Bond-Release of surety; securing new surety. 
    When the surety upon the bond of any city officer desires to be released from such bond, he may give notice in writing to the officer, upon whose bond he is surety, that he desires to be so released, and that such officer give a new bond with sufficient sureties within ten days after receiving such notice, and may within five days after the service of such notice deliver a copy of the same, with an affidavit showing the time and manner of service, to the city council. If such officer does not within ten days after receiving such notice or, within such further time not exceeding 20 days as the city council shall allow, give a new bond with sufficient security, approved as required by law, his office shall become vacant. If a new bond is given by such officer and approved by the city council, then the former securities shall be entirely released and discharged from all liabilities incurred by such officer in consequence of business which may have come into his hands from and after the time of the approval of such new bond, but they shall not be released from liabilities incurred previous to the filing of the new bond, and the sureties to the new bond are liable for all the official delinquencies of the officer, whether of omission or commission, which may occur after the approval of the new bond. 
(Code 2008, § 2.12.110; Ord. No. 2, div. 1, § 11, 1912) 
Sec. 2-123. - Commission by warrant. 
    After taking the oath and filing the bond as designated in this article, and before entering upon the duties of their offices, all city officers, except the aldermen, shall be commissioned by warrant under the corporate seal, signed by the mayor and attested by the city clerk. 
(Code 2008, § 2.12.120; Ord. No. 2, div. 1, § 12, 1912) 
Sec. 2-124. - Contested office, rights of warrant holder. 
    Any person holding the commission to an office shall be entitled to the possession of such office and all property belonging to the same pending any contest over such office. 
(Code 2008, § 2.12.130; Ord. No. 2, div. 1, § 13, 1912) 
Sec. 2-125. - Oaths, affirmations; power to administer. 
    The mayor and city clerk shall have power to administer oaths and affirmations upon all lawful occasions. 
(Code 2008, § 2.12.140; Ord. No. 2, div. 1, § 14, 1912) 
Sec. 2-126. - Vacation. 
    Except as otherwise provided by law, elective offices shall become vacant on the happening of any of the following events before the expiration of the term of the person holding such office: 
(1)  Death or disability; 
(2)  Resignation; 
(3)  Owing a debt to the city; 
(4)  Failure to maintain permanent residency within the city or ward, in the case of an alderman; 
(5)  Conviction of an infamous crime, or of any offense involving a violation of his official oath; 
(6)  Refusal or neglect to take his oath of office or to give or renew his official bond, within the time required by law; 
(7)  The decision of a competent tribunal declaring his election void; 
(8)  Removal from office by the decision of a competent tribunal. 
(Code 2008, § 2.12.170; Ord. No. 2, div. 1, § 17, 1912) 
Sec. 2-127. - Salary unchanged during term of office. 
    The fees, salary or compensation of no city officer who is elected or appointed for a definite term of office shall be increased or demised during such term. 
(Code 2008, § 2.12.180) 
Secs. 2-128-2-152. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CITY ADMINISTRATOR 

Sec. 2-153. - Creation of office. 
    There is created and established the employment position of city administrator. The city administrator shall receive such compensation as may, from time to time, be recommended by the mayor and approved by the city council. 
(Code 2008, § 2.13.010; Ord. No. 9-83(part), 1983) 
Sec. 2-154. - Appointment of the city administrator. 
    The city administrator shall be appointed for an indefinite term by the mayor with the advice and consent of the council. The city administrator may be removed from office in the same manner. At his time of appointment, he need not be a resident of the city, but shall establish such residence within 90 days from appointment. 
(Code 2008, § 2.13.020; Ord. No. 9-83(part), 1983) 
Sec. 2-155. - Duties and responsibilities. 
    The city administrator shall be the chief administrative officer of the city in dealings with citizens, service vendors, civic groups and other governmental agencies and shall act as the principal intermediary between the mayor and council, and all city employees. The city administrator shall have the following duties and responsibilities: 
(1)  To supervise and direct the day-to-day operations of the city's departments and personnel, including, without limitation, the director of public works (streets, waterworks, sewage collection and treatment system), the chief of police and all other municipal employees; and to consult with the city clerk, the city treasurer and the city attorney; 
(2)  To carry out and implement the policy direction established by the mayor and council; 
(3)  To recruit, screen and evaluate all candidates for employment with the city, and shall follow the policies and procedures outlined in the city standard policies and procedures manual; 
(4)  To assist the mayor and council in appointing or removing officers which by statute or ordinance are to be appointed or removed by them; 
(5)  After consultation with the mayor, to recommend the appointment or removal of any other supervisory municipal employee to the council for confirmation; 
(6)  After consultation with supervisory employee involved, to appoint or remove all subordinate employees, workers or laborers; 
(7)  To develop plans and schedule work for city work force and to supervise the implementation of those plans by the city's supervisory staff; 
(8)  To serve as the city's zoning enforcement officer with the duties and responsibilities prescribed for that officer in chapter 78; 
(9)  To supervise the city's director of public works, superintendent of water and superintendent of sewer in planning and supervision of street, sewer and water functions; 
(10)  To attend all meetings of the council and all meetings of various city boards, commissions and council committees, with the right to take part in the discussions but without the right to vote; 
(11)  To approve all purchases not requiring prior council action and to prepare bid specifications and related documents for other purchases; 
(12)  To prepare and recommend annual operating and long range capital improvement programs, to prepare written reports and documents at the direction of the mayor and city council, and to evaluate and report to the council no less frequently than monthly on the operation of the various city departments; 
(13)  To perform such other duties as may be prescribed by the mayor and city council. 
(Code 2008, § 2.13.030) 
Secs. 2-156-2-178. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CITY CLERK 

Sec. 2-179. - Election; qualification. 
    The city clerk shall be elected and hold office for a term of four years and until his successor is elected and qualified. No person shall be eligible to hold the office of city clerk unless he is qualified as required by law. 
Sec. 2-180. - Recordkeeping duties; city documents; duty of the city clerk. 
    It shall be the duty of the city clerk to keep the corporate seal, and all papers belonging to the city duly, filed in the city office. The clerk shall attend all the meetings of the city council, and keep a full, complete and correct record of all its proceedings in the journal to be provided by the city council for that purpose. 
(Code 2008, § 2.16.010; Ord. No. 3-00, § 1(part), 2000) 
Sec. 2-181. - Ordinances; recordation; certification. 
    The city clerk shall record in a book to be kept for that purpose, all ordinances passed by city council, and at the foot of each ordinance so recorded, they shall make a memorandum or certificate of the date of its passage and of the publication, or posting of the same, which memorandum shall be in the following form as near as the circumstances will permit: 
STATE OF ILLINOIS, Woodford County, City of Eureka,  
    "I, ____________ , City Clerk of the City of Eureka, do hereby certify that I am the keeper of the records and ordinances of said City, and that the foregoing ordinance entitled 'An Ordinance was duly passed by the Mayor and City council of said City on the ____________ day of ____________ , A.D. 20 ____________ .' Witness my hand and the seal of said City of Eureka this ____________ day of ____________ , A.D. 20 ____________ . City Clerk." 
    (SEAL) 
(Code 2008, § 2.16.020; Ord. No. 3-00, § 1(part), 2000) 
Sec. 2-182. - Ordinances; publications; fillings. 
    The city clerk shall cause all ordinances of the city council imposing any fine, penalty, imprisonment or forfeiture, or making any appropriation, to be published in pamphlet form and filed with the county clerk as appropriate. The clerk shall see that all ordinances so passed by the city council shall, before they take effect, be deposited in the city office. 
(Code 2008, § 2.16.030; Ord. No. 300, § 1(part), 2000) 
Sec. 2-183. - Licenses; recordation. 
    The city clerk shall issue and deliver all licenses, and enter upon the license register a true record of the same, showing the purpose for which and the person to whom the same is issued, the amount paid for, and the date of issuing and expiration of the same. The record may be in the following form: 
    "LICENSE RECORD" 
    "Name of person to whom issued. Date. Expiration date. Purpose. Amount." 
(Code 2008, § 2.16.040; Ord. No. 3-00, § 1(part), 2000) 
Sec. 2-184. - Council meetings-Journal of proceedings. 
    The city clerk shall enter upon the journal of proceedings the yeas and nays taken upon the passage of all ordinances and all propositions to create any liability against the city, or for the expenditure or appropriation of its money, and in all other cases at the request of any member of the council. He shall also, whenever any vote is taken to pass an ordinance over the veto of the mayor, enter the yeas and nays upon said journal as aforesaid. 
(Code 2008, § 2.16.050; Ord. No. 3-00, § 1(part), 2000) 
Sec. 2-185. - Council meetings-Record of committee. 
    The city clerk shall keep a list of all committees appointed and of the business referred to them and shall note when the committees report and the date and nature of such reports. 
(Code 2008, § 2.16.060; Ord. No. 3-00, § 1(part), 2000) 
Sec. 2-186. - Attestation; certification duties. 
    The city clerk shall attest all deeds, contracts and leases made by the mayor and city council and in conjunction with the mayor, sign all ordinances, bonds, licenses and orders on the city treasurer and affix the corporate seal thereto and perform such other and further duties as may be required by law and the council. 
(Code 2008, § 2.16.070; Ord. No. 3-00, § 1(part), 2000) 
Sec. 2-187. - Publication of treasurer's report. 
    The city clerk shall immediately upon the receipt of the treasurer's annual report cause the same to be published in some newspaper published in the city. If there is no newspaper published in the city a copy shall be posted in a public place in the city. 
(Code 2008, § 2.16.080; Ord. No. 3-00, § 1(part), 2000) 
Sec. 2-188. - Elections; notification of officers. 
    The city clerk shall within five days after the result of any city election is declared or appointments made, notify all persons elected or appointed to office of their election or appointment. 
(Code 2008, § 2.16.090; Ord. No. 3-00, § 1(part), 2000) 
Sec. 2-189. - Transfer to successor. 
    The city clerk shall, upon the termination of his term of office, deliver to the successor in office all property, books and effects of every description in his possession belonging to the city or appertaining to the office. If he refuses to do so within five days after notification and request, he shall be liable upon his bond for all damages caused thereby. 
(Code 2008, § 2.16.100; Ord. No. 3-00, § 1(part), 2000) 
Secs. 2-190-2-216. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CITY TREASURER 

Sec. 2-217. - Election; qualification. 
    The city treasurer shall be elected and hold office for a term of four years and until his successor is elected and qualified. No person shall be eligible to hold the office of city treasurer unless he is qualified as required by law. 
Sec. 2-218. - Duties, generally. 
    The city treasurer shall perform all duties as are or may be prescribed by law or by the city ordinances. 
Sec. 2-219. - Receipt, disbursements of funds. 
    The city treasurer shall receive and keep all money of the city coming into his hands, and disburse the same only upon the warrant of the mayor, countersigned by the clerk, which warrant shall state the fund or appropriation to which the same is chargeable and to whom payable. 
(Code 2008, § 2.20.010; Ord. No. 2, div. 4, § 1, 1912) 
Sec. 2-220. - Warrant for funds form. 
    The warrant required by section 2-219 shall be as near as possible in the following form: A list of warrants by fund and department with the dollar amount to be paid and the vendor name with description of expense. A total for each fund and department will be designated with total warrants for the city due. 
City of Eureka Department Summary Report Date Fund Department Warrant paid to Description of Expense Total payable Total warrants for Department Total warrants for City  
(Code 2008, § 2.20.020) 
Sec. 2-221. - Accounting duties; personal use of city funds prohibited. 
    The treasurer shall keep, in proper books to be provided by the city, by double entry, a full and accurate account of all moneys received and disbursed by him in behalf of the city, specifying the time of receipt and disbursement, from who received and to whom disbursed, and from what fund received and disbursed. He shall keep a separate account of each fund or appropriation, and the debts and credits belonging thereto. He shall keep all moneys belonging to the city in his hands separate and distinct from his own moneys, and he is expressly prohibited from using, either directly or indirectly, the corporation money or warrants in his custody and keeping for his own use and benefit, or that of any other person whomsoever. Any violation of this section shall subject him to removal from office by the city council. In case of such removal, the city council shall declare the office vacant, and the mayor shall appoint, with the approval of the city council, a city treasurer to fill such vacancy who shall hold his office for the remainder of the unexpired term, and until a successor is elected and qualified. 
(Code 2008, § 2.20.030; Ord. No. 2, div. 4, § 3, 1912) 
Sec. 2-222. - Receipts for moneys received. 
    The treasurer shall maintain a list of every person paying money into the treasury a receipt therefor, specifying the date of payment, and upon what account paid, and he shall file copies of such receipts with the clerk at the date of his monthly reports. 
(Code 2008, § 2.20.040; Ord. No. 2, div. 4, § 4, 1912) 
Sec. 2-223. - Accounting duties-Monthly report. 
    The treasurer shall at the end of each and every month, and oftener if required, render an account to the city council under oath, showing the state of the treasury at the date of such account, and the balance of money in the treasury. The treasurer shall accompany such accounts with a statement of all moneys received into the treasury and on what account, together with all warrants redeemed and paid by the treasurer. These warrants, with any and all vouchers held by the treasurer, shall be delivered to the clerk, and filed with his account in the clerk's office upon every day of such settlement. The treasurer shall return all warrants paid by the treasurer, stamped or marked "paid." He shall keep a register of all warrants redeemed and paid, which shall describe such warrants and show the date, amount, number, the fund from which paid, the name of the person to whom paid, and when paid. 
(Code 2008, § 2.20.050; Ord. No. 2, div. 4, § 5, 1912) 
Sec. 2-224. - Accounting duties-Annual, special request reports. 
    The treasurer shall report to the city council as often as required, a full and detailed account of all receipts and expenditures of the corporation as shown by his books up to the time of said report. He shall annually, between April 1 and 10, make out and file with the clerk a full and detailed account of all such receipts and expenditures, and of all his transactions as treasurer during the preceding fiscal year, and shall show in such account the state of the treasury at the close of the fiscal year; which account the clerk shall immediately cause to be published in a newspaper printed in the city, if there is one, and if not, then by posting the same in a public place in the clerk's office. 
(Code 2008, § 2.20.060; Ord. No. 2, div. 4, § 6, 1912) 
Sec. 2-225. - Transfer to successor. 
    The treasurer shall, upon the termination of his term of office, within five days after notification and request, deliver to his successor in office, all property, books and effects of every description in his possession belonging to the city or appertaining to his office. Upon his refusal or failure to do so, he shall be liable on his bond for all damages caused thereby. 
(Code 2008, § 2.20.070; Ord. No. 2, div. 4, § 7, 1912) 
Secs. 2-226-2-243. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - CHIEF OF POLICE 

Sec. 2-244. - Enforcement of city ordinances. 
    The chief of police shall have the power and authority provided by law, and shall cause all ordinances of the city to be enforced. 
(Code 2008, § 2.28.010; Ord. No. 2, div. 7, § 1, 1912; Ord. No. 26(part), 1913) 
Sec. 2-245. - Prosecution for violation. 
    It shall be the duty of the chief of police upon its coming to his knowledge that the provisions of any ordinance have been violated, to forthwith make the proper complaint. If resolution through notification in writing of violation does not resolve the complaint the chief of police shall file before the competent court, procure the arrest of the offender, the attendance of witnesses, and the production of evidence for the successful prosecution of the offender. 
(Code 2008, § 2.28.020; Ord. No. 2, div. 7, § 2, 1912; Ord. No. 26(part), 1913) 
Sec. 2-246. - Arrest for violation. 
    The chief of police may arrest a person when: 
(1)  He has a warrant commanding that such person be arrested; 
(2)  He has reasonable grounds to believe that a warrant for the person's arrest has been issued in this state or in another jurisdiction; or 
(3)  He has reasonable grounds to believe that the person is committing or has committed an offense as prescribed by the statutes of the state or a violation of this Code. 
(Code 2008, § 2.28.03; Ord. No. 2, div. 7, § 3, 1912; Ord. No. 26(part), 1913) 
Sec. 2-247. - Custody of city property. 
    The chief of police shall have charge of all city property not otherwise in the charge of the mayor and city council. 
(Code 2008, § 2.28.040; Ord. No. 2, div. 7, § 5, 1912; Ord. No. 26(part), 1913) 
Sec. 2-248. - Conscientious execution of duties. 
    The chief of police shall be active and vigilant in the discharge of his duties and to the best of his ability cause the ordinances of this city to be rigidly enforced. 
(Code 2008, § 2.28.050; Ord. No. 2, div. 7, § 6, 1912; Ord. No. 26(part), 1913) 
Sec. 2-249. - Duties, generally. 
    The chief of police shall perform such other duties as may be required of him by ordinance, resolution or by order of the mayor and city council. 
(Code 2008, § 2.28.060; Ord. No. 2, div. 7, § 2, 1912; Ord. No. 26(part), 1913) 
Sec. 2-250. - Arrests, serving process; authority. 
    The chief of police may serve any process or make any arrests authorized to be made by any city officer. 
(Code 2008, § 2.12.150; Ord. No. 2, div. 1, § 15, 1912) 
Sec. 2-251. - Police powers. 
    The chief of police and his deputies, police officers shall be conservators of the peace, and such officers shall have power to arrest, or cause to be arrested, with or without process, all persons who break the peace or are found violating any ordinance of the city, or any criminal law of the state, and may commit for examination and if necessary detain such person in custody, overnight or on Sunday, Saturday, or holiday in the county jail or any other safe place, or until they can be brought before the proper circuit court. All warrants for the violation of ordinances and all criminal warrants to whomsoever directed, may be served and executed within the corporate limits of the city by any police officer of the city. 
(Code 2008, § 2.12.160; Ord. No. 2, div. 1, § 16, 1912) 
Secs. 2-252-2-280. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DEPARTMENTS (RESERVED) 

Secs. 2-281-2-308. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - EMPLOYEE BENEFITS (RESERVED) 

Secs. 2-309-2-334. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - FINANCE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-335. - Fiscal year designated. 
    The fiscal and municipal year of the city shall begin on May 1, each and every year. 
(Code 2008, § 3.04.010) 
Sec. 2-336. - Restrictions. 
    The mayor and city council, whenever the interests of the city may require it, may borrow money on the credit of the city for corporate purposes and issue bonds therefor, in such amounts and forms, and on such conditions as it shall prescribe, provided that ordinances providing for the issue of bonds (except bonds to refund existing bonded indebtedness) shall not go into effect until approved by a majority of the voters in the city voting upon the question at an election called for that purpose and held in accordance with the provisions of the laws of the state. The city shall not become indebted in any manner or for any purpose to an amount, including existing indebtedness, in the aggregate to exceed five percent on the value of the taxable property therein, to be ascertained by the last assessment for state and county taxes previous to the incurring of such indebtedness and before or at the time of incurring and indebtedness shall provide for the collection of a direct annual tax sufficient to pay the interest on such debt as it falls due, and also to pay and discharge the principal thereof within 20 years after contracting the same. 
(Code 2008, § 3.12.010; Ord. No. 2, div. 3, § 16, 1912) 
State Law reference- Limitation on municipal indebtedness, 65 ILCS 5/8-5-1. 
Secs. 2-337-2-360. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BUDGET[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal finance, 65 ILCS 5/8-1-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-361. - Adoption of annual budget. 
    The city hereby adopts 65 ILCS 5/8-2-9.1-5/8-2-9.10, as they are now or may hereafter be amended. 
(Code 2008, § 3.08.010; Ord No. 1-84, § 1, 1984) 
Sec. 2-362. - Budget officer. 
    The mayor, with the approval of the city council shall appoint a budget officer who shall have the powers, duties and responsibilities enumerated in 65 ILCS 5/8-2-9.1-5/8-2-9.10, as they are now or may hereafter be amended. The budget officer shall give a bond in such sum as' may be required by statute. 
(Code 2008, § 3.08.020; Ord. No. 1-84, § 2, 1984) 
Sec. 2-363. - Computation of annual budget. 
    The budget officer shall compile a budget pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/8-2-9.1-5/8-2-9.10, as they are now, or may hereafter be amended, containing estimates of the revenues available before the beginning of the fiscal year to which it applies together with recommended expenditures for the municipality and all of its boards, commissions and departments. Said budget shall be adopted prior to May 1 of each fiscal year. 
(Code 2008, § 3.08.030; Ord. No. 1-84, § 3, 1984) 
Sec. 2-364. - Public inspection, notice and hearing on budget. 
    Copies of the tentative annual budget shall be made available for public inspection in printed or typewritten form in the office of the city clerk for at least ten days prior to the passage of the annual budget. Not less than one week after the budget is available for inspection, and prior to final action on the budget, at least one public hearing shall be held on the budget by the city council. Notice of this hearing shall be given by publication in a newspaper having a general circulation in the city at least one week prior to the time of hearing. 
(Code 2008, § 3.08.040; Ord. No. 1-84, § 4, 1984) 
Sec. 2-365. - Revision of annual budget. 
    The city council may delegate authority to heads of municipal departments, boards or commissions to delete, add to, or change items previously budgeted to the department, board or commission, subject to such limitation or requirement for prior approval by the budget officer as the city council, upon a two-thirds vote of the members, may establish. The annual budget may be revised by a vote of two-thirds of the city council by deleting, adding to, or changing budgeted items. No revision of the budget shall be made increasing the budget in the event funds are not available to effectuate the purpose of the revision. 
(Code 2008, § 3.08.050; Ord. No. 1-84, § 5, 1984) 
Sec. 2-366. - Payments. 
    No account or claim against the city, except for the salaries, or for the payment of any judgment against the city, or for fee bills of officers of court, shall be audited or paid unless the person presenting the same, or some credible person for him, makes oath in writing attached thereto that the same is correct, due and unpaid. And no claim or account against the city, upon any account made or indebtedness incurred by any such officer shall be paid unless accompanied by the certificate of such officer stating that he has examined such account, or claim, and believes that the same is correct, reasonable and in accordance with the contract. 
(Code 2008, § 2.56.010; Ord. No. 13, § 1, 1912) 
Secs. 2-367-2-390. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-391-2-408. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PLANNING COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-409. - Creation; purpose. 
    In order that adequate provisions be made for the preparation of a comprehensive city plan for the guidance, direction and control of the growth and development or redevelopment of the city and contiguous territory not more than 11/2 miles beyond the corporate limits and not included in any municipality, a planning commission is created under authority of 65 ILCS 5/11-12-4 et seq., and as amended. 
(Code 2008, § 2.40.010; Ord. No. 3-66, § 1, 1966) 
Sec. 2-410. - Membership. 
    The planning commission shall consist of five members, citizens of the city and two ex officio members, appointed by the mayor on the basis of their particular fitness for their duty on the planning commission and subject to the approval of the city council. 
(Code 2008, § 2.40.020; Ord. No. 3-66, § 2, 1966) 
Sec. 2-411. - Term of office; vacancies; compensation. 
    Members shall serve for a period of five years. Vacancies shall be filled by appointments for unexpired terms only. All members of the commission shall serve with compensation of $25.00 per month except that, if the city council deems it advisable, they may receive such compensation as may be fixed from time to time by the city council. 
(Code 2008, § 2.40.030; Ord. No. 3-66, § 3, 1966) 
Sec. 2-412. - Organization. 
    Immediately following their appointment, the members of the planning commission shall meet, organize, elect such officers as it may deem necessary, and adopt and later change or alter rules and regulations of organization and procedure consistent with city ordinances and state laws. The commission shall keep written records of its proceedings, which shall be open at all times to public inspection. The commission shall also file an annual report with the mayor and council setting forth its transactions and recommendations. 
(Code 2008, § 2.40.040; Ord. No. 3-66, § 4, 1966) 
Sec. 2-413. - Powers and duties. 
    The planning commission shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  To prepare and recommend to the city council a comprehensive plan for the present and future development or redevelopment of the city and contiguous unincorporated territory not more than 11/2 miles beyond the corporate limits of the city and not included in any other municipality. Such plan may be adopted in whole or in separate geographical or functional parts, each of which, when adopted, shall be the official comprehensive plan or part thereof for the city. Such plan shall be advisory except as to such part thereof as has been implemented by ordinance duly enacted by the city council. All requirements for public hearing, filing of notice of adoption with the county recorder of deeds, and filing of said plan and ordinances with the municipal clerk shall be complied with as provided for by law. To provide for the health, safety, comfort and convenience of the inhabitants of the city and contiguous territory, such plan shall establish reasonable standards of design for subdivisions and for re-subdivisions of unimproved land and of areas subject to redevelopment in respect to public improvements as defined in this chapter and shall establish reasonable requirements governing the location, width, course, and surfacing of public streets and highways, alleys, ways for public service facilities, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, street lights, parks, playgrounds, school grounds, size of lots to be used for residential purposes, stormwater drainage, water supply and distribution, sanitary sewers, and sewage collection and treatment. The requirements specified in this division shall become regulatory only when adopted by ordinance. 
(2)  To designate land suitable for annexation to the municipality and the recommended zoning classification for such land upon annexation. 
(3)  To recommend to the city council, from time to time, such changes in the comprehensive plan, or any part thereof, as may be deemed necessary. 
(4)  To prepare and recommend to the city council, from time to time, plans and/or recommendations for specific improvements in pursuance of the official comprehensive plan. 
(5)  To give aid to the officials of the city charged with the direction of projects for improvements embraced within the official plan or parts thereof to further making of such improvements and generally to promote the realization of the official comprehensive plan. 
(6)  To arrange and conduct any form of publicity relative to its activities for the general purpose of public understanding. 
(7)  To cooperate with municipal or regional planning commissions and other agencies or groups to further the local planning program and to assure harmonious and integrated planning for the area. 
(8)  To exercise such other powers germane to the powers granted under authority of 65 ILCS 5/11-12-4 et seq., and as amended, as may be conferred by the city council. 
(Code 2008, § 2.40.050; Ord. No. 3-66, § 5, 1966) 
Sec. 2-414. - Land subdivision, re-subdivision. 
    At any time or times before or after the formal adoption of the official comprehensive plan by the corporate authorities, an official map may be designated by ordinance, which map may consist of the whole area included within the official comprehensive plan, or one or more separate geographical or functional parts, and may include all or any part of the contiguous unincorporated area within 11/2 miles from the corporate limits of the city. All requirements for public hearing, filing of notice of adoption with the county recorder of deeds, and filing of said plan and ordinances, including the official map, with the municipal clerk shall be complied with as provided for by law. No map or plat of any subdivision or re-subdivision presented for record affecting land within the corporate limits of the city or within contiguous territory which is not more than 11/2 miles beyond the corporate limits shall be entitled to record or shall be valid unless the subdivision shown thereon provides for standards of design, and standards governing streets, alleys, public ways, ways for public service facilities, street lights, public grounds, size of lots to be used for residential purposes, stormwater and floodwater runoff channels and basins, water supply and distribution, sanitary sewers, and sewage collection and treatment in conformity with the applicable requirements of the ordinances, including the official map. 
(Code 2008, § 2.40.060; Ord. No. 3-66, § 6, 1966) 
Sec. 2-415. - Improvements. 
    The administrator shall furnish the planning commission, for its consideration, a copy of all ordinances, plans and data relative to public improvements of any nature. The planning commission may report in relation thereto if it deems a report necessary or advisable for the consideration of the city council. 
(Code 2008, § 2.40.070; Ord. No. 3-66, § 7, 1966) 
Sec. 2-416. - Staff. 
    The commission may, at the discretion of the city council, employ a paid secretary or staff, or whose salaries, wages, and other necessary expenses shall be provided for by the city council from the public funds. If the planning commission deems it advisable to secure technical advice or services, it may be done upon authority from the city council and appropriations by the city council therefor. 
(Code 2008, § 2.40.080; Ord. No. 3-66, § 8, 1966) 
Secs. 2-417-2-445. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - BOARD OF POLICE COMMISSIONERS 

Sec. 2-446. - Established. 
    There is hereby established a board of police commissioners for the city. 
(Ord. No. 12-01, § I, 1-16-2016) 
Sec. 2-447. - Membership. 
    The board of police commissioners will be comprised of three members, appointed by the mayor with consent of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 12-01, § II, 1-16-2016) 
Sec. 2-448. - Terms of members. 
    The appointed members of the board of police commissioners will serve terms as provided by statute and will have all of the powers and duties as required by the laws of this state. 
(Ord. No. 12-01, § III, 1-16-2016) 
Sec. 2-449. - Appointment of chief of police. 
    The chief of police shall be appointed by the mayor with the consent of the city council and shall not be named by the board of police commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 12-01, § IV, 1-16-2016) 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Liquor Control Act of 1934, 235 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
    Unless the context otherwise requires, words and phrases used in this chapter shall be construed as hereinafter set forth, or as used in the Illinois Liquor Control Act of 1934, as amended. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alcohol means the product of distillation of any fermented liquid, whether rectified or diluted, whatever may be the origin thereof, and includes synthetic ethyl alcohol. The term "alcohol" does not include denatured alcohol or wood alcohol. 
    Alcoholic liquor means and includes alcohol, spirits, wine and beer, and every liquid or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and capable of being consumed as a beverage by a human being. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to alcohol used in the manufacture of denatured alcohol produced in accordance with Acts of Congress and regulations promulgated there under, nor to any liquid or solid containing one-half of one percent, or less, of alcohol by volume. 
    Beer means a beverage obtained by alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or concoction of barley or other grain, malt and hops in water, and includes, among other things, beer, ale, stout, lager beer, porter and the like. 
    Caterer retailer means a person who serves alcoholic liquors for consumption, either on-site or off-site, whether the location is licensed or unlicensed, as an incidental part of food service. Prepared meals and alcoholic liquors are sold at a package price agreed upon under contract. 
    Club means a corporation organized under the laws of the state, not for pecuniary profit, solely for the promotion of some common object other than the sale or consumption of alcoholic liquors, kept, used and maintained by its members through the payment of annual dues, and owning, hiring or leasing a building or a space in a building, of such extent and character as may be suitable and adequate for the reasonable and comfortable use and accommodation of its members and their guests and provided with suitable and adequate kitchen and dining room space and equipment and maintaining a sufficient number of servants and employees for cooking, preparing and serving food and meals for its members and their guests; provided, that such club files with the local liquor control commissioner at the time of its application for a license under this chapter two copies of a list of names and residences of its members, and similarly files within ten days of the election of any additional member his name and address; and, provided further, that its affairs and management are conducted by a board of directors, executive committee or similar body chosen by the members at their annual meeting and that no member or any officer, agent or employee of the club is paid, or directly or indirectly receives, in the form of salary or other compensation any profits from the distribution or sale of alcoholic liquor to the club or the members of the club or its guests introduced by members beyond the amount of such salary as may be fixed and voted at any annual meeting by the members or by its board of directors or other governing body out of the general revenue of the club. 
    Gasoline station means any establishment where motor fuel is sold or offered for sale from approved pumps, whether through an attendant or by self-service. Motor fuel includes all volatile and inflammable liquids which are produced, blended or compounded, or which are suitable or practicable for operating motor vehicles. 
    Grocery store means any establishment that displays and offers for sale at retail any of the following products: dairy products; meat or poultry products; breads or baked goods; frozen foods; canned goods other than snacks or alcoholic liquor; or health and beauty aids. 
    Incidental sales means alcohol sales not to exceed 40 percent of the primary business. 
    Licensed premises means the premises described in a retail liquor dealer's license as the place where alcoholic liquor is permitted to be sold at retail. 
    Licensee means any person licensed in accordance with and under the provisions of this chapter. 
    Original package means any bottle, flask, jug, can, cask, barrel, keg, hogshead or other receptacle or container, whatsoever, used, corked or capped, sealed and labeled by the manufacturer of alcoholic liquor, to contain and to convey any alcoholic liquor. 
    Peddling means selling any product door-to-door or at any location other than a location for which the sale of alcoholic liquor is permitted in accordance with this chapter, within the corporate limits of the city. 
    Resident means any person living in the city for a period of not less than 90 days. 
    Restaurant means any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are served, and where meals are actually and regularly served, without sleeping accommodations, such space being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and capacity and having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its guests. 
    Retail liquor dealer's license means a license to sell alcoholic liquor at retail, which has been issued under the provisions of this chapter. 
    Retailer means a person who sells, or offers for sale, alcoholic liquor for use or consumption and not for resale in any form. 
    Sale means any transfer, exchange or barter in any manner, or by any means whatsoever, including the transfer of alcoholic liquors by and through the transfer or negotiation of warehouse receipts or certificates, and includes and means all sales made by any person, whether principal, proprietor, agent, servant or employee. The term "sale" includes any transfer of alcoholic liquor from a foreign importer's license to an importing distributor's license even if both licenses are held by the same person. 
    Sell at retail and sale at retail refer to and mean sales for use or consumption and not for resale in any form. 
    Spirits means any beverage which contains alcohol obtained by distillation, mixed with water or other substance in solution, and includes brandy, rum, whiskey, gin, or other spirituous liquors, and such liquors when rectified, blended or otherwise mixed with alcohol or other substances. 
    Wine means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the natural contents of fruits or vegetables containing sugar, including such beverages when fortified by the addition of alcohol or spirits, as defined herein. 
(Code 2008, § 5.11.010; Ord. No. 08-20, § I, 12-15-2008) 
Secs. 6-2-6-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL 

Sec. 6-21. - Local liquor control commissioner; powers. 
    The mayor is hereby designated as the local liquor control commissioner for the city. The local liquor control commissioner shall have the duty to administer and enforce this chapter and the applicable provisions of the Illinois Liquor Control Act of 1934 (235 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.), and to notify the Illinois Secretary of State of any convictions for a violation of section 6-20 of the Illinois Liquor Control Act of 1934 or section 6-69 of this Code. The local liquor control commissioner shall have the following powers, functions and duties with respect to liquor licenses, other than licenses to manufacturers, importing distributors, distributors, foreign importers, nonresident dealers, non-beverage users, brokers, railroads, airplanes and boats: 
(1)  To appoint two members from the community to serve on the local liquor control commission; 
(2)  To grant, subject to approval or disapproval by the city council, and/or suspend for not more than 30 days or revoke for cause all retail liquor dealer's licenses issued to persons for premises within the city; 
(3)  To enter or to authorize any law enforcing officer to enter at any time upon any premises licensed by the local liquor control commission or the state liquor control commission to determine whether any of the provisions of this chapter or the Illinois Liquor Control Act of 1934 or any rules or regulations adopted by him or by the state liquor control commission have been or are being violated, and at such time to examine said premises of said licensee in connection therewith; 
(4)  To notify the secretary of state where a club incorporated under the General Not for Profit Corporation Act of 1986 or a foreign corporation functioning as a club in the state under a certificate of authority issued under that Act has violated this chapter or the Illinois Liquor Control Act of 1934 by selling or offering for sale at retail alcoholic liquors without a license; 
(5)  To receive complaints from any citizen within the city that any of the provisions of this chapter or the Illinois Liquor Control Act of 1934, or any rules or regulations adopted pursuant hereto, have been or are being violated and to act upon such complaints in the manner hereinafter provided; 
(6)  To receive or authorize the city clerk to receive fees for a retail liquor dealer's license and other fees required for the application process; 
(7)  To levy fines in accordance with section 6-83; 
(8)  To examine, or cause to be examined, under oath, any applicant for a retail liquor dealer's license or for a renewal thereof, or any licensee upon whom notice of revocation or suspension has been served in the manner hereinafter provided, and to examine or cause to be examined, the books and records of any such applicant or licensee; to hear testimony and take proof for information in the performance of these duties, and for such purpose to issue subpoenas which shall be effective in any part of the state; 
(9)  The local liquor control commission shall consider and make a determination as to the applicants request for a license and the class in which the license will be issued. The local liquor control commission shall make a recommendation to the city council at a regularly scheduled council meeting for final approval or disapproval of each liquor license request and in which class the license is to be issued. Each license will require a vote of a two-thirds majority of the city council before any license is granted and issued. 
(Code 2008, § 5.11.020) 
Sec. 6-22. - Compensation of local liquor control commissioner and commission members. 
    The local liquor control commissioner shall receive compensation from the city in the amount of $300.00 per year ($25.00 per month). The members of the local liquor commission shall receive compensation from the city in an amount of $100.00 per year. This compensation shall not be increased or decreased during any fiscal year in which the annual appropriation has already been made. Further, this compensation shall not be increased or decreased during the mayor's term of office, but may be increased or decreased for a future term of office of the mayor if done so at least 180 days prior to the beginning of said future term. 
(Code 2008, § 5.11.030) 
Secs. 6-23-6-47. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LICENSES 

Sec. 6-48. - License required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale at retail in the city any alcoholic liquor without having a retail liquor dealer's license and a retailer's license issued by the state liquor control commission, or in violation of the terms of such license. 
(Code 2008, § 5.11.040) 
Sec. 6-49. - Separate license for each premises; transfer of license to other premises. 
    Premises will be defined by the address of the premises on the application submitted by the licensee. A retail liquor dealer's license shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquor only on the premises described in the application and license, and only one location shall be so described in each license. After a license has been granted for particular premises, such location may be changed or enlarged only upon the written permission to make such change issued by the local liquor control commission and endorsed upon the license. No change of location shall be permitted unless the proposed new location is a proper one for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor under the laws of this state and the provisions of this Code, and the person requesting the change files with the state liquor control commission and the local liquor control commission a written request in writing and a statement under oath which shall show that the premises to which the change is to be made comply in all respects with the requirements of state law and the provisions of this Code. 
(Code 2008, § 5.11.050) 
Sec. 6-50. - License classifications: fees. 
Classification Fee Class A: A Class A license shall authorize the sale at retail of all alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises described in the license and alcoholic liquor in original packages for consumption off the premises described in the license. $750.00 Class B: A Class B license shall authorize the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor in original packages for consumption off the premises described in the license. The sale at retail of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises described in the license is strictly prohibited. $750.00 Class C (CLUB): A Class C license shall authorize the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor by a club for consumption on the club premises described in the license. The sale at retail of alcoholic liquor for consumption off the premises described in the license is strictly prohibited. $150.00 Class D: A Class D license shall authorize the sale at retail on the premises of a grocery store of beer and wine only, in original packages, for consumption off the premises described in the license. The sale at retail of alcoholic liquor other than beer and wine or the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises described in the license is strictly prohibited. $400.00 Class E: A Class E license shall authorize the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises of a restaurant described in the license. The sale at retail of alcoholic liquor for consumption off the premises described in the license is strictly prohibited. $500.00 Class F: A Class F license shall authorize the sale at retail of beer and wine only, for consumption on the premises of a restaurant. The sale at retail of alcoholic liquor other than beer and wine or the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption off the premises described in the license is strictly prohibited. $400.00 Class G: A Class G license shall authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises for a special event and shall be granted only for the day premises which is licensed as a special event and no license shall be issued for more than a total of four days in a 12-month period for a single special event. $50.00 per day Class H: A Class H license shall authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the licensed premises, which shall consist of a golf course and the property adjoining the golf course used in conjunction with the golf course, including, but not limited to, driving range area, practice green and club house, including pro-shop and any areas adjacent thereto, all of which make up the golf course. $150.00 Class I: A Class I caterer retailer license shall allow a licensed service/caterer company to serve alcoholic liquor, including beer, wine and liquor for consumption, either on-site or off-site, whether the location is licensed or unlicensed, as an incidental part of the food service where prepared meals and alcoholic liquor are sold at a package price agreed upon under contract. $400.00  
Class A, B, C, E, F, H and I licenses shall not be issued for the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor at a grocery store. All license fees shall be paid to the city clerk at the time of application, and shall be forthwith turned over to the city treasurer. In the event the license applied for is denied, the fee shall be returned to the applicant. If the license is granted, then the fee shall be deposited in the general corporate fund by proper action. 
(Code 2008, § 5.11.060; Ord. No. 08-20, § II, 12-15-2008) 
Sec. 6-51. - Limitation on number of licenses. 
(a)  In order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city, to prevent minors from purchasing alcoholic liquor, and to promote temperance in the consumption of alcoholic liquor, there shall be the following limitations on the number of retail liquor dealer's licenses issued for each classification: 
Class A 1 Class B 4 Class C 0 Class D 0 Class E 0 Class F 0 Class G 3 Class H 0 Class I 1  
(b)  Applications for retail liquor dealer's licenses shall be considered in the order in which they are received by the local liquor control commission. A list shall be created to provide an orderly consideration of applicants desiring a retail liquor dealer's license and maintained on file in the office of the city clerk. Once an application has been rejected by the local liquor control commission for any reason, excluding the lack of availability of a license, the applicant shall be ineligible for further consideration unless and until the applicant submits a new application to the local liquor control commission in accordance with this chapter. 
(Code 2008, § 5.11.070; Ord. No. 08-20, § III, 12-15-2008) 
Sec. 6-52. - Application for license. 
    Application for a retail liquor dealer's license shall be made to the local liquor control commission in writing, signed by the applicant or by a duly authorized agent if the application is submitted on behalf of a club, corporation, or other business entity, and verified by oath or affidavit. All applicants shall attach to the application proof of liquor liability insurance coverage for the premises of the applicant's business in which a license is sought, in such amount that is at least equal to the maximum liability amounts set out in section 6-21(a) of the Illinois Liquor Control Act of 1934, as amended. All license and application fees shall be paid to the city clerk at the time of application. License fees, not including any fees for a criminal history records check, shall be refunded to the applicant if an application is denied. Except for Class G and Class I licenses, all applicants shall provide fingerprints as part of their application in accordance with 235 ILCS 5/4-7. In addition to the above, any application for a retail liquor dealer's license shall contain the following information and statements under oath: 
(1)  The applicant's name, sex, date of birth, mailing address, Federal Employer Identification Number (FEIN) if applicable, and position and percentage of ownership in the applicant's business; 
(2)  The name and address of the applicant's business which is to be operated under such license; 
(3)  If applicable, the date of the filing of the "assumed name" of the business with the county clerk; 
(4)  The name, sex, date of birth, mailing address, position and percentage of ownership in the business of every owner or partner of the business; 
(5)  The name, sex, date of birth, mailing address, copy of driver's license and/or state ID with photo, position and percentage of ownership of every corporate officer, director, or manager of every owner of the applicant's business and any person who owns five percent or more of the shares of the applicant's business; 
(6)  In case of a co-partnership, the date of the formation of the partnership; in the case of an Illinois corporation, the date of its incorporation; or in the case of a foreign corporation, the state where it was incorporated and the date of its becoming qualified under the Business Corporation Act of 1983 to transact business in the state; 
(7)  The number, date of issuance and the date of expiration of the applicant's current retail liquor dealer's license; 
(8)  The name and address of the landlord if the premises of the business are leased; 
(9)  The applicant's current State of Illinois liquor license number; 
(10)  The date the applicant began (will begin) liquor sales at his place of business; 
(11)  The address of the applicant's warehouse if he warehouses liquor; 
(12)  The applicant's retailer's occupation tax (ROT) registration number; 
(13)  Whether the applicant has made a similar application for a state or local liquor license for the premises described in the application, and the disposition of such application; 
(14)  Whether the applicant has made a similar application for a state or local liquor license for premises other than described in the application, and the disposition of such application; 
(15)  Whether the applicant is delinquent in the payment of any taxes to the city or state; 
(16)  Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony, gambling offense, pandering, or other offense opposed to decency or morality, or is otherwise disqualified to receive a license by reason of any provision contained in this chapter, the laws of the state or this Code, other than minor traffic violations; 
(17)  Whether the applicant possesses a current federal wagering stamp; 
(18)  Whether a previous liquor license issued by any state or political subdivision thereof or by the federal government has been suspended or revoked, and the reasons therefor; 
(19)  Whether the applicant or manager of the applicant's business is a resident of the city and the length of time the applicant or manager has resided within the city; 
(20)  Whether the applicant, or any other person set forth in the application or otherwise directly involved in the business which is the subject of the application is a public official for any public or governmental body, and if so, the particulars thereof; 
(21)  Whether the proposed licensed premises are located within 100 feet of any church, school other than an institution of higher learning, hospital, or home for aged or indigent persons or for veterans, their spouses or children as defined in 235 ILCS 5/6-11; 
(22)  A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the laws of the state or the United States, or any provision of this Code in the conduct of the applicant's place of business. 
If the application is approved for a Class G license to be issued, the liquor commissioner shall promptly notify the chief of police in writing of the issuance of the Class G license. Such notice shall include a copy of said license. The chief will give the licensee the restrictions and guidelines for a Class G license and will notify the liquor commissioner when the licensee has agreed to the restrictions and guidelines for the license and then it can be issued. 
(Code 2008, § 5.11.080) 
Sec. 6-53. - Separation from service of an applying manager from a licensed corporation. 
    If a license is held by a corporation under this chapter and the applicant who signed for and was examined under section 6-54 is a manager for the corporation, the separation from employment of said applicant, either voluntarily or for cause, shall require the following action: 
(1)  Within 72 hours of said separation from service, a temporary manager who meets the qualifications of this chapter, except for residence, must be named by the corporate officials. The name, address, phone number, and other contact information for this person will be provided in writing to the liquor commissioner and receipted by the city clerk. This temporary manager will hold the license for the corporation for up to 30 days. At the end of 30 days from the date of separation, the temporary manager may petition the liquor commissioner for an extension of up to 30 days more. However, if said 30-day extension would extend beyond the term of the license, the extension shall be only to the expiration date at most. 
(2)  During the 30 days or any extension of them, a new manager shall be named and complete section 6-52(1), (2), (3), (5), (7), (9), (16), (18), (19), (20), and (22) and provide the information required under section 6-54 along with the current fee for such examination. 
(3)  If the current license shall expire during the original 30 days, no extension shall be granted and all sales of alcohol shall cease upon the expiration of the license. Any existing inventory may be stored out of sight of retail customers for up to 60 days pending a new license. Any application by a new manager shall be considered a new license application. 
(4)  The liquor commissioner shall have the right to hold any hearings deemed necessary to enforce this section. Records of said hearings to follow guidelines required by the state liquor commission. Any assistants named to assist the liquor commissioner may take part in said hearing. 
(Code 2008, § 5.11.082) 
Sec. 6-54. - Criminal history records check; examination of applicant. 
(a)  Upon the initial application for a retail liquor dealer's license or any renewal thereof, each applicant for a retail liquor dealer's license shall submit his fingerprints to the state department of state police in the form and manner prescribed by the state department of state police. These fingerprints shall be checked against the fingerprint records now and hereafter filed in the state department of state police and Federal Bureau of Investigation criminal history records databases. After receiving the criminal history for the applicant from the state department of state police and Federal Bureau of Investigation, the local liquor control commission may use such information to determine whether the applicant qualifies for the issuance or renewal of a retail liquor dealer's license. The applicant shall pay a fee to the city clerk, in an amount as determined by the state department of state police, which shall be forwarded to the state department of state police for the purposes of conducting a criminal history records check. 
(b)  At any time during the pending of an application the local liquor control commission shall have the right to compel the applicant to submit to any examination and to produce any books and records which, in the judgment of the local liquor control commission, are material to the determination of whether the applicant is qualified to receive a license under the provisions of this article, or whether the premises sought to be licensed are suitable for such purposes. The local liquor control commission shall also have the right to require the applicant to answer any charges made in any objection to the issuance of the license. The failure of any applicant to appear at the time and place fixed by the local liquor control commission for his examination or to produce books and records requested, unless for good cause shown, shall be deemed to be an admission that the applicant is not qualified to receive a license. 
(Code 2008, § 5.11.090) 
Sec. 6-55. - Bond required; forfeiture. 
    Each person applying for a retail dealer's liquor license under this article shall execute a penal bond in the sum of $1,500.00 with at least two personal securities or a solvent surety company licensed to do business in the state, to be approved by the city council. Said bond shall be filed with the city clerk at the same time the application is presented, and shall be conditioned upon the faithful observance by the licensee of the provisions of this article and of the laws of the state and of the United States of America, applying to the sale and possession of alcoholic liquor. Said bond shall be refunded to the applicant if the application for a license is denied. If a licensee shall be convicted of the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or the Illinois Liquor Control Act of 1934, or his license shall be revoked and no appeal is taken from said order of revocation or any appeal taken there from is decided adversely to the licensee, said bond shall thereupon be forfeited to the city. 
(Code 2008, § 5.11.100) 
Sec. 6-56. - Issuance of licenses to certain persons prohibited. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this section, no retail liquor dealer's license shall be issued to: 
(1)  A person who has been convicted of a felony under any federal or state law. 
(2)  A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community in which he resides. 
(3)  A person who has been convicted of being the keeper or is the keeper of a house of ill-fame. 
(4)  A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality. 
(5)  A person who is not a resident of the city. 
(6)  A person whose license issued under this article has been revoked for cause. 
(7)  A person who at the time of application for renewal of any license issued hereunder would not be eligible for such license upon first application. 
(8)  A co-partnership, if any general partnership thereof, or any limited partnership thereof, owning more than five percent of the aggregate partner interest in such co-partnership would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder. 
(9)  A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any stockholder owning in the aggregate more than five percent of the stock of such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason other than citizenship and residence within the city. 
(10)  A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent unless said manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required of the licensee. 
(11)  A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal or state law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor, subsequent to the passage of the Illinois Liquor Control Act of 1934, or who has forfeited his bond to appear in court to answer charges for any such violation. 
(12)  A person who does not beneficially own the premises for which a license is sought, or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for which the license is to be issued. 
(13)  Any law enforcing public official, including members, if any, of a city liquor control commission, the mayor, or any alderman or member of the city council; and no such official shall be interested directly in the manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic liquor, except that a retail liquor dealer's license may be granted to any alderman or member of the city council if: 
a.  The sale of alcoholic liquor pursuant to the license is incidental to the selling of food; 
b.  The issuance of the license is approved by the state liquor control commission; 
c.  The issuance of the license is in accordance with all applicable local ordinances; and 
d.  The official granted a license does not vote on alcoholic liquor issues pending before the city council. 
(14)  Any person, association or corporation not eligible for a state retail liquor license. 
(15)  A person who intends to sell alcoholic liquors for use or consumption on his licensed retail premises who does not have liquor liability insurance coverage for that premises in an amount that is at least equal to the maximum liability amounts set out in section 6-21(a) of the Illinois Liquor Control Act of 1934, as amended. 
(16)  A corporation unless it is incorporated in Illinois, or unless it is a foreign corporation which is qualified under the Illinois Business Corporation Act of 1983 to transact business in Illinois. 
(17)  A person who is not a beneficial owner of the business to be operated by the licensee. 
(18)  A person who has been convicted of a gambling offense as proscribed by any of section 28-1(a)(3) through (a)(11) of, or as proscribed by section 28-1.1 or 28-3 of, the Illinois Criminal Code of 1961, or as proscribed by a statute replaced by any of the aforesaid statutory provisions. 
(19)  A person or entity to which a federal wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government, unless the person or entity is eligible to be issued a license under the Illinois Raffles Act or the Illinois Pull Tabs and Jar Games Act. 
A criminal conviction of a corporation is not grounds for the denial, suspension, or revocation of a license applied for or held by the corporation if the criminal conviction was not the result of a violation of any federal or state law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor, the offense that led to the conviction did not result in any financial gain to the corporation and the corporation has terminated its relationship with each director, officer, employee, or controlling shareholder whose actions directly contributed to the conviction of the corporation. The local liquor control commission shall determine if all provisions of this section have been met before any action on the corporation's license is initiated. 
(Code 2008, § 5.11.110; Ord. No. 11-19, § I, 10-17-2011) 
Sec. 6-57. - Sale near churches, schools, hospitals and main street. 
(a)  No retail liquor dealer's license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor within 100 feet of any church, school other than an institution of higher learning, hospital, or home for aged or indigent persons or for veterans, their spouses or children, provided that this prohibition shall not apply to hotels offering restaurant service, regularly organized clubs, or to restaurants, food shops or other places where sale of alcoholic liquors is not the principal business carried on; nor to the renewal of a license for the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor on premises within 100 feet of any church or school where the church or school has been established within such 100 feet since the issuance of the original license. In the case of a church, the distance of 100 feet shall be measured to the nearest part of any building used for worship services or educational programs and not to property boundaries. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit the issuance of a retail liquor dealer's license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor incidental to a restaurant if: 
(1)  The primary business of the restaurant consists of the sale of food where the sale of liquor is incidental to the sale of food and the applicant is a completely new owner of the restaurant; 
(2)  The immediately prior owner or operator of the premises where the restaurant is located operated the premises as a restaurant and held a valid retail license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor at the restaurant for at least part of the 24 months before the change of ownership; and 
(3)  The restaurant is located 75 or more feet from a school. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit the issuance of a retail liquor dealer's license to a church or private school to sell at retail alcoholic liquor if any such sales are limited to periods when groups are assembled on the premises solely for the promotion of some common object other than the sale or consumption of alcoholic liquors. 
(Code 2008, § 5.11.120) 
Sec. 6-58. - Stores selling school supplies, lunches, etc. 
    No license shall be issued to any person for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor at any store or other place of business where the majority of customers are minors of school age or where the principal business transacted consists of the sale of school books, school supplies, food, lunches or drinks for such minors. 
(Code 2008, § 5.11.130) 
Sec. 6-59. - Violation of tax acts; refusal, revocation or suspension of license. 
(a)  In addition to other grounds specified in this article, the local liquor control commission, on complaint of the state department of revenue, shall refuse the issuance or renewal of a retail liquor dealer's license, or suspend or revoke the license, of any person, for any of the following violations of any tax act administered by the state department of revenue: 
(1)  Failure to make a tax return. 
(2)  The filing of a fraudulent return. 
(3)  Failure to pay all or part of any tax or penalty finally determined to be due. 
(4)  Failure to keep books and records. 
(5)  Failure to secure and display a certificate or sub-certificates of registration, if required. 
(6)  Willful violation of any rule or regulation of the state department of revenue relating to the administration and enforcement of tax liability. 
(b)  Upon receiving notice from the state department of revenue that a violation of any of subsection (a)(1) through (6) of this section have been corrected or otherwise resolved to the department's satisfaction, the local liquor control commission may vacate an order of revocation. 
(Code 2008, § 5.11.140) 
Sec. 6-60. - Duration of license; prorating fee. 
    All retail liquor dealer's licenses shall be valid from the date and time issued until one minute past midnight (12:01 a.m.) on the following April 28, unless suspended or revoked sooner as provided for in this article. No license shall be issued or valid for a term of longer than one year. The fee paid for a license shall be reduced in proportion to the number of full calendar months remaining until expiration of the license. 
(Code 2008, § 5.11.150) 
Sec. 6-61. - Privilege granted by license; nature as to property; license not alienable or transferable; tax delinquencies; renewal. 
(a)  A license shall be purely a personal privilege, good for not to exceed one year after issuance unless sooner revoked as in this article provided, and shall not constitute property, nor shall it be subject to attachment, garnishment or execution, nor shall it be alienable or transferable, voluntary or involuntarily, or subject to be encumbered or hypothecated. Such license shall not descend by the laws of testate or intestate devolution, but it shall cease upon the death of the licensee, provided that executors or administrators of the estate of any deceased licensee, and the trustee of any insolvent or bankrupt licensee, when such estate consists in part of alcoholic liquor, may continue the business of the sale of alcoholic liquor under order of the appropriate court, and may exercise the privileges of the deceased or insolvent or bankrupt licensee after the death of such decedent, or such insolvency or bankruptcy until the expiration of such license but not longer than six months after the death, bankruptcy or insolvency of such licensee. 
(b)  Any licensee may renew his license at the expiration thereof, provided the licensee is then qualified at the time of renewal to receive a license and the premises for which such renewal license is sought are suitable for such purpose; and provided further, that the renewal privilege herein provided for shall not be construed as a vested right which shall in any case prevent the city council from decreasing the number of licenses to be issued within the city. No retail liquor dealer's license shall be renewed unless the applicant provides documentation that any tax owed to the city has been satisfied by payment. 
(c)  All applications for the renewal of a retail liquor dealer's license shall be made in writing to the local liquor control commission at least 15 days prior to the date of expiration of said license. It shall not be necessary for the licensee to file a full license application in order to obtain a renewal of the license; provided, that the applicant shall submit an affidavit stating that the information and statements contained in the original application have not changed, and such affidavit shall be accompanied by the required license fee. 
(d)  Any person who shall fail to make application for renewal and pay the fee as herein provided shall be deemed to have forfeited and abandoned such license, and no renewal thereof shall thereafter be permitted. Any such license so forfeited or abandoned shall not be reissued, and any such person seeking thereafter to procure a license shall be considered as a new applicant and shall be subject to all limitations as to the number of licenses to be issued, as heretofore provided. 
(e)  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to require the local liquor control commission to renew a license when the total number of licenses outstanding in a particular license classification exceeds those permitted by this chapter. 
(Code 2008, § 5.11.160) 
Sec. 6-62. - Change in stockholders. 
    No corporate licensee shall permit any transfer of its stock which would vest in aggregate more than five percent of the stock outstanding in said corporation in any stockholder unless said stockholder has been previously approved by the local liquor control commission. All requests for approval of stockholders shall be in writing and under oath stating substantially the same requisites as set forth in section 6-52. The local liquor control commission shall approve such transfer of stock unless the proposed stockholder would be ineligible to receive a license for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor under this chapter for any reason other than citizenship and residence within the city. 
(Code 2008, § 5.11.170) 
Sec. 6-63. - Sale of licensed business. 
    Upon application being filed as provided in section 6-52 with the city clerk, and upon payment of all bonds, criminal history record check fees, and the applicable license fee, the local liquor control commission may issue a retail liquor dealer's license to the purchaser of an established licensed business. Such application must be for exactly the same class of license as that held by the seller, and such application shall be only for the same location as the previously licensed business. The applicant shall attach to such application a statement containing the facts in respect to his purchase of such business. Such application shall be approved or denied as in the case of applications for original licenses, and, if approved, a retail liquor dealer's license shall be issued to such purchaser. No credit for any unused portion of the previous license, or rebate for any unused portion of any license, shall be given. No retail liquor dealer's license shall be issued to the purchaser of such business until the seller of such business has surrendered his license to the city clerk for cancellation. 
(Code 2008, § 5.11.180) 
Sec. 6-64. - Display of license. 
    Every licensee immediately shall post a license issued in accordance with the provisions of this article in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises, and shall keep said license so posted during all times said license is in force. The local liquor control commission shall provide a frame to be used by the licensee for display of the license issued. 
(Code 2008, § 5.11.190) 
Sec. 6-65. - Display of birth defects warning signs. 
    Every licensee, whether selling or offering for sale alcoholic liquor for use or consumption on or off the licensed premises, shall cause a sign with the message "GOVERNMENT WARNING: ACCORDING TO THE SURGEON GENERAL, WOMEN SHOULD NOT DRINK ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES DURING PREGNANCY BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF BIRTH DEFECTS" to be framed and hung in plain view on the licensed premises. The sign shall be no smaller than 81/2 inches by 11 inches. Licensees may obtain warning signs from the state liquor control commission. The licensee shall have 30 days from receipt of the warning sign to post it on the licensed premises. 
Sec. 6-66. - Display of sale to minors warning signs. 
    Every licensee, whether selling or offering for sale alcoholic liquor for use or consumption on or off the licensed premises, shall cause a sign to be displayed in a prominent place on the licensed premises which shall read as follows: 
WARNING TO MINORS-You are subject to a fine of up to $750.00, under the ordinances of the City of Eureka, if you purchase alcoholic liquor, or misrepresent your age for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining alcoholic liquor or are in possession of alcoholic liquor. The first offense will be $250.00. The second offense will be $500.00. The third offense will be $750.00. 
WARNING TO ADULT PATRONS-You are subject to a fine of $750.00, under the ordinance of the City of Eureka, if you purchase alcoholic liquor for delivery to or use by any minor person. 
(Code 2008, § 5.11.210) 
Sec. 6-67. - Hours of operation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any licensed premises to sell or offer for sale at retail any alcoholic beverage except for during the hours designated: 
(1)  Monday through Thursday: from 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight. 
(2)  Friday and Saturday: from 8:00 a.m. to 2:00 a.m. 
(3)  Sunday: from 12:00 noon to 12:00 midnight. 
(4)  In addition, on December 31, till 2:00 a.m. New Year's Day. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, it shall be unlawful for any person issued a retail liquor dealer's license to sell or offer for sale at retail any alcoholic liquor in the city between the following hours: 
(1)  12:00 midnight Monday and 8:00 a.m. Monday; 
(2)  12:00 midnight Tuesday and 8:00 a.m. Tuesday; 
(3)  12:00 midnight Wednesday and 8:00 a.m. Wednesday; 
(4)  12:00 midnight Thursday and 8:00 a.m. Thursday; 
(5)  12:00 midnight Friday and 8:00 a.m. Friday; 
(6)  2:00 a.m. Saturday and 8:00 a.m. Saturday; 
(7)  2:00 a.m. Sunday and 12:00 noon Sunday. 
(c)  On the last Sunday in October, or on any other date specified by the state as a return to United States Central Standard Time, it shall be unlawful for any person to whom a retail liquor dealer's license has been issued to sell or offer for sale at retail any alcoholic liquor in the city during the hours of 1:00 a.m. Central Standard Time and 12:00 noon. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful to keep open for business or to permit the public to patronize any premises where alcoholic liquor is sold at retail during the hours within which the sale of such liquor is prohibited. 
(e)  The time for closing as set forth in this section shall be marked by: 
(1)  The ceasing of all service at the bar of any alcoholic liquor; 
(2)  The ceasing of all service at the tables of any alcoholic liquor; 
(3)  The extinguishing of all electrical signs and decorative outdoor lights; 
(4)  The locking of the whole of such premises with respect to which a retail liquor dealer's license has been issued hereunder; 
(5)  The vacating of all patrons of said premises within 15 minutes thereafter, whether alcoholic liquor or food is being consumed, or not; provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply to the owner, manager, bartender, employees or watchmen; provided, further, that such persons so remaining do not consume any alcoholic liquor whatsoever. 
(f)  The premises of duly-licensed restaurants may be kept open during such hours, provided that the following activities shall cease during the hours within which the sale of alcoholic liquor is prohibited: 
(1)  All service at the bar of any alcoholic liquor; 
(2)  All service at tables of any alcoholic liquor; 
(3)  All consumption by any person of any alcoholic liquor upon such licensed premises within 15 minutes thereafter. 
(g)  The local liquor control commission, with the consent of the city council, is hereby authorized to extend until 3:00 a.m. the closing hours on New Year's Day for premises licensed to sell alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises. During such extended hours only the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises shall be permitted. No patrons will be allowed admittance between 2:00 a.m. and 3:00 a.m. 
(h)  All locations in the city that sell or offer for sale at retail any alcoholic liquor, having an appropriate retail liquor dealer's license in good standing with the state and local liquor control commission, will be permitted to begin serving alcoholic beverages and selling package liquor at 12:00 noon on Sundays and at 8:00 a.m. on other weekdays. 
(i)  This section shall apply to all of the premises licensed. Hours specified herein shall mean either Central Standard Time or Central Daylight Savings Time, whichever is being observed within the city. 
(Code 2008, § 5.11.220) 
Sec. 6-68. - Employees. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to employ in any premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor any person who is afflicted with, or who is a carrier of, any infectious or communicable disease, contained in the list of infectious and communicable diseases published annually by the U.S. Secretary of Health and Human Services, in a capacity in which such person may transmit the infectious or communicable disease through the handling, preparation or distribution of food or alcoholic liquor; and it shall be unlawful for any person who is afflicted with, or a carrier of, any such disease to work in a capacity where the disease may be transmitted through the handling, preparation or distribution of food or liquor. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section, it shall be unlawful to permit any person under the age of 21 to serve, mix, dispense or sell alcoholic liquor or to be otherwise involved in the handling of such alcoholic liquor. 
(c)  Holders of a Class E or F retail liquor dealer's license may employ 18-, 19- and 20-year-old persons to sell or serve alcoholic liquor to patrons if all of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The primary duties of the 18-, 19-, and 20-year-old persons are the serving of food and the servicing of patrons seated at tables; 
(2)  The service of alcoholic liquor is incidental to the service of food to patrons; 
(3)  Service is not at a counter primarily used for serving drinks (i.e., bar); 
(4)  18-, 19- and 20-year-old employees do not mix or prepare alcoholic drinks; 
(5)  The licensed premises are, at all times, under the control of either the licensee or an adult agent or employee of the licensee. To be in control of the premises, an adult possessing those responsibilities and duties normally associated with a manager must be present on the premises. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as allowing any licensee issued a Class F retail liquor dealer's license, or any officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee to serve alcoholic liquor other than beer or wine within the licensed premises. 
(e)  Restrictions on servers. 
(1)  Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for a licensee or an agent or employee of the licensee to serve or supervise the service of alcoholic beverages in licensed premises while under the influence of alcohol, a controlled substance, a synthetic alternative drug or any combination of alcohol, a controlled substance and/or synthetic alternative drug. Under the influence means not only all the well-known and easily recognized conditions and degrees of intoxication, but any abnormal mental or physical condition which is the result of indulging to any degree in alcohol beverages, controlled substance or synthetic alternative drug and which tends to deprive a person of the clearness of intellect and control of himself which he would otherwise possess. 
(2)  Presumption. A test of the person's breath, blood, or urine, including a preliminary breath test, that shows the person has an alcohol concentration of 0.04 or more is prima facie evidence that he is under the influence. Blood tests indicating impairment by controlled substance or synthetic alternative drug is also evidence that he is under the influence. Law enforcement officials shall be allowed to ask for a preliminary breath test upon reasonable suspicion. Refusal to submit to a requested test may be considered by the local liquor commission as grounds for fines, suspension, revocation, non-issuance, or non-renewal of the licensee's liquor license. 
(3)  Effect of violation on premises. If the principal business of the licensed premises is the sale of alcohol beverages, law enforcement officials will order it closed until such time as another licensed server of the licensee who is not in violation of this section shall take charge of such premises. It shall be a violation of this subsection for any licensed premises to be open contrary to such order of law enforcement officials. 
(Code 2008, § 5.11.230; Ord. No. 15-13, § I, 6-1-2015) 
Sec. 6-69. - Books and records available for investigation and control; maintenance. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every licensee to make books and records available upon reasonable notice for the purpose of investigation and control by the state liquor control commission or the local liquor control commission. Such books and records need not be maintained on the licensed premises, but must be maintained in the state; however, if access is available electronically, the books and records may be maintained out of state. However, all original invoices or copies thereof covering purchases of alcoholic liquor must be retained on the licensed premises for a period of 90 days after such purchase, unless the state liquor control commission has granted a waiver in response to a written request in cases where records are kept at a central business location within the state or in cases where books and records that are available electronically are maintained out of state. 
(b)  Report of food and liquor sales from restaurants. 
(1)  Holders of a Class E and F liquor license shall be required to show the license holder meets the food to liquor sales requirement of 51 percent food sales to alcohol sales. 
(2)  Holders of a Class E and F liquor license shall file with the city liquor commission a schedule of their bookkeeping quarterly reporting period and the commission will review the quarterly report of sales based on the time frame provided by the licensee. A report to the liquor commission shall be filed at the end of each of the months designated as the business bookkeeping quarterly reporting period. The report shall show by month the total sales, total alcohol sales, with percent of alcohol sold to total sales; and total food sales to percent of total sales. The report shall be due by the 15th of the following month. 
(3)  The holders of a Class E and F liquor license shall use the "Report of Food and Liquor Sales from Restaurants" form to submit the report of food sales to alcohol sales. Failure by a Class E and F liquor license holder to submit the required "Report of Food and Liquor Sales from Restaurants" will cause the suspension of the licensee's liquor license until the required form has been submitted. 
(Code 2008, § 5.11.240; Ord. No. 09-11, § I, 9-21-2009) 
Sec. 6-70. - View from street; lighting; posting prices. 
(a)  Except for restaurants, no screen, blind, curtain, partition, article or thing shall be permitted in the windows or upon the doors of, nor inside of, premises licensed under this article for the consumption of alcoholic liquor on such premises, which shall prevent a clear view into the interior of such licensed premises from the street or sidewalk at all times. All rooms where liquor is sold for consumption upon the premises shall be continuously lighted during business hours by natural or artificial white light so that all parts of the interior of the premises shall be clearly visible. All licensees shall maintain a schedule of the prices charged for all drinks of alcoholic liquor to be served and consumed on the licensed premises or in any room or part thereof. Prices of alcoholic liquor shall not be posted or displayed in, upon or adjacent to windows or on the exterior of, or on any property adjacent to, any premises for which has been issued a license authorizing the consumption of alcoholic beverages on such premises. 
(b)  Licensees (D and B) for off-premises consumption, located in business districts B-1 and B-2, will be allowed signage restricted by the following terms: 
(1)  Total area of all signs on the property advertising or offering for sale of any alcoholic liquor shall not exceed 24 square feet. 
(2)  A wall sign shall not extend more than 15 inches from the building and shall not extend above the wall to which it is attached. 
(3)  Projecting signs are not allowed for advertising or offering for sale any alcoholic liquor. 
(4)  Freestanding signs are not allowed for advertising or offering for sale any alcoholic liquor. 
(5)  Only block letters may be used to advertise; no logos will be allowed. 
(6)  Only one color may be chosen to advertise. 
(7)  Signs advertising or offering for sale of any alcoholic liquor are prohibited from being placed on any property except that of the legally licensed building. 
(Code 2008, § 5.11.250; Ord. No. 16-02, § I, 1-18-2016) 
Sec. 6-71. - Civil rights in licensed premises. 
    No licensee shall deny or permit his agents and employees to deny any person the full and equal enjoyment of the accommodations, advantages, facilities and privileges of any premises in which alcoholic liquor is authorized to be sold subject only to the conditions and limitations established by law and applicable alike to all citizens. 
(Code 2008, § 5.11.260) 
Sec. 6-72. - Prohibited entry to licensed premises. 
    No licensee or any officer, associate, member, representative, agent, or employee of a licensee shall permit any person under the age of 21 years to enter and remain in that portion of licensed premises that sells, gives, or delivers alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises. This section does not apply to any licensed premises, such as a restaurant, club, or grocery store where the selling, giving, or delivering alcoholic liquor is not the principal business of the licensee at those premises. Proof that a licensee, or his employee or agent, demanded, was shown, and reasonably relied upon adequate written evidence (as defined in section 6-73(a)(2)) for purposes of entering and remaining on the licensed premises is an affirmative defense in any criminal prosecution therefor or to any proceedings for the suspension or revocation of any license based thereon. It shall not, however, be an affirmative defense if the licensee, or his agent or employee, accepted the written evidence knowing it to be false or fraudulent. If a false or fraudulent driver's license or identification card is presented by a person less than 21 years of age to a licensee or the licensee's agent or employee for the purpose of obtaining entry and remaining on licensed premises, the law enforcement officer or agency investigating the incident shall, upon the conviction of the person who presented the fraudulent license or identification, make a report of the matter to the secretary of state on a form provided by the secretary of state. 
(Code 2008, § 5.11.270) 
Sec. 6-73. - Prohibited sales. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, it shall be unlawful for any licensee or any officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee to sell, give, or deliver alcoholic liquor to any person under the age of 21 years or to any intoxicated person. No person, after purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic liquor, shall sell, give or deliver such alcoholic liquor to another person under the age of 21 years, except in the performance of a religious ceremony or service. If a licensee or officer, associate, agent, or employee of the licensee is prosecuted under this subsection, for selling, giving, or delivering alcoholic liquor to a person under the age of 21 years, the person under 21 years of age who attempted to buy or receive the alcoholic liquor may be prosecuted pursuant to section 6-74, unless the person under 21 years of age was acting under the authority of a law enforcement agency, the state liquor control commission, or the local liquor control commission pursuant to a plan or action to investigate, patrol, or conduct any similar enforcement action. 
(1)  For the purpose of preventing the violation of this section, any licensee, or his agent or employee shall refuse to sell, deliver, or serve alcoholic beverages to any person who is unable to produce adequate written evidence of identity and of the fact that he is over the age of 21 years, if requested by the licensee, agent, employee, or representative. 
(2)  However, no agent or employee of the licensee shall be disciplined or discharged for selling or furnishing liquor to a person under 21 years of age if the agent or employee demanded and was shown, before furnishing liquor to a person under 21 years of age, adequate written evidence of age and identity of the person issued by a federal, state, county or municipal government, or subdivision or agency thereof, including, but not limited to, a motor vehicle operator's license, a registration certificate issued under the federal Selective Service Act, or an identification card issued to a member of the armed forces. This subsection, however, shall not apply if the agent or employee accepted the written evidence knowing it to be false or fraudulent. 
(3)  Adequate written evidence of age and identity of the person is a document issued by a federal, state, county, or municipal government, or subdivision or agency thereof, including, but not limited to, a motor vehicle operator's license, a registration certificate issued under the federal Selective Service Act, or an identification card issued to a member of the armed forces. Proof that the defendant-licensee, or his employee or agent demanded, was shown and reasonably relied upon such written evidence in any transaction forbidden by this section is an affirmative defense in any criminal prosecution therefor or to any proceedings for the suspension or revocation of any license based thereon. It shall not, however, be an affirmative defense if the agent or employee accepted the written evidence knowing it to be false or fraudulent. If a false or fraudulent driver's license or identification card is presented by a person less than 21 years of age to a licensee or the licensee's agent or employee for the purpose of ordering, purchasing, attempting to purchase, or otherwise obtaining or attempting to obtain the serving of any alcoholic beverage, the law enforcement officer or agency investigating the incident shall, upon the conviction of the person who presented the fraudulent license or identification, make a report of the matter to the secretary of state on a form provided by the secretary of state. 
(4)  A licensee or an officer, associate, member, representative, agent, or employee of a licensee may sell, give, or deliver alcoholic liquor to a person under the age of 21 years or authorize the sale, gift, or delivery of alcoholic liquor to a person under the age of 21 years pursuant to a plan or action to investigate, patrol, or otherwise conduct a "sting operation" or enforcement action against a person employed by the licensee or on any licensed premises if the licensee or officer, associate, member, representative, agent, or employee of the licensee provides written notice, at least 14 days before the "sting operation" or enforcement action to the local liquor control commissioner. Notice provided under this section shall be valid for a "sting operation" or enforcement action conducted within 60 days of the provision of that notice. 
(b)  The local liquor control commission shall review the model policy and guidelines for the operation of alcohol compliance checks developed by the state law enforcement training standards board and shall establish a policy and standards for alcohol compliance operations to investigate whether a licensee is furnishing alcoholic liquor to persons under 21 years of age in violation of this article. All supervising officers of such compliance checks shall have met the minimum training standards as determined by the state law enforcement training standards board. 
(c)  A licensee who is the subject of an enforcement action or "sting operation" under this section and who is found to be in compliance with this article shall be notified by the law enforcement agency conducting the enforcement action or "sting operation" that no violation was found within 30 days after such finding has been made. 
(Code 2008, § 5.11.280) 
Sec. 6-74. - Purchase, acceptance of gift, consumption or possession of alcoholic liquor by persons under 21 years; identification cards; other prohibitions; exceptions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to purchase or accept a gift of alcoholic liquor, or consume or have alcoholic liquor in his possession. If a licensee or his agents or employees believes or has reason to believe that a sale or delivery of any alcoholic liquor is prohibited because of the age of the prospective recipient, he shall, before making such sale or delivery demand presentation of some form of positive identification containing proof of age. This subsection does not apply to possession by a person under the age of 21 years making a delivery of alcoholic liquor in pursuance of the order of his parent. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, give, or furnish to any person under the age of 21 years any false or fraudulent written, printed, or photo static evidence of the age and identity of such person, or sell, give or furnish to any person under the age of 21 years evidence of age and identification of any other person. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to transfer, alter, or deface an identification card or obtain an identification card by means of false information. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to possess any written, printed or photo static evidence of age and identity that is false, fraudulent, or not actually his own. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to present or offer to any licensee, his agent or employee, any written, printed or photo static evidence of age and identity that is false, fraudulent, or not actually his own for the purpose of ordering, purchasing, attempting to purchase or otherwise procuring or attempting to procure, the serving of any alcoholic beverage. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian to permit his residence to be used by an invitee of the parent's child or the guardian's ward, if the invitee is under the age of 21 years, in a manner that constitutes a violation of this section. A parent or guardian is deemed to have permitted his residence to be used in violation of this subsection if he knowingly authorizes, enables, or permits consumption of alcoholic liquor by invitees under the age of 21 years. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to rent a hotel or motel room from the proprietor or agent thereof for the purpose of or with the knowledge that such room shall be used for the consumption of alcoholic liquor by persons under the age of 21 years. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person to have alcoholic liquor in his possession on public school district property on school days or at events on public school district property when children are present, unless the alcoholic liquor: 
(1)  Is in the original container with the seal unbroken and is in the possession of a person who is not otherwise legally prohibited from possessing the alcoholic liquor; or 
(2)  Is in the possession of a person in or for the performance of a religious service or ceremony authorized by the school board. 
(g)  The possession and dispensing, or consumption by a person under 21 years of age of alcoholic liquor in the performance of a religious service or ceremony, or the consumption by a person under 21 years of age under the direct supervision and approval of the parents or parent or those persons standing in loco parentis of such person under 21 years of age in the privacy of a home, is not prohibited by this section. 
(Code 2008, § 5.11.290) 
Sec. 6-75. - Happy hours prohibited. 
(a)  No licensee or employee or agent of such licensee shall: 
(1)  Sell more than one drink of alcoholic liquor for the price of one drink of alcoholic liquor; 
(2)  Sell, offer to sell or serve to any person an unlimited number of drinks of alcoholic liquor during any set period of time for a fixed price, except at private functions not open to the general public; 
(3)  Increase the volume of alcoholic liquor contained in a drink, or the size of a drink of alcoholic liquor, without increasing proportionately the price regularly charged for the drink on that day; 
(4)  Encourage or permit, on the licensed premises, any game or contest which involves drinking alcoholic liquor or the awarding of drinks of alcoholic liquor as prizes for such game or contest on the licensed premises; or 
(5)  Advertise or promote in any way, whether on or off the licensed premises, any of the practices prohibited under subsection (a)(1) through (4) of this section. 
(b)  Nothing in subsection (a) of this section shall be construed to prohibit a licensee from: 
(1)  Offering free food or entertainment at any time; 
(2)  Including drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a meal package; 
(3)  Including drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a hotel package; 
(4)  Negotiating drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a contract between a hotel or multi-use establishment and another group for the holding of any function, meeting, convention or trade show; 
(5)  Providing room service to persons renting rooms at a hotel; 
(6)  Selling pitchers (or the equivalent, including, but not limited, to buckets), carafes, or bottles of alcoholic liquor which are customarily sold in such manner and delivered to two or more persons at one time; or 
(7)  Selling or offering for sale a party package only if the licensee: 
a.  Offers food in the dedicated event space; 
b.  Limits the party package to no more than three hours; 
c.  Distributes wristbands, lanyards, shirts or any other wearable item to identify party package attendees; and 
d.  Excludes individuals not participating in the party package from the dedicated event space; 
(8)  Advertising events permitted under this subsection (b); 
(9)  Including drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of an entertainment package where the licensee: 
a.  Restricts dates of operation to dates during which there is an event at an adjacent stadium; 
b.  Restricts hours of serving alcoholic liquor to two hours before the event and one hour after the event; 
c.  Restricts alcoholic liquor sales to beer and wine; 
d.  Requires tickets for admission to the establishment; and 
e.  Prohibits sale of admission tickets on the day of an event and permits the sale of admission tickets for single events only; and 
(10)  Discounting any drink of alcoholic liquor during a specified time period only if: 
a.  The price of the drink of alcoholic liquor is not changed during the time that it is discounted; 
b.  The period of time during which any drink of alcoholic liquor is discounted does not exceed four hours per day and 15 hours per week; however, this period of time is not required to be consecutive and may be divided by the licensee in any manner; 
c.  The drink of alcoholic liquor is not discounted between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and the licensed premises' closing hour; and 
d.  Notice of the discount of the drink of alcoholic liquor during a specified time is posted on the licensed premises or on the licensee's publicly available website at least seven days prior to the specified time. 
(c)  A violation of this section shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of a retail liquor dealer's license as provided by this section. 
(Code 2008, § 5.11.310) 
Sec. 6-76. - Product sampling. 
(a)  Licensees may conduct product sampling for consumption at licensed premises. Up to three samples, consisting of no more than: 
(1)  One-quarter ounce of distilled spirits; 
(2)  One ounce of wine; or 
(3)  Two ounces of beer; 
may be served to a consumer in one day. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, an on-premises retail licensee may offer for sale and serve more than one drink per person for sampling purposes without violating section 6-75(a)(1) or (b)(6), provided the total quantity of the sampling package, regardless of the number of containers in which the alcoholic liquor is being served, does not exceed one ounce of distilled spirits, four ounces of wine, or 16 ounces of beer. In any event, all provisions of section 6-75 shall apply to an on-premises retail licensee that conducts product sampling. 
(c)  A craft distiller tasting permit licensee may conduct product sampling of distilled spirits for consumption at the location specified in the craft distiller tasting permit license. Up to three samples, consisting of no more than one-quarter ounce of distilled spirits, may be served to a consumer in one day. 
(Code 2008, § 5.11.320) 
Sec. 6-77. - Nudity on the premises where alcoholic liquor is offered for sale. 
    It shall be unlawful for any licensee or person acting as agent, servant, or employee of such licensee to provide, suffer, or permit any act, conduct, or entertainment on the premises in such a manner as to expose to public view: 
(1)  Male or female genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum, anal region, or pubic hair region. 
(2)  Any portion of the female breast at or below the areola thereof. 
(3)  Any device, film, costume, or covering which gives the appearance of or simulates the above listed body parts. 
(4)  The use of tassels, pasties, stars, or transparent material for coverage of the listed body parts. 
(5)  Sexual intercourse, any penetration of the female sex organ by the male sex organ, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, cunnilingus, analingus, fellatio, flagellation, sadomasochism, or any other sexual acts prohibited by law. 
(6)  The touching, caressing, or fondling of the breast, buttock, anus, genitals, perineum or pubic hair region. 
(7)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any activities set forth above. 
(8)  The displaying of films or pictures, or similar reproductions or technology depicting acts set forth in subsections (1) through (7) of this section. 
(Code 2008, § 5.11.330) 
Sec. 6-78. - Loitering prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to frequent or loiter within any premises licensed under this article with the purpose of soliciting any patron or customer therein to purchase any alcoholic or nonalcoholic beverages. 
(Code 2008, § 5.11.350; Ord. No. 15, § I, 6-1-2015) 
Sec. 6-79. - Curb service prohibited. 
    No curb service for the sale of alcoholic liquor shall be carried on with respect to premises for which a Class A, C, E or F retail liquor dealer's license has been issued, either upon the public street or private property contiguous to such licensed premises. 
(Code 2008, § 5.11.360) 
Sec. 6-80. - Safety provisions. 
(a)  A licensee issued a Class A, C, E, F, G or H license under the provisions of this article may not permit the use of any pyrotechnic device within its licensed premises without the prior authorization of the state fire marshal. Nor may such licensee, or any agent or employee of such licensee, use mace, pepper spray, or any other toxic air-released compound within its licensed premises. 
(b)  No person may impede any person who is attempting to exit the premises of a licensee due to an emergency that constitutes a threat to the health or safety of persons within the licensed premises. For the purpose of this section, the term "impede a person who is attempting to exit" includes physically restraining the person or blocking or locking an exit while the licensed premises is open to the public. 
(c)  All persons issued a Class A, C, E F, G or H license under the provisions of this article with an authorized capacity: 
(1)  Of at least 250 persons; 
(2)  Set by the state fire marshal; or 
(3)  Set by local ordinance, whichever is lowest; 
must place a panic bar on each exit of the licensed premises. All persons issued a Class A, C, E, F, G or H license under the provisions of this article with an authorized capacity of at least 500 persons that conducts live entertainment within its licensed premises must, before the commencement of the live entertainment, make an announcement to the patrons of the licensed premises that generally informs those patrons of the locations of exits and fire escapes at the licensed premises. 
(Code 2008, § 5.11.370) 
Sec. 6-81. - Reporting incidents to police. 
    Any licensee, agent or employee shall immediately report any disturbance, disorderly conduct, physical altercation or other criminal act reported to or observed by the licensee, agent or employee on the licensed premises to the city police department. 
(Code 2008, § 5.11.380) 
Sec. 6-82. - Access from licensed premises to dwelling quarters. 
    Except in the case of hotels and clubs, no alcoholic liquor shall be sold at retail upon any premises which has any access that leads from the premises to any other portion of the same building or structure used for dwelling or lodging and which is permitted to be used or kept accessible for use by the public. This provision shall not prevent any connection between the premises and such other portion of the building or structure which is used only by the licensee, his family and personal guests. 
(Code 2008, § 5.11.390) 
Sec. 6-83. - Revocation; suspension; fines; notice; hearing. 
(a)  The local liquor control commissioner may revoke or suspend any license issued by the city if it is determined that the licensee has violated any provision of the Illinois Liquor Control Act of 1934 or this Code, or any applicable rule or regulations established by the local liquor control commissioner or the state commission. 
(b)  In addition to the suspension, the local liquor control commission may levy a fine on the licensee for such violations not to exceed $1,000.00 for a first violation within a 12-month period, $1,500.00 for a second violation within a 12-month period, and $2,500.00 for a third or subsequent violation within a 12-month period. Each day on which a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. Not more than $15,000.00 in fines under this section may be imposed against any licensee during the period of his license. Proceeds from such fines shall be paid into the general corporate fund of the city treasury. 
(c)  No retail liquor dealer's license shall be revoked or suspended and no licensee shall be fined except after a public hearing by the local liquor control commission with a three-day written notice to the licensee affording the licensee an opportunity to appear and defend the charges against him. All hearings shall be open to the public, and the local liquor control commission shall reduce all evidence to writing and shall maintain a certified official record of the proceedings to be taken and prepared by a certified court reporter or certified shorthand reporter. If the local liquor control commission has reason to believe that any continued operation of particular licensed premises will immediately threaten the welfare of the community, they may, upon the issuance of a written order stating the reason for such conclusion and without notice or hearing, order the licensed premises closed for not more than seven days, giving the licensee an opportunity to be heard during that period, except that if the licensee is also engaged in the conduct of another business on the licensed premises such order shall not be applicable to the other business. If the local liquor control commission determines after the hearing that the license should be revoked or suspended or that the licensee should be fined, he shall, within five days after the hearing, state the reason for such determination in a written order, and either the amount of the fine, the period of suspension, or that the license has been revoked, and shall serve a copy of such order within the five days upon the licensee. 
(d)  The local liquor commissioner may appoint a deputy commissioner to serve in his absence with all the powers afforded the liquor commissioner. 
(Code 2008, § 5.11.400) 
Sec. 6-84. - Complaint of violation; hearing. 
    Any five residents of the city shall have the right to file a complaint with the local liquor control commission stating that any person licensed under the provisions of this article has been or is violating the provisions of this article, the Illinois Liquor Control Act of 1934, or any rules or regulations of the local liquor control commission or the state liquor control commission. Such complaint shall be in writing in the form prescribed by the local liquor control commission and shall be signed and sworn to by the parties complaining. The complaint shall state the particular provision, rule or regulation believed to have been violated and the facts in detail upon which belief is based. If the local liquor control commission is satisfied that the complaint substantially charges a violation and that from the facts alleged there is reasonable cause for such belief, he shall set the matter for hearing and shall serve notice upon the licensee of the time and place of such hearing and of the particular charge in the complaint. 
(Code 2008, § 5.11.410) 
Sec. 6-85. - Appeals from order of local liquor control commission. 
(a)  Except as provided in this section, any order or action of the local liquor control commission in levying a fine or refusing to levy a fine on a licensee, granting or refusing to grant a license, revoking or suspending or refusing to revoke or suspend a license or refusing for more than 30 days to grant a hearing upon a complaint to revoke or suspend a license may, within 20 days after notice of such order or action, be appealed by any resident of the city or any person interested, to the state liquor control commission in accordance with state law and the commission's rules and regulations. 
(b)  In any case where a licensee appeals to the state liquor control commission from an order or action having the effect of suspending or revoking a license, denying a renewal application, or refusing to grant a license, the licensee may resume the operation of the licensed business pending the decision of the state liquor control commission and the expiration of the time allowed for an application for rehearing. If an application for rehearing is filed, the licensee shall continue the operation of the licensed business until the denial of the application or, if the rehearing is granted, until the decision on rehearing. In any case in which a licensee appeals to the state liquor control commission a suspension or revocation that is the second or subsequent suspension or revocation imposed on that licensee within the preceding 12-month period, the licensee shall consider the suspension or revocation to be in effect until a reversal of the local liquor control commission's action has been issued by the state liquor control commission and shall cease all activity otherwise authorized by the license. 
(c)  The appeal authorized by this section shall be limited to a review of the official record of the proceedings of the local liquor control commission. A certified official record of the proceedings taken and prepared by a certified court reporter or certified shorthand reporter shall be filed by the local liquor control commission within five days after notice of the filing of such appeal, if the appellant licensee pays for the cost of the transcript. 
(Code 2008, § 5.11.420) 
Sec. 6-86. - Granting licenses after revocation; waiting period; discretion. 
(a)  When any retail liquor dealer's license has been revoked for any cause, no license shall be granted to any person for the period of one year thereafter for the conduct of the business of selling alcoholic liquor in the premises described in the revoked license unless the revocation order has been vacated or unless the revocation order was entered as to the licensee only. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit the issuance of a retail liquor dealer's license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor incidental to a restaurant if: 
(1)  The primary business of the restaurant consists of the sale of food where the sale of liquor is incidental to the sale of food and the applicant is a completely new owner of the restaurant; 
(2)  The immediately prior owner or operator of the premises where the restaurant is located operated the premises as a restaurant and held a valid retail liquor dealer's license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor at the restaurant for at least part of the 24 months before the change of ownership; and 
(3)  The restaurant is located 100 feet or more feet from a school. 
(Code 2008, § 5.11.430) 
Sec. 6-87. - STEPS training to encourage profitable services. 
(a)  The Beverage Alcohol Sellers and Servers Education and Training (BASSET) program is the state's sell/server training program. 
(b)  All liquor license holders except Class G will be required to participate in the STEPS, BASSET program for continuation and renewal of their annual liquor license. 
(c)  Failure to participate after notification from the county sheriff's department of the program training date and time will cause the immediate revocation of the alcoholic liquor license of the licensee or the liquor license will not be renewed until completion of the STEPS, BASSET program. 
(d)  A copy of the certification showing the licensee's participation in the STEPS training program shall be submitted to the city prior to the next license renewal. 
(Code 2008, § 5.11.430.1; Ord. No. 15-11, § I, 6-1-2015) 
Chapter 10 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- General authority relative to animals, 65 ILCS 5/11-20-9. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bit, bite, or biting means the act of being seized with the teeth or jaws, so that the thing seized has been nipped or gripped, or has been wounded or pierced. 
    Cat means any member of the feline species, male or female. 
    Dog means any member of the canine species, male or female. 
    Leash means a cord, rope, strap or chain or similar substance which shall be securely fastened to the collar or harness of a dog or other animal and shall be of sufficient strength to keep such dog or other animal under control. 
    Livestock means any horse, mule, cow, sheep, goat, swine, goose, chicken, or any other similar animal. 
    Nuisance means, as pertains to dogs, cats or other animals, a nuisance pertaining thereto constitutes the permitting, knowingly or unknowingly, by the owner of any one or more of the following acts: running at large, chasing vehicles or humans or other things while unleashed, intimidating, attacking, to bite, or biting, or being bit, molesting, causing or knowing to cause substantial damage to property or persons, being in an unsanitary state or causing an offensive odor, or barking, or caterwauling, or making noise or engaging in the act of defecation on public property or on any municipal right-of-way or sidewalk or street or alley or on property not owned by the owner of the animal that is deemed dangerous or otherwise offensive by an officer of the court. The removal of feces immediately following the act of defecation shall not constitute a nuisance as defined herein. 
    Owner means any person having a right of property in a dog or cat, or who keeps or harbors a dog or cat, or who has a dog or cat in his care or acts as its custodian, or who knowingly permits a dog or cat to remain on or about any premises occupied by him. 
    Police officer means the chief of police or other police officers, including pound keeper, dog or cat catcher or county animal control officer. 
    Running at large means any dog, cat or other animal unrestrained by enclosures, leash, or other tie, or so far away from its owner that the owner cannot immediately control it and providing, however, that the animal is not considered running at large when under the full and complete control of the owner upon the owner's premises or authorized premises. 
    Vicious dog means any dog that when unprovoked bites or attacks a human being or other animal either on public or private property. The term "vicious dog" does not include a dog that bites or attacks a trespasser on the property of its owner, anyone assaulting its owner, anyone who has abused it, or anyone who is professionally used for law enforcement duties. 
(Code 2008, § 6.04.050; Ord. No. 20-03, § 1(part), 2003) 
Sec. 10-2. - Deliberate violation for purpose of impoundment. 
    Whoever willfully drives or entices any animal from beyond the inhabited part of the city into the same or aids or abets the same, or lets any animal out of any enclosure in which it may be confined, or aids or abets in the letting out or escape thereof in order to take up or impound the same shall be subject to a penalty. 
(Code 2008, § 6.04.030; Ord. No. 4, div. 1, § 9, 1912) 
Sec. 10-3. - Running at large. 
    It is unlawful for any person to permit any dog, cat, livestock or other animal to run at large within the city. Dogs trained for purposes of law enforcement shall be excluded from the provisions of this chapter when unleashing or non-restraint is warranted by the police officer in charge. 
(Code 2008, § 6.04.070; Ord. No. 20-03, § 1(part), 2003) 
Sec. 10-4. - Number permitted. 
    Each residence within the city shall be limited to a maximum of four dogs or cats or combination thereof over the age of four months which shall be duly permitted pursuant to section 10-13. 
(Code 2008, § 6.04.080; Ord. No. 20-03, § 1(part), 2003) 
Sec. 10-5. - Declared nuisance; impoundment authorized. 
    Any dog, cat, or other animal running at large as defined by this chapter or otherwise in violation of this chapter shall be deemed a nuisance and shall be impounded by a police officer. 
(Code 2008, § 6.04.100) 
Sec. 10-6. - Impoundment-Redemption. 
    Any dog, cat, or other animal impounded may be redeemed by the owner upon payment of a fee of $50.00 for the impoundment of the animal and other expenses incurred by the city, including a pick-up fee. Fees shall be established by the public safety committee and amended from time to time as necessary to underwrite the expense of sheltering and maintaining said animal(s). 
(Code 2008, § 6.04.110; Ord. No. 20-03, § 1(part), 2003; Ord. No. 08-17, § I, 12-1-2008) 
Sec. 10-7. - Impoundment-Recordkeeping. 
    Immediately upon the impoundment of any dog, cat or other animal, the chief of police shall enter upon the records of his office the date of impoundment, number, and description of the animal, and record whether the animal is licensed and when the last vaccination for rabies has been given. 
(Code 2008, § 6.04.120; Ord. No. 20-03, § 1(part), 2003) 
Sec. 10-8. - Impoundment-Notice; posting; destruction of unredeemed animal. 
    Public notice of any impoundment shall include the posting of a description of each animal and date of impoundment on the bulletin board at the city building. Any dog not redeemed by the owner thereof within two days after the posting of such public notice by the chief of police shall be given up to the county animal control officer. All other animals shall be kept for four days and, if not claimed, shall be destroyed or given up to the area Humane Society. 
(Code 2008, § 6.04.130; Ord. No. 20-03, § 1(part), 2003) 
Sec. 10-9. - Dogs, cats, or other animals which may be immediately destroyed. 
    The following dogs, cats, or other animals are hereby declared to be public nuisances and the chief of police, any police officer, pound keeper, dog or cat catcher may immediately kill such dogs, cats, or other animals, and it is unlawful for any owner or keeper to maintain such public nuisances: 
(1)  Bitches in heat, running at large, whether licensed or unlicensed. 
(2)  Vicious dogs running at large and attacking any child or other person while in the act or immediately following such attack, and an officer may pursue such vicious dog for purposes of destroying it, provided the pursuit is immediate. 
(3)  Any dog or cat or animal which has suffered serious injury, and in the opinion of such officer such animal has little chance of recovery and be put out of its misery. 
(Code 2008, § 6.04.140; Ord. No. 20-03, § 1(part), 2003) 
Sec. 10-10. - Inspection of animal habitat. 
    By authority of the chief of police, an inspection of the habitat of any animal the subject to this chapter may be performed if reasonable belief exists that the health, safety, or welfare of the public or the animal or residents therein are at risk. 
(Code 2008, § 6.04.150; Ord. No. 20-03, § 1(part), 2003) 
Sec. 10-11. - Cruelty to animals. 
    It is unlawful for any person to treat any animal within the city in any cruel manner whatsoever or to knowingly permit another to do the same. Cruelty to animals includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Overworking, beating, abusing, poisoning, mutilating, torturing, starving, or giving unnecessary pain to an animal over a period of time; 
(2)  Exposing the animal to the elements of the weather over a long period of time without appropriate nourishment or provisions for housing; 
(3)  Failing to provide an animal proper food, drink and sanitary shelter; 
(4)  Abandoning or leaving an animal on any public way or public place; 
(5)  Encouraging, instigating or causing a fight between animals, either in private or in public; and 
(6)  Using any device with the intent to frighten an animal for amusement or entertainment. 
No such animal shall be seized except upon the issuance of a court order or where this chapter specifically provides for the seizure and impounding of such animal. 
(Code 2008, § 6.04.160; Ord. No. 20-03, § 1(part), 2003) 
Sec. 10-12. - Animals injured or diseased. 
    No person shall keep or possess any animal which is injured or diseased beyond recovery, or which is sick with an infectious or contagious disease within the city limits. 
(Code 2008, § 6.04.010; Ord. No. 4, div. 1, § 13, 1912) 
Sec. 10-13. - License. 
    It is unlawful for any person owning any dog within the limits of the city to keep a dog unless it is properly licensed in accordance with the Woodford County Animal Control Act. 
(Code 2008, § 6.04.060; Ord. No. 20-03, § 1(part), 2003) 
Secs. 10-14-10-44. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ANIMALS CREATING DISTURBANCE 

Sec. 10-45. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Animal means any and all types of animal, domesticated and wild, male and female, singular and plural. 
    Corroborated means additional evidence of a different person or character to the same point. The statement of a complainant is said to be corroborated when it is shown to correspond with the representation of another witness or to comport with some fact otherwise known or established. 
    Materially means substantially or considerably. 
    Owner or keeper means any person having a right of property in an animal, or who has it in his care or control, or who knowingly permits such animal to remain on property owned or occupied by him. If such animal is licensed, the person last issued such license shall be presumed to be the owner of the animal and, for the purposes of this article, if such person is a minor, the parent or guardian with whom the child resides shall be considered to be the owner or keeper. 
    Reasonable person means a person of ordinary sensitivity and sensibility. Reasonable is synonymous with rational, honest, equitable, fair and suitable. 
(Code 2008, § 6.10.010) 
Sec. 10-46. - Prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to be the owner or keeper of any animal or animals which emit noises in such a manner as to materially disturb or annoy a reasonable person. 
(Code 2008, § 6.10.020) 
Sec. 10-47. - Interpretation. 
    For the purposes of this article, noises occurring between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. are more disturbing and unnecessary than noises occurring between 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.; repetitious sounds are more disturbing and unnecessary than intermittent sounds. 
(Code 2008, § 6.10.030) 
Sec. 10-48. - First complaint. 
    Upon receipt of a complaint or observation of a violation of this article, the police department shall notify the owner or keeper of the animal or animals of the violation and serve him with a written copy of this article. A record of such service shall be maintained at the main office of the police department. 
(Code 2008, § 6.10.040) 
Sec. 10-49. - Subsequent violation. 
    If, within 90 days of the service described above, another such violation occurs and is complained of and corroborated, the owner or keeper of such animal or animals may be issued a citation charging a violation of this article. 
(Code 2008, § 6.10.050) 
Chapter 14 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS 

Sec. 14-1. - Adopted. 
(a)  The International Building Code, 2015 edition (IBC), published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter by reference thereto with the following modifications: 
(1)  Each new residence for which a building permit is sought after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall contain a yard light which shall operate automatically from sunset to sunrise and be located in the front yard ten feet from the front lot line and within three feet of the driveway; and 
(2)  All wiring for any yard light shall be buried underground a minimum depth of 24 inches. 
(b)  Any property use, remodel, construction or erected, construct, alter or repair a building or structure within the corporate limits shall conform to all ordinances of the City of Eureka Municipal Code and the city's zoning code and subdivision code. 
(c)  Any property use, remodel, construction or to erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure not specifically covered under the City of Eureka Municipal Code and the city's zoning code and subdivision code will require planning commission approval through the application of a special use or variance request. 
(d)  Any property use, remodel, construction or to erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure deemed a nuisance, safety hazard or receiving more than three complaints by three separate adjoining property owners shall be reviewed by the city planning commission for allowable property use, remodel or construction. The decision of the planning commission shall be final. 
(Code 2008, § 15.06.010; Ord. No. 3-84, § 2, 1984; Ord. No. 26-03, § 2, 2003; Ord. No. 2-04, § 2, 2004; Ord. No. 17-05, § 2, 5-15-2017) 
Sec. 14-2. - Amendments; city council authority. 
    The council reserves the right to add to or delete any portions of the IBC which it feels necessary to more fully be adapted to local situation. 
(Code 2008, § 15.06.020; Ord. No. 3-84, § 3, 1984; Ord. No. 2-04, § 3, 2004) 
Sec. 14-3. - Waiver of specific requirements; city council authority. 
    The council reserves the right to waive any specific requirements on an individual request basis. 
(Code 2008, § 15.06.030; Ord. No. 3-84, § 4, 1984) 
Sec. 14-4. - Insertions, additions and changes to IBC. 
    The following sections of the IBC are hereby revised, completed or deleted as follows: 
Section 101.1: Insert in place of bracketed material [NAME OF JURISDICTION] the following: "The City of Eureka." 
Section 903.2.8: Revise to read as follows: "An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3 shall be provided throughout all buildings with a Group R fire area except for single-family dwellings and two-family dwellings." 
Section 1612.3: Insert in place of bracketed material [INSERT NAME OF JURISDICTION] the following: "The City of Eureka." Insert in place of bracketed material [INSERT DATE OF ISSUANCE] the following: "April 3, 2017." 
(Code 2008, § 15.06.040; Ord. No. 2-04, § 4, 2004; Ord. No. 17-05, § 3, 5-15-2017) 
Sec. 14-5. - Powers and duties of zoning administration. 
    The zoning administrator is authorized and directed to enforce all provisions of this chapter including specifically those portions of the IBC adopted by reference. In carrying out these responsibilities, the zoning administrator shall, as he deems necessary, consult with and consider the suggestions of other departments and officers of the city, including, but not limited to, the public works department, city engineer, city administrator, any applicable fire safety personnel and the city attorney. The zoning administrator shall also collect and account for all fees. 
(Code 2008, § 15.06.050; Ord. No. 2-04, § 5, 2004) 
Sec. 14-6. - Permit fees. 
(a)  Each applicant for a building permit shall pay a filing fee as set forth in section 14-7. 
(b)  The value of all new construction, except for one- and two-family residences, will be based on the contract cost. The zoning administrator shall determine the value of new one- and two-family residences by using the data published periodically by the code council. The value of remodeling or repair work shall be determined on the basis of contracts entered into by the applicant. In the event no contract is available, the director shall estimate the value of remodeling or repair work for one- and two-family residences by using the "HomeTech Remodeling and Renovation Cost Estimator" published by HomeTech Publishing or such other similar publication deemed appropriate by the zoning administrator. 
(c)  In the event that the work specified in the application was started prior to the issuance of the building permit for such work, then the permit fees herein established shall be doubled. 
(Code 2008, § 15.06.060; Ord. No. 2-04, § 6, 2004) 
Sec. 14-7. - Rate fee structure, permit and inspection fees. 
(a)  Building permit fees. Fees to be charged for building permits shall be as follows: 
(1)  Construction costs. 
a.  Projects with a construction cost of $3,000.00 or less: $25.00. 
b.  Projects with a construction cost of $3,001.00-$10,000.00: $50.00. 
c.  Projects with a construction cost of $10,001.00-$25,000.00: $75.00. 
d.  Projects with a construction cost of $25,001.00-$100,000.00: $100.00. 
e.  Projects with a construction cost of $100,001.00 and up: $250.00. 
(2)  In addition to the application fee, a fee of $3.00 per $1,000.00 of construction cost shall be charged for all construction including single-family, multifamily, commercial, industrial, garages, additions to homes, enclosed porches or commercial additions. 
(b)  Inspections fees and requirements. 
(1)  There shall be two inspections required for each of the following except as stated with the appropriate fee to be charged for each inspection: 
a.  Sheds with a foundation; 
b.  Pools which are permanent; 
c.  Unattached garage, without electrical or plumbing, three inspections; 
d.  Decks; 
e.  Driveway approach; 
f.  Car ports, one inspection; 
g.  Fences; 
h.  Porches; 
i.  Garages with electric/plumbing, three inspections; 
j.  Enclosed porches, three inspections. 
This list is not considered all-inclusive and other construction as determined by the city shall be designated requiring two inspections unless otherwise stated. 
(2)  If the building inspector must return to recheck either of the above required inspections due to the site layout was incorrect or the owner called for a final prior to completion of the construction there shall be an additional $30.00 fee charged prior to the second inspection. 
(3)  Failure of the owner and/or contractor to call for a required inspection prior to work commencing or moving to the next phase of construction without a require inspection, there shall be a fine of $100.00 for each offense. The fine shall be paid prior to any additional inspections. 
(4)  Permit construction types requiring the following five inspections: 
a.  Single-family; 
b.  Multifamily; 
c.  Commercial; 
d.  Industrial; 
e.  Additions to homes; 
f.  Commercial property. 
This list is not considered all-inclusive and other construction as determined by the city shall be designated requiring five inspections. 
(5)  Six inspections required and inspection cost for each to be collected at the time of the issue of the building permit: 
a.  Site layout: fee of $30.00. 
b.  Footings: fee of $30.00. 
c.  Water and sewer connections: fee of $60.00. 
d.  Framing, electrical and plumbing: fee of $120.00. 
e.  Driveway approach: fee of $60.00. 
f.  Final occupancy permit: fee of $120.00. 
g.  If the building inspector must return to recheck any of the above required inspections due to their being improperly completed or the owner called for a final prior to completion of the entire construction project there shall be an additional fee charged prior to the second inspection. 
h.  Multifamily units requiring more than one visit to the construction site for a required inspection covered under subsection (b) of this section shall be charged an inspection fee as designated above for each additional visit to the site. The inspection fee shall be paid prior to any additional inspections. 
i.  Failure of the owner and/or contractor to call for a required inspection prior to work commencing or moving to the next phase of construction without a require inspection, there shall be a fine of $100.00 for each offense. The fine shall be paid prior to any additional inspections. 
(6)  All commercial properties changing/remodeling of the interior shall require inspections. The number of inspections will be based on the type of remodeling performed: 
a.  Framing, electrical and plumbing; 
b.  Final. 
This list is not considered all-inclusive and other construction and or remodeling inspection needs will be considered to determine total required inspections by the city administrative office. 
(7)  There shall be a fee of $30.00 for each inspection and an additional $30.00 fee for any re-inspection. The fine shall be paid prior to any additional inspections. 
(8)  A fine for failure of the owner and/or contractor to call for a required inspection prior to work commencing or moving to the next phase of construction without a required inspection shall be imposed. There shall be a fine of $100.00 for each offense. The fine shall be paid prior to any additional inspections. 
(c)  Building inspector. 
(1)  Shall be appointed by the mayor with contract effective for one year from the date of appointment and approval by the city council. 
(2)  The building inspector shall send all notices to any individual and/or corporation requiring a permit and having not applied for one with the city. 
(3)  Any required inspections not performed by the building inspector shall be refunded to the building permit applicant and deducted from future payments to the building inspector. 
(Code 2008, § 17.1440(A), (B), (H); Ord. No. 09-06, § I, 5-4-2009; Ord. No. 09-08, § I, 11-16-2009; Ord. No. 11-02, § I, 2-21-2011; Ord. No. 12-12, § I, 7-2-2012; Ord. No. 12-21, § I, 11-5-2012; Ord. No. 15-01, § I, 1-5-2015) 
Sec. 14-8. - Inconsistencies between IBC and other codes adopted by the city. 
    In the event of any inconsistency between the provisions of the IBC and any other code adopted or incorporated by reference by this Code, the terms of the more stringent code as determined by the zoning administrator shall apply. 
(Code 2008, § 15.06.080; Ord. No. 2-04, § 8, 2004) 
Chapter 18 - BUSINESSES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1-18-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Regulation of businesses and professions, 225 ILCS 2/1 et seq.; authority of city over certain businesses, 65 ILCS 5/11-42-1 et seq.; authority of city to fix the amount, terms and manner of issuing and revoking licenses, 65 ILCS 5/11-60-1. 

Sec. 18-19. - Application. 
    Applications for all licenses and permits required by ordinance shall be made in writing to the administrative staff in the absence of provision to the contrary. Each application shall state the names of the applicant, the permit or license desired, the location to be used, if any, the time covered, and the fee to be paid; and each application shall contain such additional information as may be needed for the proper guidance of the city council in the issuing of the number of permits authorized which shall be determined by the city council annually. 
(Code 2008, § 5.04.010; Ord. No. 1-82, ch. 1, § 1, 1982) 
Sec. 18-20. - Persons subject to license. 
    Whenever in this Code a license is required for the maintenance, operation or conduct of any business or establishment, or for doing business or engaging in any activity or occupation, any person, firm or corporation shall be subject to the requirement if by himself or through an agent, employee or partner, he holds himself forth as being engaged in the business or occupation; or solicits patronage therefor, actively or passively; or performs or attempts to perform any part of such business or occupation in the city. 
(Code 2008, § 5.04.020; Ord. No. 1-82, ch. 1, § 2, 1982) 
Sec. 18-21. - Forms. 
    Forms for all licenses and permits, and applications therefor, shall be prepared and kept on file by the city clerk. 
(Code 2008, § 5.04.030; Ord. No. 1-82, ch. 1, § 3, 1982) 
Sec. 18-22. - Signatures. 
    Each license or permit issued shall bear the signature of the clerk in the absence of any provision to the contrary. 
(Code 2008, § 5.04.040; Ord. No. 1-82, ch. 1, § 4(part), 1982) 
Sec. 18-23. - Applicant investigation. 
    Upon the receipt of an application for a license or permit where the ordinance of the city necessitates an inspection or investigation before the issuance of such permits or license, the city clerk shall refer such application to the proper officer for making such investigation within 48 hours of the time of such receipt. The officer charged with the duty of making an investigation or inspection shall make a report thereon, favorable or otherwise within ten days after receiving the application or a copy thereof. The health officer shall make or cause to be made an investigation in regard to such licenses in connection with the care and handling of food and the prevention of nuisances and the spread of disease, for the protection of health. All other investigations, except where otherwise provided, shall be made by the chief of police or some other officer designated by the mayor. 
(Code 2008, § 5.04.050; Ord. No. 1-82, ch. 1, § 4(A), 1982) 
Sec. 18-24. - Fees. 
    In absence of provisions to the contrary, all fees and charges for licenses or permits shall be paid in advance at the time application therefor is made to the city. When an applicant has not engaged in the business until after the expiration of part of the current license year the license fee shall be pro-rated by quarters and the fee paid for each quarter or fraction thereof during which the business has been or will be pursued. Except as otherwise provided, all net license fees shall become a part of the general fund or enterprise fund as appropriate for license issued. 
(Code 2008, § 5.04.060; Ord. No. 1-82, ch. 1, § 5, 1982) 
Sec. 18-25. - Termination. 
(a)  All annual licenses shall terminate on the last day of the fiscal year of the city, where no provision to the contrary is made. 
(b)  The city clerk shall mail to all licensees of the city a statement informing the licensee of the expiration date of the license held by the licensee. If the license is an annual one, the statement shall be mailed three weeks prior to the date of such expiration, provided that a failure to send out such notice, or the failure of the licensee to receive it, shall not excuse the licensee from a failure to secure a new license, or a renewal thereof, nor shall it be a defense in action for operation without a license. 
(Code 2008, § 5.04.070; Ord. No. 1-82, ch. 1, § 6, 1982) 
Sec. 18-26. - Building and premises compliance. 
    No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business and no permit shall be issued for any thing or act, if the premises and building to be used for the purpose do not fully comply with the requirements of the ordinances of the city. No such license or permit shall be issued for the conduct of any business or performance of any act which would involve a violation of the zoning ordinances of the city. 
(Code 2008, § 5.04.080; Ord. No. 1-82, ch. 1, § 7, 1982) 
Sec. 18-27. - Change of location. 
    The location of any licensed business or occupation, or of any permitted act, may be changed, provided ten days' notice thereof is given to the city clerk, in the absence of any provision to the contrary, provided that the building, zoning and frontage consent requirements of the ordinances are complied with. 
(Code 2008, § 5.04.090; Ord. No. 1-82, ch. 1, § 8, 1982) 
Sec. 18-28. - Nuisances prohibited. 
    No business, licensed or not, shall be so conducted or operated as to amount to a nuisance in fact. 
(Code 2008, § 5.04.120; Ord. No. 1-82, ch. 1, § 11, 1982) 
Sec. 18-29. - Inspection. 
(a)  Whenever inspections of the premises used for or in connection with the operation of a licensed business or occupation are provided for or required by ordinance, or are reasonably necessary thereto to secure compliance with any ordinance provision or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the licensee, or the person in charge of the premises to be inspected, to admit thereto for the purpose of making the inspection any officer or employee of the city who is authorized or directed to make such inspection at any reasonable time that admission is requested. 
(b)  Whenever an analysis of any commodity or material is reasonably necessary to secure conformance with any ordinance provision or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the licensee of the city whose business is governed by the provision to give any authorized officer or employee of the city requesting the same sufficient samples of such material or commodity for such analysis upon request. 
(c)  In addition to any other penalty which may be provided, the mayor and city council may revoke the license of any licensed proprietor of any licensed business in the city who refuses to permit any such officer or employee who is authorized to make such inspection or take such sample to make the inspection, or take an adequate sample of said commodity, or who interferes with such officer or employee while in the performance of his duty in making such inspection, provided that no license shall be revoked for such cause unless written demand is made upon the licensee or person in charge of the premises, in the name of the city, stating that such inspection or sample is desired at the time it is sought to make the inspection or to obtain the sample. 
(Code 2008, § 5.04.130; Ord. No. 1-82, ch. 1, § 12, 1982) 
Sec. 18-30. - Revocation. 
    Any license or permit issued under this article may be revoked by the mayor and the city council for any violation of this Code by the licensee or permittee; such revocation may be in addition to any fine imposed. 
(Code 2008, § 5.04.140; Ord. No. 1-82, ch. 1, § 13, 1982) 
Sec. 18-31. - Posting. 
    It shall be the duty of any person conducting a licensed business in the city to keep his license posted in a prominent place on the premises used for such business at all times. 
(Code 2008, § 5.04.150; Ord. No. 1-82, ch. 1, § 14, 1982) 
Secs. 18-32-18-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - AMUSEMENTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- General authority relative to amusement, 65 ILCS 5/11-42-5; authority for municipal regulation of sellers of tickets for theatricals, shows, amusements, athletic events and other exhibitions, 65 ILCS 5/11-42-1; authority for municipal regulation of theatricals and other exhibitions, shows, and amusements and may license, tax, and regulate all places for eating or amusement, 65 ILCS 5/11-42-5; authority for municipal regulation of all amusements and activities having a tendency to annoy or endanger persons or property on the sidewalks, streets, and other municipal property, 65 ILCS 5/11-80-9. 

Sec. 18-51. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Amusement means and includes menageries, circuses, theatricals, exhibitions, etc. 
Sec. 18-52. - Applicability. 
    The provisions of this article, except as to licensing and fees, shall apply to all public shows and other amusements in the city, whether specifically licensed in another chapter or not. 
(Code 2008, § 5.08.010; Ord. No. 1-82, ch. 2, art. 1, § 1, 1982) 
Sec. 18-53. - Fees. 
(a)  It is unlawful to conduct or operate any amusement which is open to the public and for admittance to which a fee is charged without having first obtained a license therefor, provided that the provisions of this section shall not be held to apply to those amusements which are specifically licensed by any other ordinance of the city. 
(b)  Applications for such licenses shall be made to office of the city clerk and shall comply with all of the general provisions of the ordinances relating to such application and shall be accompanied by an amusement license fee of $25.00. 
(Code 2008, § 5.08.020; Ord. No. 1-82, ch. 2, art. 1, § 2, 1982) 
Sec. 18-54. - Use of public place. 
    No permit shall be granted or given for amusement to be given on any public street or sidewalk or in such place that the only main accommodation for the public or the audience will be in a public place, except on order of the city council. 
(Code 2008, § 5.08.030; Ord. No. 1-82, ch. 2, art. 1, § 3, 1982) 
Sec. 18-55. - Table games. 
(a)  It is unlawful to maintain or expose for public use any table games or amusement device operated with a slug or coin for the use of which a fee is charged without having first obtained a license therefor. 
(b)  As used in this section, the term "table game" means and includes any device, whether controlled by skill or chance, for the operation of a game, pastime or contest by the manipulation of a marble, sphere, or of objects or figures, or by controlling the movements of the same or setting them in motion by mechanical means, or electronic means. 
(Code 2008, § 5.08.040; Ord. No. 1-82, ch. 2, art. 1, § 4, 1982) 
Sec. 18-56. - Music devices. 
    It is unlawful to offer or maintain for public use any coin-operated device, machine or mechanism to produce or reproduce music without having first secured a permit therefor. The annual fee for such permits shall be $10.00. 
(Code 2008, § 5.08.050; Ord. No. 1-82, ch. 2, art. 1, § 5, 1982) 
Sec. 18-57. - Crowd control. 
(a)  The audience of any amusement must be orderly and quiet at all times and it is unlawful for any person attending such amusement to create a disturbance in the audience. 
(b)  It is unlawful to permit or gather such a crowd to witness any amusement as to create a dangerous condition because of fire or other risks. 
(Code 2008, § 5.08.070; Ord. No. 1-82, ch. 2, art. 1, § 7, 1982) 
Sec. 18-58. - Exit lights. 
    It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant in charge of any building or hall used as an assembly hall with accommodations for 100 persons or more in which amusements, lectures, and other entertainment is offered, operated, or presented, to provide and place a sign on which the word "exit" shall appear in letters at least four inches high, over every door or other opening from such hall to every means of egress there from, and a light shall be provided with a red globe and placed at or over such sign, which light shall be kept burning during the entire period that the hall is open to the public and until the audience has left the hall. This section is subject to state fire regulations. 
(Code 2008, § 5.08.130; Ord. No. 1-82, ch. 2, art. 1, § 13, 1982) 
Sec. 18-59. - Premises conformance. 
    It is unlawful to operate or permit the operation of any amusement licensed in this article unless the premises in which such amusement is operated or permitted to be operated conforms with all the provisions or requirements in this Code relating to public gatherings. 
(Code 2008, § 5.08.140; Ord. No. 1-82, ch. 2, art. 1, § 14, 1982) 
Secs. 18-60-18-76. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BOWLING ALLEYS, POOL HALLS AND ARCADES 

Sec. 18-77. - License required; arcade defined. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Arcade means a place of business with five or more coin-operated mechanical or electronic amusement devices. 
(b)  No person, firm, private club or corporation shall operate or maintain a bowling alley, pool hall or arcade or who has one or more coin-operated amusement devices open to the public without having first obtained a license therefor; applications for such licenses shall be made in writing to the office of the city clerk and shall state thereon the intended location of the place of business and the number of alleys or pool tables, coin-operated mechanical and/or electronic amusement devices to be used. 
(Code 2008, § 5.10.020; Ord. No. 1-82, ch. 2, art. 2, § 1, 1982) 
Sec. 18-78. - Fee. 
    The annual fee for coin-operated mechanical and/or electronic amusement devices is $25.00 per year, per device. There shall be no fee charged per alley and/or each non-coin-operated pool table. 
(Code 2008, § 5.10.010; Ord. No. 1-86, § 1, 1986; Ord. No. 1-82, ch. 2, art. 2, § 2, 1982) 
Sec. 18-79. - Hours and supervision. 
    No coin-operated mechanical or electronic amusement device shall operate between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. weekdays and 1:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. weekends and holidays, and a qualified person (18 years of age or more) shall be in attendance at all times to supervise the operation of the aforementioned licensed mechanical or electronic devices. 
(Code 2008, § 5.10.030; Amd. of 6-7-1982; Ord. No. 1-82, ch. 2, art. 2, § 3, 1982) 
Secs. 18-80-18-101. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PEDDLERS, HAWKERS AND SOLICITORS 

Sec. 18-102. - License-Required. 
    It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to engage in the business of peddler or in the activity of soliciting or canvassing in the city without first obtaining a license as provided in this chapter. Local persons representing nonprofit charitable or religious organizations shall not be required to be licensed. 
(Code 2008, § 5.12.010; Ord. No. 10-11, § I, 7-6-2010; Ord. No. 14-11, 10-20-2014) 
Sec. 18-103. - License-Application; forms; contents. 
    Any person desiring to secure a license under this chapter shall apply in writing to the city clerk on a form provided by the city at least ten days in advance of effective date of the license. Such application shall state: 
(1)  Personal information of the applicant. 
(2)  Name, address and telephone number of the person, firm or corporation by whom the applicant is employed or is representing. 
(3)  Vehicle description, license number, year, make and model being utilized. 
(4)  Nature or character of the publications, goods, wares, merchandise or services to be offered by the applicant. 
(5)  Dates and times applicant will be soliciting, peddling, hawking or canvassing in the city. 
(Code 2008, § 5.12.020; Ord. No. 10-11, § I, 7-6-2010; Ord. No. 14-11, 10-20-2014) 
Sec. 18-104. - License to be carried at all times and exhibited on demand. 
    The peddler's license shall be carried at all times by the applicant to whom issued when peddling, hawking, soliciting or canvassing in the city. The license shall be exhibited by any such applicant whenever he is requested to do so by a police officer or any person solicited. 
(Code 2008, § 5.12.030; Ord. No. 10-11, § I, 7-6-2010; Ord. No. 14-11, 10-20-2014) 
Sec. 18-105. - License fee designated. 
    The fee for any peddler, solicitor or hawker shall be $50.00 for a weekly license or $20.00 for a daily license for each individual to be licensed. License fee shall be waived for persons representing nonprofit charitable or religious organizations. 
(Code 2008, § 5.12.040; Ord. No. 10-11, § I, 7-6-2010; Ord. No. 14-11, 10-20-2014) 
Sec. 18-106. - Soliciting from house-to-house; restrictions; violations deemed public nuisance. 
    It is unlawful for any person, firm or agent of any corporation or organization to go in or upon any private residence, apartment or premises in the city for the purpose of selling or soliciting from the occupants thereof, or canvassing for orders for publications, goods, wares and merchandise or services of any character or description without first having obtained the consent of the occupants thereof. Nor shall any such selling or soliciting be lawful in any instance where any such occupant has forbidden soliciting or canvassing or caused to be placed on his premises, in a conspicuous position near the entrance thereof a sign bearing the words "No Trespassing" or "No Solicitors" or any similar notice indicating in any manner that the occupant of said premises does not desire to be molested unless such occupant has specifically requested such solicitation or canvassing. 
(Code 2008, § 5.12.050; Ord. No. 10-11, § I, 7-6-2010; Ord. No. 14-11, 10-20-2014) 
Sec. 18-107. - License; grounds for revocation. 
    Without excluding other just grounds for revocation, a license may be revoked for the following: 
(1)  Obtained under an application containing a false or fraudulent statement; 
(2)  For violation of any of the provisions of this article, or any other ordinances of the city or any state or federal statutes; 
(3)  For selling or offering to sell or soliciting or canvassing for orders for any publication, goods, wares, merchandise or services other than those specified in his application for license. 
(Code 2008, § 5.12.060; Ord. No. 10-11, § I, 7-6-2010; Ord. No. 14-11, 10-20-2014) 
Secs. 18-108-18-127. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - VIDEO GAMING 

Sec. 18-128. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act means the Video Gaming Act found at 230 ILCS 40/1 et seq., as from time to time amended. 
    Terminal operator means an individual, partnership, corporation or limited liability company that is licensed under the Act and that owns, services, and maintains video gaming terminals located within the corporate limits of the city. 
    Video gaming terminal shall have the meaning ascribed to such term by the Act. 
(Code 2008, § 5.18.010; Ord. No. 15-12, § I, 6-1-2015) 
Sec. 18-129. - Video gaming permitted. 
    Video gaming as licensed and regulated under the terms and conditions of the Act is permitted within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 2008, § 5.18.020; Ord. No. 15-12, § I, 6-1-2015) 
Sec. 18-130. - Registration. 
    Every terminal operator that owns, services or maintains any video gaming terminal within the corporate limits of the city shall register the video gaming terminal with the city clerk by providing to the city clerk a description of the terminal, the location of the terminal within the corporate limits of the city, and the serial number of the terminal. The terminal operator shall register the video gaming terminal with the city before such video gaming terminal is operated within the city. 
(Code 2008, § 5.18.030; Ord. No. 15-12, § I, 6-1-2015) 
Sec. 18-131. - Fees. 
    A fee of $25.00 per terminal per year for a maximum of five terminals shall be assessed by the city for owning or operating a video gaming terminal within the city. Said year shall correspond with the fiscal year of the city 
(Code 2008, § 5.18.040; Ord. No. 15-12, § I, 6-1-2015) 
Chapter 22 - CIVIL EMERGENCIES AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act, 20 ILCS 3305/1 et seq. 

Sec. 22-1. - Establishment. 
    There is hereby created the Eureka Emergency Services and Disaster Agency (ESDA) to prevent, minimize, repair, and alleviate injury or damage resulting from disaster caused by enemy attack, sabotage, or other hostile action, or from natural or manmade disaster, in accordance with "The Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act, 20 ILCS 3305/1 et seq." This ESDA shall consist of the coordinator and such additional members as may be selected by the coordinator. 
(Code 2008, § 2.68.010) 
Sec. 22-2. - Coordinator. 
    The coordinator of the city ESDA shall be appointed by the mayor and shall serve until removed by same. The coordinator shall have direct responsibility for the organization, administration, training and operation of the ESDA, subject to the direction and control of the mayor as provided by statute. In the event of the absence, resignation, death or inability to serve as the coordinator, the mayor or any person designated by him, shall be and act as coordinator until a new appointment is made as provided in this chapter. 
(Code 2008, § 2.68.020) 
Sec. 22-3. - Functions. 
    The city ESDA shall perform such ESDA functions within the city as shall be prescribed in and by the state ESDA plan and program prepared by the governor, and such orders, rules and regulations as may be promulgated by the governor, and in addition shall perform such duties outside the corporate limits as may be required pursuant to any mutual aid agreement with any other political subdivision, municipality, or quasi municipality entered into as provided in the Emergency Management Agency Act, 20 ILCS 3305/1 et seq. 
(Code 2008, § 2.68.030) 
Sec. 22-4. - Service as mobile support team. 
    All or any members of the city ESDA organization may be designated as members of a mobile support team created by the director of the state ESDA as provided by law. The leader of such mobile support team shall be designated by the mayor with advise from the coordinator of the city ESDA organization. 
(Code 2008, § 2.68.040) 
Sec. 22-5. - Agreements with other political subdivisions. 
    The coordinator of ESDA may, with mayor and council, approval negotiate mutual aid agreements with other cities or political subdivisions of the state, but no such agreement shall be effective until it has been approved by the mayor, city council and the state director of ESDA. 
(Code 2008, § 2.68.050) 
Sec. 22-6. - Emergency action. 
    If the governor proclaims that a disaster emergency exists in the event of actual enemy attack upon the United States or the occurrence with the state of a major disaster resulting from enemy sabotage or other hostile action or from manmade or natural disaster, it shall be the duty of the city ESDA to cooperate fully with the state ESDA and with the governor in the exercise of emergency powers as provided by law. 
(Code 2008, § 2.68.060) 
Sec. 22-7. - Compensation. 
    Members of the ESDA who are paid employees or officers of the city, if called for training by the state director of ESDA, shall receive for the time spent in such training the same rate of pay as is attached to the position held; members who are not such city employees or officers shall receive for such training time such compensation as may be established by the mayor. 
(Code 2008, § 2.68.070) 
Sec. 22-8. - Reimbursement by state. 
    The state treasurer may receive and allocate to the appropriate fund, any reimbursement by the state to the city for expenses incident to training members of the ESDA as prescribed by the state director of ESDA compensation for services and expenses of members of a mobile support team while serving outside the city in response to a call by the governor or state director of ESDA, as provided by law, and any other reimbursement made by the state incident to ESDA activities as provided by law (purchases and expenditures) The mayor may, on recommendation of the city coordinator of ESDA, authorize any purchase of contracts necessary to place the city in a position to combat effectively any disaster resulting from the explosion of any nuclear or other bomb or missile, and to protect the public health and safety, protect property, and provide emergency assistance to victims in the case of such disaster, or from manmade or natural disaster in the event of enemy caused or other disaster, the city coordinator of ESDA is authorized, on behalf of the city to procure such services, supplies, equipment or material as may be necessary for such purposes in view of the exigency without regard to the statutory procedures or formalities normally prescribed by law pertaining to city contracts or obligations, as authorized by the state ESDA Act of 1975, provided that if the mayor meets at such time he shall act subject to the directions and restrictions imposed by that body. 
(Code 2008, § 2.68.080) 
Sec. 22-9. - Oath. 
    Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the city ESDA organization shall, before entering upon his duties, subscribe to the following oath, which shall be filed with the coordinator: 
"I, ____________ , do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and defend and bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of Illinois, and the territory, institutions, and facilities thereof, both public and private, against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I take this obligation freely without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and, that I will well and faithfully discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter. And I do further swear (or affirm) that I do not advocate nor am I nor have I been a member of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this State by force or violence; and that during such time as I am affiliated with the ESDA organization, I will not advocate nor become a member of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this State by force or violence." 
(Code 2008, § 2.68.090) 
Sec. 22-10. - Office space designated. 
    The mayor is authorized to designate space in a city building, or elsewhere, as may be provided for by the mayor for the city ESDA as its office. 
(Code 2008, § 2.68.100) 
Sec. 22-11. - Appropriations; levy of taxes. 
    The mayor may make an appropriation for ESDA purposes in the manner provided by law, and may levy in addition for ESDA purposes only, a tax not to exceed $0.05 per $100.00 of the assessed value of all taxable property in addition to all other taxes, as provided by the state ESDA Act of 1975; however, that amount collectable under such levy shall in no event exceed 0.25 cents per capita. 
(Code 2008, § 2.68.110) 
Chapter 26 - ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 26-1-26-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TREES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 26-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Park trees means trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation in public parks having individual name, and all areas owned by the city, or to which the public has free access as a park. Park trees shall be the budgetary and administrative responsibility of the park committee. 
    Street trees means trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation on land lying between property lines on either side of all streets, avenues or ways within the city. Street trees shall be the budgetary and administrative responsibility of the maintenance committee. 
(Code 2008, § 8.36.010; Ord. No. 13-83, § 1, 1983) 
Secs. 26-20-26-41. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TREE BOARD 

Sec. 26-42. - Established; membership. 
    There is created an option to establish a city tree board for the city which shall consist of five members, at least four of which shall be citizens and residents of this city, who shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the council. 
(Code 2008, § 8.36.020; Ord. No. 13-83, § 2, 1983) 
Sec. 26-43. - Terms. 
    The term of the five persons to be appointed by the mayor shall be three years except that the term of two of the members appointed to the first board shall be for only one year and the term of two members of the first board shall be for two years. In the event that a vacancy shall occur during the term of any member, his successor shall be appointed for the unexpired portion of the term. 
(Code 2008, § 8.36.030; Ord. No. 13-83, § 3, 1983) 
Sec. 26-44. - Compensation. 
    Members shall serve without compensation. 
(Code 2008, § 8.36.040; Ord. No. 13-83, § 4, 1983) 
Sec. 26-45. - Duties and responsibilities. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the board to study, investigate, counsel and develop and/or update annually, and submit a written plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal, or disposition of trees and shrubs in parks, along streets, and in other public areas. Such plan will be presented no later than January 15 of each year to the city council and upon their acceptance and approval shall constitute the official comprehensive city tree plan for the city. The board, when requested by the city council, shall consider, investigate, make findings, report, and recommend upon any special matter or question coming within the scope of its work. 
(Code 2008, § 8.36.050; Ord. No. 13-83, § 5, 1983) 
Sec. 26-46. - Operation. 
    The board shall choose its own officers, make its own rules, and regulations and keep a journal of its proceedings. A majority of the members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(Code 2008, § 8.36.060; Ord. No. 13-83, § 6, 1983) 
Sec. 26-47. - Street trees; approved species. 
    The following list constitutes the official street tree species for the city. No species other than those included in this list may be planted as street trees without written permission of the city tree board. 
(1)  Small trees. 
a.  Crabapple, Flowering. 
b.  Golden Rain Tree. 
c.  Washington Hawthorn. 
d.  Pear, Bradford. 
e.  Redbud. 
f.  Soapberry. 
g.  Lilac, Japanese. 
(2)  Medium trees. 
a.  Hackberry. 
b.  Honey locust (thornless). 
c.  Linden or Basswood. 
d.  Shingle Oak. 
e.  Ash, Green. 
f.  Oak, English. 
g.  Oak, Red. 
(3)  Large trees. 
a.  Coffee tree. 
b.  Kentucky Maple, Sugar. 
c.  Oak, Bur. 
d.  Ginkgo. 
e.  Maple. 
f.  Cottonwood (cottonless, male). 
g.  Peach, Flowering. 
h.  Plum, Purple leaf. 
i.  Service berry. 
j.  Pagoda tree, Japanese. 
k.  Pecan. 
l.  Birch, River. 
m.  Persimmon. 
n.  Sassafras. 
(Code 2008, § 8.36.070) 
Sec. 26-48. - City council review; appeals. 
    The city council shall have the right to review the conduct, acts, and decisions of the city tree board. Any person may appeal from any ruling or order of the city tree board to the city council who may hear the matter and make final decision. 
(Code 2008, § 8.36.190; Ord. No. 13-83, § 19, 1983) 
Secs. 26-49-26-69. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - STANDARDS 

Sec. 26-70. - Street trees-Spacing. 
    The spacing of street trees will be in accordance with the three species size classes listed in section 26-47, and no trees may be planted closer together than the following: small trees, 30 feet; medium trees, 40 feet; and large trees, 50 feet; except in special plantings designed or approved by a landscape architect. 
(Code 2008, § 8.36.080; Ord. No. 13-83, § 8, 1983) 
Sec. 26-71. - Street trees-Distance from curb and sidewalk. 
    No trees may be planted closer than four feet to any curb or sidewalk. 
(Code 2008, § 8.36.090; Ord. No. 13-83, § 9, 1983) 
Sec. 26-72. - Street trees-Distance from street corners and fireplugs. 
    No street tree shall be planted closer than 35 feet to any street corner, measured from the point of nearest intersecting curbs or curb lines. No tree shall be planted closer than ten feet to any fireplug. 
(Code 2008, § 8.36.100; Ord. No. 13-83, § 10, 1983) 
Sec. 26-73. - Street trees-Distance from utilities. 
    No trees may be planted under or within ten lateral feet of any overhead utility wire, or within three lateral feet of an easement. 
(Code 2008, § 8.36.110; Ord. No. 13-83, § 11, 1983) 
Sec. 26-74. - Public tree care. 
    The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain, and remove trees, plants, and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues lanes, squares and public grounds, as may be necessary to ensure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds. The city administrator may remove or cause or order to be removed, any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, waterlines, or other public improvements, or is affected with any injurious fungus, insect, or other pest. This section does not prohibit the planting and/or maintenance of street trees by adjacent property owners providing that the selection and location of said trees is in accordance with this article. 
(Code 2008, § 8.36.120; Ord. No. 13-83, § 12, 1983) 
Sec. 26-75. - Tree topping. 
    It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm, or city department to top any street tree, park tree or other tree on public property. The term "topping" means the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from this chapter at the determination of the city tree board. 
(Code 2008, § 8.36.130; Ord. No. 13-83, § 13, 1983) 
Sec. 26-76. - Dead or diseased tree removal on private property; city's authority. 
    Every owner of any tree dead or diseased, shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs which constitute a menace to the safety of the public. The city shall have the right to remove any tree or shrub on private property if it is dead or diseased. 
(Code 2008, § 8.36.150) 
Sec. 26-77. - Pruning requirements; city's authority. 
    Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within the city shall prune the branches so that such branches shall not obstruct the light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection and so that there shall be a clear space of 14 feet above the surface of the street and eight feet above a sidewalk. The owners shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs which constitute a menace to the safety of the public. The city shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub on private property when it interferes with visibility of any traffic, traffic control device or clearance above streets or sidewalks. 
(Code 2008, § 8.36.140; Ord. No. 13-83, § 14, 1983) 
Sec. 26-78. - Tree board; interference with unlawful. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the city tree board, or any of its agents, while engaging in and about the planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying, or removing of any street trees, park trees, or trees on private grounds, as authorized in this article. 
(Code 2008, § 8.36.160; Ord. No. 13-83, § 16, 1983) 
Sec. 26-79. - Insurance. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person or firm to engage in the business or occupation of pruning, treating, or removing street or park trees within the city without first supplying proof of insurance, in the minimum amounts of $100,000.00 for bodily injury and $50,000.00 property damage, indemnifying the city or any person injured or damage resulting from the pursuit of such endeavors as described in this article. 
(Code 2008, § 8.36.170; Ord. No. 13-83, § 17, 1983) 
Sec. 26-80. - Waivers. 
    Any private individual wishing to cut up and remove a street tree that has been taken down by the city, or wishing to take down, cut up, and remove a park tree that has been specified for removal by the city, shall first sign a waiver which shall remove the city of any responsibility for any damage or personal injury resulting from the individual's actions. 
(Code 2008, § 8.36.180; Ord. No. 13-83, § 18, 1983) 
Chapter 30 - FIRE AND FIRE PROTECTION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Fire limits designated. 
    All that portion of the city embraced between Callender Street where it intersects Eureka Street, thence north on Callender Street to the centerline of the main track of the Toledo, Peoria and Western Railway Company, thence eastward along said line of said main track to Major Street; thence south on Darst Street to Eureka Street; thence west on Eureka Street to the place of beginning on Callender Street constitutes the fire limits of the city. 
(Code 2008, § 15.08.010; Ord. No. 8, § 1, 1912) 
Secs. 30-2-30-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - REGULATIONS AND RESTRICTIONS 

Sec. 30-21. - Construction; incombustible material. 
    No building or structure of any kind or description shall be erected or constructed within the fire limits designated in section 30-1, unless the outside and party walls thereof are composed of brick, concrete, iron or other incombustible material. 
(Code 2008, § 15.08.020) 
Sec. 30-22. - Combustible siding prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person, company or corporation to cover or recover any building now erected or hereafter erected within the fire limits with any shingles, boards, planks or other combustible material whatever; but all such buildings shall in all cases be covered with metal, tile, slate or some other equally good fireproof materials. 
(Code 2008, § 15.08.030; Ord. No. 8, § 3, 1912) 
Sec. 30-23. - Moving wooden buildings; prohibition. 
    No wooden buildings or parts of wooden buildings now in the fire limits shall be moved to any other place therein, and no wooden building or parts of wooden buildings shall be removed from without said fire limits to any place within said fire limits. 
(Code 2008, § 15.08.040; Ord. No. 8, § 4, 1912) 
Sec. 30-24. - Burning restrictions. 
    The burning of wood, charcoal or propane gas in a gas grill, charcoal grill or similar device for the purpose of cooking food or outdoor burning of wood in a manmade or manufactured device fire ring or in a contained area lined with bricks, stones, rocks or metal in the rear or side yard for cooking, campfire, and for other recreational use is permitted. 
(1)  The burning of paper disposed of by general household use shall be permitted in an approved burning container designated and provided for this purpose. 
(2)  All permitted outdoor burning shall be constantly attended until the fire is extinguished. 
(3)  If any complaint is received on any outdoor burning due to the emission of smoke or odors, the police officer on duty will determine if the burning is excessive and shall have the authority to cause the burning to cease and be immediately extinguished. 
(4)  The chief of police shall have the authority to approve any other type of burning, including, but not limited to, municipal burning. 
(5)  No person, firm, or corporation shall burn or set fire to, or allow to be burned set fire to any grass, leaves or any other refuse other than as allowed in this section. 
(Code 2008, § 8.04.020) 
Chapter 34 - FLOODPLAIN PROTECTION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 34-1. - Purpose. 
    The ordinance from which this chapter is derived is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to this city by the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/1-2-1, 5/11-12-12, 5/11-30-2, 5/11-30-8 and 5/11-31-2) in order to accomplish the following purposes: 
(1)  To prevent unwise developments from increasing flood or drainage hazards to others; 
(2)  To protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from flood damage; 
(3)  To promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens from the hazards of flooding; 
(4)  To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control, repairs to public facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and relief operations; 
(5)  To maintain property values and a stable tax base by minimizing the potential for creating blight areas; 
(6)  To make federally subsidized flood insurance available; and 
(7)  To preserve the natural characteristics and functions of watercourses and floodplains in order to moderate floodwater and stormwater impacts, improve water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat, provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance community and economic development. 
(Code 2008, § 17.750; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.750), 11-2-2009; Ord. No. 10-07-01, 5-3-2010) 
Sec. 34-2. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    The ordinance from which this chapter is derived repeals and replaces other ordinances adopted by the city council to fulfill the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program, including the flood insurance rate map dated July 18, 1985. However, the ordinance from which this chapter is derived does not repeal the original resolution or ordinance adopted to achieve eligibility in the program; nor does the ordinance from which this chapter is derived repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. Where the ordinance from which this chapter is derived and other ordinance easements, covenants or deed restrictions conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 10-07-01, § 14, 5-3-2010) 
Sec. 34-3. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Base flood means the flood having a one percent probability of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. The base flood is also known as the 100-year flood. The base flood elevation at any location is as defined in this chapter. 
    Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation in relation to mean sea level of the crest of the base flood. 
    Basement means that portion of a building having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Building means a walled and roofed structure, including gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, including manufactured homes, prefabricated buildings and gas or liquid storage tanks. The term "building" also includes recreational vehicles and travel trailers installed on a site for more than 180 days per year. 
    Critical facility means any facility which is critical to the health and welfare of the population and, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster. Damage to these critical facilities can impact the delivery of vital services, can cause greater damage to other sectors of the community, or can put special populations at risk. Examples of critical facilities where flood protection should be required include emergency services facilities (such as fire and police stations), schools, hospitals retirement homes and senior care facilities, major roads and bridges, critical utility sites (telephone switching stations or electrical transformers, and hazardous material storage facilities chemicals, petrochemicals, hazardous or toxic substances). 
    Development. 
(1)  The term "development" means any manmade change to real estate, including, but not necessarily limited to: 
a.  Demolition, construction, reconstruction, repair, placement of a building, or any structural alteration to a building; 
b.  Substantial improvement of an existing building; 
c.  Installation of a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer on a site for more than 180 days per year; 
d.  Installation of utilities, construction of roads, bridges, culverts or similar projects; 
e.  Construction or erection of levees, dams, walls or fences; 
f.  Drilling, mining, filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving, or other alterations of the ground surface; 
g.  Storage of materials including the placement of gas and liquid storage tanks, and channel modifications or any other activity that might change the direction, height, or velocity of floodwaters or surface waters. 
(2)  The term "development" does not include routine maintenance of existing buildings and facilities, resurfacing roads, or gardening, plowing, and similar practices that do not involve filing, grading, or construction of levees. 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to be constructed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    FEMA means the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
    Flood means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and rapid accumulation, or the runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood fringe means that portion of the floodplain outside of the regulatory floodway. 
    Flood insurance rate map means a map prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency that depicts the floodplain or special flood hazard area (SFHA) within a community. This map includes insurance rate zones and may or may not depict floodways and show base flood elevations. 
    Flood insurance study means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations. 
    Flood protection elevation (FPE) means the elevation of the base flood plus one foot of freeboard at any given location in the floodplain. 
    Floodplain and special flood hazard area (SFHA). 
(1)  These two terms are synonymous and mean land within the jurisdiction of the city, the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city, or that may be annexed into the city that is subject to inundation by the base flood. The floodplains of the city are generally identified as such on panel number(s) 333 of 500 of the countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map of Woodford County prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated September 17, 2010. The term "floodplain" also includes those areas of known flooding as identified by the community. 
(2)  The floodplains of those parts of unincorporated Woodford County that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city or that may be annexed into the city are generally identified as such on the flood insurance rate map prepared for the county by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated September 17, 2010. 
    Floodproofing means any combination of structural or nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate, property and their contents. 
    Floodproofing certificate means a form published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency that is used to certify that a building has been designed and constructed to be structurally dry floodproofed to the flood protection elevation. 
    Floodway means that portion of the floodplain required to store and conveys the base flood. The floodways for each of the floodplains of the city shall be according to the best data available from federal, state, or other sources. 
    Freeboard means an increment of elevation added to the base flood elevation to provide a factor of safety for uncertainties in calculations, future watershed development, unknown localized conditions, wave actions and unpredictable effects such as those caused by ice or debris jams. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register. 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district. 
(3)  Individually listed on the state inventory of historic places by the state historic preservation agency. 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places that has been certified by the state historic preservation agency. 
    IDNR/OWR means the Illinois Department of Natural Resources/Office of Water Resources. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of article III of this chapter. 
    Manufactured home means a structure transportable in one or more sections, that is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to required utilities. 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more lots for rent or sale. 
    New construction means structures for which the start of construction commenced or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements of such structures. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to be constructed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    NFIP means the National Flood Insurance Program. 
    Recreational vehicle or travel trailer means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  400 square feet or less in size; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. 
    Repetitive loss means flood related damages sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event on the average equals or exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    SFHA. See Floodplain. 
    Start of construction means and includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued. This, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement or other improvement, was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation or placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. For a substantial improvement, actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Structure. See Building. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cumulative percentage of damage during the life of the building equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred regardless of actual repair work performed. Volunteer labor and materials must be included in this determination. The term "substantial damage" includes "repetitive loss" buildings (see definition). 
    Substantial improvement. 
(1)  The term "substantial improvement" means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or improvement of a structure taking place during the life of the building in which the cumulative percentage of improvements: 
a.  Equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the improvement or repair is started; or 
b.  Increases the floor area by more than 20 percent. 
(2)  Substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. This term "substantial improvement" includes structures which have incurred repetitive loss or substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work done. 
(3)  The term "substantial improvement" does not include: 
a.  Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
b.  Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the state register of historic places. 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the required federal, state, and/or local permits and elevation certification is presumed to be in violation until such time as the documentation is provided. 
(Code 2008, § 17.760; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.760), 11-2-2009; Ord. No. 10-07-01, 5-3-2010) 
Sec. 34-4. - Base flood elevation. 
    This chapter's protection standard is the base flood. The best available base flood data are listed below. Whenever a party disagrees with the best available data, the party shall finance the detailed engineering study needed to replace the existing data with better data and submit it to the FEMA and IDNR/OWR for approval prior to any development of the site. 
(1)  The base flood elevation for the floodplains of Walnut Creek shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the countywide Flood Insurance Study of Woodford County prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and June 4, 2009. 
(2)  The base flood elevation for each of the remaining floodplains delineated as an "A Zone" on the countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map of Woodford County shall be according to the best data available from federal, state or sources. Should no other data exist, an engineering study must be financed by the applicant to determine base flood elevations. 
(3)  The base flood elevation for the floodplains of those parts of unincorporated Woodford County that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city, or that may be annexed into the city, shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the Flood Insurance Study of Woodford County prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated September 17, 2010. 
(Code 2008, § 17.770; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.770), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 34-5. - Duties of the zoning administrator. 
    The city planning and zoning commission shall be responsible for the general administration of this chapter and ensure that all development activities within the floodplains under the jurisdiction of the city meet the requirements of this chapter. Specifically, the zoning administrator shall: 
(1)  Process development permits in accordance with section 34-6; 
(2)  Ensure that all development in a floodway (or a floodplain with no delineated floodway) meets the damage prevention requirements of section 34-41; 
(3)  Ensure that the building protection requirements for all buildings subject to article III of this chapter are met and maintain a record of the "as-built" elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) or floodproof certificate; 
(4)  Ensure that all subdivisions and annexations meet the requirements of section 34-7; 
(5)  Ensure that water supply and waste disposal systems meet the public health standards of section 34-42; 
(6)  If a variance is requested, ensure that the requirements of section 34-9 are met and maintain documentation of any variances granted; 
(7)  Inspect all development projects and take any and all penalty actions outlined in section 34-11 as is necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter; 
(8)  Ensure that applicants are aware of and obtain any and all other required local, state, and federal permits; 
(9)  Notify IDNR/OWR and any neighboring communities prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse; 
(10)  Provide information and assistance to citizens upon request about permit procedures and floodplain construction techniques; 
(11)  Cooperate with state and federal floodplain management agencies to coordinate base flood data and to improve the administration of this chapter; 
(12)  Maintain for public inspection base flood data, floodplain maps, copies of state and federal permits, and documentation of compliance for development activities subject to this chapter; 
(13)  Perform site inspections to ensure compliance with this chapter and make substantial damage determinations for structures within the floodplain; and 
(14)  Maintain the accuracy of floodplain maps including notifying IDNR/OWR and/or submitting information to FEMA within six months whenever a modification of the floodplain may change the base flood elevation or result in a change to the floodplain map. 
(Ord. No. 10-07-01, § 4, 5-3-2010) 
Sec. 34-6. - Permit. 
    No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body not exempted by law shall commence any development in the floodplain without first obtaining a development permit from the zoning administrator. The zoning administrator shall not issue a development permit if the proposed development does not meet the requirements of this chapter. 
(1)  The application for development permit shall be accompanied by: 
a.  Drawings of the site, drawn to scale showing property line dimensions; 
b.  Existing grade elevations and all changes in grade resulting from excavation or filling; 
c.  The location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings; 
d.  The elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all proposed buildings subject to the requirements of article III of this chapter; and 
e.  Cost of project or improvements as estimated by a licensed engineer or architect. A signed estimate by a contractor may also meet this requirement. 
(2)  Upon receipt of an application for a development permit, the zoning administrator shall compare the elevation of the site to the base flood elevation. Any development located on land that can be shown by the base flood elevation. Any development located on land that can be shown by survey data to be higher than the current base flood elevation and which has not been filled after the date of the site's first flood insurance rate map is not in the floodplain and therefore not subject to the requirements of this chapter. Conversely, any development located on land shown to be below the base flood elevation and hydraulically connected, but not shown on the current flood insurance rate map, is subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
(3)  The zoning administrator shall maintain documentation of the existing ground elevation at the development site and certification that this ground elevation existed prior to the date of the site's first flood insurance rate map identification. 
(4)  The zoning administrator shall be responsible for obtaining from the applicant copies of all other federal, state, and local permits, approvals or permit-not-required letters that may be required for this type of activity. The zoning administrator shall not issue a permit unless all other federal, state, and local permits have been obtained. 
(Code 2008, § 17.000; Ord. No. 10-07-01, § 5, 5-3-2010) 
Sec. 34-7. - Subdivision requirements. 
(a)  The city council shall take into account hazards, to the extent that they are known, in all official actions related to land management use and development. 
(b)  New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation agreements, planned unit developments, and additions to manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet the damage prevention and building protections standards of section 34-41 and article III of this chapter. Any proposal for such development shall include the following data: 
(1)  The base flood elevation and the boundary of the floodplain, where the base flood elevation is not available from an existing study, the applicant shall be responsible for calculating the base flood elevation; 
(2)  The boundary of the floodway when applicable; and 
(3)  A signed statement by a licensed professional engineer that the proposed plat or plan accounts for changes in the drainage of surface waters in accordance with the Plat Act (765 ILCS 205/2). 
(c)  Streets, blocks lots, parks and other public grounds shall be located and laid out in such a manner as to preserve and utilize natural streams and channels. Wherever possible the floodplains shall be included within parks or other public grounds. 
(Ord. No. 10-07-01, § 8, 5-3-2010) 
Sec. 34-8. - Carrying capacity and notification. 
(a)  For all projects involving channel modification, fill, or stream maintenance (including levees), the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse shall be maintained. 
(b)  In addition, the city council shall notify adjacent communities in writing 30 days prior to the issuance of a permit for the alteration or relocation of the watercourse. 
(Ord. No. 10-07-01, § 10, 5-3-2010) 
Sec. 34-9. - Variances. 
    Whenever the standards of this chapter place undue hardship on a specific development proposal, the applicant may apply to the city planning and zoning commission for a variance. The city planning and zoning commission shall review the applicant's request for a variance and shall submit its recommendation to the city council). The city council may attach such conditions to granting of a variance as it deems necessary to further the intent of this chapter. 
(1)  No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates that all of the following conditions are met: 
a.  The development activity cannot be located outside the floodplain; 
b.  An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not granted; 
c.  The relief requested is the minimum necessary; 
d.  There will be no additional threat to public health, safety or creation of a nuisance; 
e.  There will be no additional public expense for flood protection, rescue or relief operations, policing, or repairs to roads, utilities, or other public facilities; 
f.  The applicant's circumstances are unique and do not establish a pattern inconsistent with the intent of the NFIP; and 
g.  All other state and federal permits have been obtained. 
(2)  The city planning and zoning commission shall notify an applicant in writing that a variance from the requirements of the building protections standards of article III of this chapter that would lessen the degree of protection to a building will: 
a.  Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to $25.00 per $100.00 of insurance coverage; 
b.  Increase the risk to life and property; and 
c.  Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks and that the applicant acknowledge in writing the assumption of the risk and liability. 
(3)  Variances to the building protection requirements of article III of this chapter which are requested in connection with reconstruction, repair, or alteration of a historic site or historic structure as defined in section 34-3, may be granted using criteria more permissive than the requirements of section 34-41 and article III of this chapter subject to the conditions that: 
a.  The repair or rehabilitation is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
b.  The repair or rehabilitation will not result in the structure being removed as a certified historic structure. 
(Ord. No. 10-07-01, § 11, 5-3-2010) 
Sec. 34-10. - Disclaimer of liability. 
    The degree of protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available information derived from engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur or flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that development either inside or outside of the floodplain will be free from flooding or damage. This chapter does not create liability on the part of the city or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that results from proper reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision made lawfully hereunder. 
(Code 2008, § 17.780; Ord. No. 10-07-01, § 12, 5-3-2010) 
Sec. 34-11. - Penalty. 
    Failure to obtain a permit for development in the floodplain or failure to comply with the conditions of a permit or a variance shall be deemed to be a violation of this chapter. Upon due investigation, the city clerk's office may determine that a violation of the minimum standards of this chapter exists. The city administrator shall notify the owner in writing of such violation. 
(1)  If such owner fails after ten days' notice to correct the violation: 
a.  The city shall make application to the circuit court for an injunction requiring conformance with this chapter or make such other order as the court deems necessary to secure compliance with the chapter. 
b.  Any person who violates this chapter shall upon conviction thereof be fined as provided in section 1-8. 
c.  The city shall record a notice of violation on the title of the property. 
(2)  Action by city. 
a.  The city clerk's office shall inform the owner that any such violation is considered a willful act to increase flood damages and therefore may cause coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to be suspended. 
b.  The city clerk's office is authorized to issue an order requiring the suspension of the subject development. The stop-work order shall be in writing, indicate the reason for the issuance, and shall order the action, if necessary, to resolve the circumstances requiring the stop-work order. The stop-work order constitutes a suspension of the permit. 
c.  No site development permit shall be permanently suspended or revoked until a hearing is held by the city planning and zoning commission and board of appeals. Written notice of such hearing shall be served on the permittee and shall state: 
1.  The grounds for the complaint, reasons for suspension or revocation; and 
2.  The time and place of the hearing. 
At such hearing the permittee shall be given an opportunity to present evidence on their behalf. At the conclusion of the hearing, the city planning and zoning commission and board of appeals shall determine whether the permit shall be suspended or revoked. 
(3)  Nothing herein shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible. 
(Code 2008, § 17.800; Ord. No. 10-07-01, § 13, 5-3-2010) 
Secs. 34-12-34-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STANDARDS 

Sec. 34-41. - Preventing increased flood heights and resulting damages. 
    Within any floodway identified on the countywide flood insurance rate map, and within all other floodplains where a floodway has not been delineated, the following standards shall apply: 
(1)  Except as provided in subsection (2) of this section, no development shall be allowed which, acting in combination with existing and anticipated development will cause any increase in flood heights or velocities or threat to public health and safety. The following specific development activities shall be considered as meeting this requirement: 
a.  Bridge and culvert crossings of streams in rural areas meeting the following conditions of the IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 2: 
1.  The crossing will not result in an increase in water surface profile elevation in excess of 1.0 feet. 
2.  The crossing will not result in an increase in water surface profile elevation in excess of one-half foot at a point 1,000 feet upstream of the proposed structure. 
3.  There are no buildings in the area impacted by the increases in water surface profile. 
4.  The proposed bridge or culvert crossing will not involve straightening, enlarging, or relocating the existing channel. 
5.  The design must be certified by a licensed professional engineer in the state and the designs must meet the conditions of an IDNR/OWR permit. 
6.  The design must be certified by a second licensed professional engineer. 
b.  Barge fleeting facilities meeting the following conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 3: The permit is only applicable when deadmen, pier cells, or other similar anchorage devices have been permitted by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
c.  Aerial utility crossings meeting the following conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 4: 
1.  The utility line must be constructed above the existing 100-year flood elevation or attached to an existing bridge. 
2.  A utility line attached to an existing bridge shall be constructed above the low cord elevation of the bridge. 
3.  No supporting towers or poles shall be located in a river, lake or stream. 
4.  Supporting towers including foundation and poles shall be designed and located so as to not cause an obstruction of flood flows by trapping debris. 
5.  All disturbed areas shall be returned to pre-construction grades and re-vegetated. 
6.  All state commerce commission, National Electrical Safety Code, and federal requirements must be met. 
d.  Minor boat docks meeting the following conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 5: 
1.  The boat dock must not extend more than 50 feet into a waterway and no more than one-quarter of the width of the waterway and shall not extend beyond the navigational limited established by the IDNR and U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
2.  The width of the boat dock shall not be more than ten feet. 
3.  For L-shaped or T-shaped docks, the length of that portion parallel to the shoreline must not exceed 50 percent of the landowner's shoreline frontage nor 50 feet. 
4.  Docks must be aligned so as not to cross the projection of property lines into the waterway or come within ten feet of the projected property line. 
5.  Dock posts must be marked by reflective devices. 
6.  The boat dock must be securely anchored to prevent detachment during times of high wind or water. 
7.  Metal drums or containers may not be used as buoyancy units unless they are filled with floatation foam. Containers which previously stored pesticides, herbicides, or any other toxic chemicals are not permissible. 
8.  This permit does not authorize any other related construction activity such as shore protection or fill. 
9.  Non-floating boat docks must be constructed in a manner which will minimize obstruction to flow. 
10.  At any future date, the permittee must agree to make necessary modifications to the dock as determined by the IDNR or Corp of Engineers. 
e.  Minor, non-obstructive activities meeting the following conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 6. The following activities (not involving fill or positive change in grade) are covered by this permit: 
1.  The construction of underground utility lines, wells, or septic tanks not crossing a lake or stream. 
2.  The construction of light poles, sign posts, and similar structures. 
3.  The construction of sidewalks, driveways, athletic fields (excluding fences), patios, and similar structures. 
4.  The construction of properly anchored, unwalled, open structures such as playground equipment, pavilions, and carports. 
5.  The placement of properly anchored buildings not exceeding 70 square feet in size, nor ten square feet in any dimension. Only one such building on a property is authorized by this statewide permit. 
6.  The raising of existing buildings, provided no changes are made to the outside dimensions of the building and the placement of fill is not involved. 
f.  Outfall structures and drainage ditch outlets meeting the following conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 7: 
1.  Any outfall structure, including any headwall or end-section, shall not extend riverward or lakeward of the existing adjacent natural bank slope or adjacent bank protection. 
2.  The velocity of the discharge shall not exceed the scour velocity of the channel soil, unless channel erosion would be prevented by the use of riprap or other design measures. 
3.  Outlets from drainage ditches shall not be opened to a stream until the ditch is vegetated or otherwise stabilized to minimize stream sedimentation. 
4.  Disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed floodway areas, including the stream banks, shall be restored to their original contours and seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction. 
g.  Underground pipeline and utility crossings meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 8: 
1.  In all cases, the crossing shall be placed beneath the bed of the river, lake or stream and, unless the crossing is encased in concrete or entrenched in bedrock, a minimum of three feet of cover shall be provided. The river, lake or stream bed shall be returned to its original condition. 
2.  Disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed floodway areas, including stream banks, shall be restored to their original contours and seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction. 
3.  Any utility crossing carrying material which may cause water pollution, as defined by the Environmental Protection Act (415 ILCS 5), shall be provided with shut-off valves on each side of the body of water to be crossed. 
4.  If blasting is to be utilized in the construction of the crossing, the permittee shall notify the IDNR/OWR at least ten days prior to the blasting date to allow monitoring of any related fish kills. 
h.  Bank stabilization projects meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 9: 
1.  Only the following materials may be utilized in urban areas: stone and concrete riprap, steel sheet piling, cellular blocks, fabric-formed concrete, gabion baskets, rock and wire mattresses, sand/cement filled bags, geotechnical fabric materials, natural vegetation and treated timber. Urban areas are defined as: areas of the state where residential, commercial, or industrial development currently exists or, based on land use plans or controls, is expected to occur within ten years. (The department should be consulted if there is a question of whether or not an area is considered urban.) 
2.  In addition to the materials listed in subsection (1)h.1 of this section, other materials (e.g., tire revetments) may be utilized in rural areas provided all other conditions of this permit are met. 
3.  The following materials shall not be used in any case: auto bodies, garbage of debris, scrap lumber, metal refuse, roofing materials, asphalt or other bituminous materials, or any material which would cause water pollution as defined by the Environmental Protections Act (415 ILCS 5). 
4.  The affected length of shoreline, stream bank, or channel to be protected shall not exceed, either singularly or cumulatively, 1,000 feet. 
5.  All material utilized shall be properly sized or anchored to resist anticipated forces of current and wave action. 
6.  Materials shall be placed in a way which would not cause erosion or the accumulation of debris on properties adjacent to or opposite the project. 
7.  Materials shall not be placed higher than the existing top of the bank. 
8.  Materials shall be placed so that the modified bank full-width and cross-sectional area of the channel will conform to or be no more restrictive than that of the natural channel upstream and downstream of the site. For projects involving continuous placement of riprap along the bank, toe of the bank or other similar applications, in no case shall the cross-sectional area of the natural channel be reduced by more than ten percent nor the volume of material placed exceed two cubic yards per lineal foot of the stream bank or shoreline. The bank may be graded to obtain a flatter slope and to lessen the quantity of material required. 
9.  If broken concrete is used, all protruding materials such as reinforcing rods shall be cut flush with the surface of the concrete and removed from the construction area. 
10.  Disturbance of vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed areas shall be seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction. 
11.  In the case of seawalls and gabion structures on lakes, the structure shall be constructed at or landward of the water line as determined by the normal pool elevation, unless: 
(i)  It is constructed in alignment with an existing seawall or gabion structure; and 
(ii)  The volume of material placed, including the structure, would not exceed two cubic yards per lineal foot. 
Excess material excavated during the construction of the bank or shoreline protection shall be placed in accordance with local, state, and federal laws and rules, and shall not be placed in a floodway. 
i.  Accessory structures and additions to existing residential buildings meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 10: 
1.  The accessory structure or building addition must comply with the requirements of the local floodplain ordinance. 
2.  The principle structure to which the project is being added must have been in existence on the effective date of this permit (July 25, 1988). 
3.  The accessory structure or addition must not exceed 500 square feet in size, must not deflect floodwaters onto another property, and must not involve the placement of any fill material. 
4.  No construction shall be undertaken in, or within 50 feet of, the bank of the stream channel. 
5.  The accessory structure or addition must be properly anchored to prevent its movement during flood conditions. 
6.  Only one accessory structure or addition to an existing structure shall be authorized by this permit; plans for any subsequent addition must be submitted to IDNR/OWR for review. 
7.  Disturbances of vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed floodway areas shall be seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction. 
j.  Minor maintenance dredging activities meeting the following conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 11: 
1.  The affected length of the stream shall not either singularly or cumulatively exceed 1,000 feet. 
2.  The project shall not include the construction of any new channel; all work must be confined to the existing channel or to reestablishing flows in the natural stream channel. 
3.  The cross-sectional area of the dredged channel shall conform to that of the natural channel upstream and downstream of the site. 
4.  Dredged or spoil material shall not be disposed of in a wetland and shall be either: 
(i)  Removed from the floodway; 
(ii)  Used to stabilize an existing bank provided no materials would be placed higher than the existing top of bank and provided the cross-sectional area of the natural channel would not be reduced by more than ten percent, nor the volume of material placed exceed two cubic yards per lineal foot of streambank; 
(iii)  Used to fill an existing washed out or scoured floodplain area such that the average natural floodplain elevation is not increased; 
(iv)  Used to stabilize and existing levee provided the height of the levee would not be increased nor its alignment changed; 
(v)  Placed in a disposal site previously approved by the department in accordance with the conditions of the approval; or 
(vi)  Used for beach nourishment, provided the material meets all applicable water quality standards. 
5.  Disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed floodway areas, including the stream banks, shall be seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction. 
k.  Bridge and culvert replacement structures and bridge widening meeting the following conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 12: 
1.  A licensed professional engineer shall determine and document that the existing structure has not been the cause of demonstrable flood damage. Such documentation shall include, at a minimum, confirmation that: 
(i)  No buildings or structures have been impacted by the backwater induced by the existing structure; and 
(ii)  There is no record of complaints of flood damages associated with the existing structure. 
2.  A licensed professional engineer shall determine that the new structure will provide the same or greater effective waterway opening as the existing structure. For bridge widening projects the existing piers and the proposed pier extensions must be in line with the direction of the approaching flow upstream of the bridge. 
3.  The project shall not include any appreciable rising of the approach roads. (This condition does not apply if all points on the approaches exist at an elevation equal to or higher than the 100-year frequency flood headwater elevation as determined by a FEMA flood insurance study completed or approved by INDR/OWR.) 
4.  The project shall not involve the straightening, enlargement or relocation of the existing channel of the river or stream except as permitted by the department's statewide permit number 9 (minor shoreline, channel and streambank protection activities) or statewide permit number 11 (minor maintenance dredging activities). 
5.  The permittee shall maintain records of projects authorized by this permit necessary to document compliance with the above conditions. 
l.  Temporary construction activities meeting the following conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 13: 
1.  No temporary construction activity shall be commenced until the individual permittee determines that the permanent structure (if any) for which the work is being performed has received all required federal, state and local authorizations. 
2.  The term "temporary" shall mean not more than one construction season. All temporary construction materials must be removed from the stream and floodway within one year of their placement and the area returned to the conditions existing prior to the beginning of construction. Any desired subsequent or repetitive material placement shall not occur without the review and approval of the IDNR/OWR. 
3.  The temporary project shall be constructed such that it will not cause erosion or damage due to increases in water surface profiles to adjacent properties. For locations where there are structures to the upstream floodplain, the temporary project shall be constructed such that all water surface profile increases, due to the temporary project, are contained within the channel banks. 
4.  This permit does not authorize the placement or construction of any solid embankment or wall such as a dam, roadway, levee, or dike across any channel or floodway. 
5.  No temporary structure shall be placed within any river or stream channel until a licensed professional engineer determines and documents that the temporary structure will meet the requirements of special condition number 3 of this statewide permit. Such documentation shall include, at a minimum, confirmation that no buildings or structures will be impacted by the backwater induced by the temporary structure. 
6.  The permittee shall maintain records of projects authorized by this permit necessary to document compliance with the above condition. 
7.  Disturbance of vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed areas shall be seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of the removal of the temporary construction. 
8.  Materials used for the project shall not cause water pollution as defined by the Environmental Protection Act (415 ILCS 5). 
m.  Any development determined by IDNR/OWR to be located entirely within a flood fringe area shall be exempt from state floodway permit requirements. 
(2)  Other development activities not listed in subsection (1) of this section may be permitted only if: 
a.  The permit has been issued for the work by IDNR/OWR (or written documentation is provided that an IDNR/OWR permit is not required); or 
b.  Sufficient data has been provided to FEMA when necessary, and approval obtained from FEMA for a revision of the regulatory map and base flood elevation. 
(Ord. No. 10-07-01, § 6, 5-3-2010) 
Sec. 34-42. - Public health and other standards. 
(a)  Public health standards must be met for all floodplain development. In addition to the requirements of section 34-41 and article III of this chapter the following standards apply: 
(1)  No development in the floodplain shall include locating or storing chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, flammable liquids, pollutants, or other hazardous or toxic materials below the flood protection elevation unless such materials are stored in a floodproofed and anchored storage tank and certified by a professional engineer or floodproofed building constructed according to the requirements of article III of this chapter. 
(2)  Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas and electric shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
(3)  Public sanitary sewer systems and water supply systems shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters. 
(4)  New and replacement on-site sanitary sewer lines or waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. Manholes or other above ground openings located below the flood protection elevation shall be watertight. 
(5)  Construction of new or substantially improved critical facilities shall be located outside the limits of the floodplain. Construction of new critical facilities shall be permissible within the floodplain if no feasible alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or structurally dry floodproofed to the 500-year flood frequency elevation or three feet above the level of the 100-year flood frequency elevation whichever is greater. Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access routes elevated to or above the level of the base flood elevation shall be provided to all critical facilities. 
(b)  All other activities defined as development shall be designed so as not to alter flood flows or increase potential flood damages. 
(Ord. No. 10-07-01, § 9, 5-3-2010) 
Secs. 34-43-34-72. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROTECTING BUILDINGS 

Sec. 34-73. - All buildings. 
    In addition to the damage prevention requirements of section 34-41, all buildings located in the floodplain shall be protected from flood damage below the flood protection elevation. This building protection requirement applies to the following situations: 
(1)  Construction or placement of a new building or alteration or addition to an existing building valued at more than $1,000.00 or 70 square feet. 
(2)  Substantial improvements or structural alterations made to an existing building that increase the floor area by more than 20 percent or equal or exceed the market value by 50 percent. Alteration shall be figured cumulatively during the life of the building. If substantially improved, the existing structure and the addition must meet the flood protection standards of this section. 
(3)  Repairs made to a substantially damaged building. These repairs shall be figured cumulatively during the life of the building. If substantially damaged the entire structure must meet the flood protection standards of this section. 
(4)  Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured home on an existing site (the building protection requirements do not apply to returning a manufactured home to the same site it lawfully occupied before it was removed to avoid flood damage). 
(5)  Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a site for more than 180 days per year. 
(6)  Repetitive loss to an existing building as defined in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 10-07-01, § 7(A), 5-3-2010) 
Sec. 34-74. - Residential/nonresidential buildings. 
    Residential or nonresidential buildings can meet the building protection requirements by one of the following methods: 
(1)  The building may be constructed on permanent land fill in accordance with the following: 
a.  The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at or above the flood protection elevation; 
b.  The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than six inches before compaction and should extend at least ten feet beyond the foundation before sloping below the flood protection elevation; 
c.  The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during flooding by vegetative cover, riprap, or other structural measure; 
d.  The fill shall be composed of rock or soil and not incorporated debris or refuse material; and 
e.  The fill shall not adversely affect the flow of surface drainage from or onto neighboring properties and when necessary stormwater management techniques such as swales or basins shall be incorporated. 
(2)  The building may be elevated on solid walls in accordance with the following: 
a.  The building or improvements shall be elevated on stilts, piles, walls, crawlspace, or other foundation that is permanently open to floodwaters; 
b.  The lowest floor and all electrical, heating, ventilating, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and utility meters shall be located at or above the flood protection elevation; 
c.  If walls are used, all enclosed areas below the flood protection elevation shall address hydrostatic pressures by allowing the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs must either be certified by a licensed professional engineer or by having a minimum of one permanent opening on each wall no more than one foot above grade with a minimum of two openings. The openings shall provide a total net area of not less than one square inch for every one square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding below the base flood elevation; and 
d.  The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored, designed, and certified so as to minimize exposure to hydrodynamic forces such as current, waves, ice, and floating debris. 
1.  All structural components below the flood protection elevation shall be constructed of materials resistant to flood damage; 
2.  Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines, submersible pumps, and other service facilities may be located below the flood protection elevation provided they are waterproofed; 
3.  The area below the flood protection elevation shall be used solely for parking or building access and not later modified or occupied as habitable space; or 
4.  In lieu of the above criteria, the design methods to comply with these requirements may be certified by a licensed professional engineer or architect. 
(3)  The building may be constructed with a crawlspace located below the flood protection elevation provided that the following conditions are met: 
a.  The building must be designed and adequately anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. 
b.  Any enclosed area below the flood protection elevation shall have openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. A minimum of one opening on each wall having a total net area of not less than one square inch per one square foot of enclosed area. The openings shall be no more than one foot above grade. 
c.  The interior grade of the crawlspace below the flood protection elevation must not be more than two feet below the lowest adjacent exterior grade. 
d.  The interior height of the crawlspace measured from the interior grade of the crawl to the top of the foundations wall must not exceed four feet at any point. 
e.  An adequate drainage system must be installed to remove floodwaters from the interior area of the crawlspace within a reasonable period of time after a flood event. 
f.  Previous of the building below the flood protection elevation must be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage. 
g.  Utility systems within the crawlspace must be elevated above the flood protection elevation. 
(Ord. No. 10-07-01, § 7(B), 5-3-2010) 
Sec. 34-75. - Nonresidential. 
    Nonresidential buildings may be structurally dry floodproofed (in lieu of elevation) provided a licensed professional engineer or architect certifies that: 
(1)  Below the flood protection elevation the structure and attendant utility facilities are watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the base flood. 
(2)  The building design accounts for flood velocities, duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy, and the impact from debris and ice. 
(3)  Floodproofing measures will be incorporated into the building design and operable without human intervention and without an outside source of electricity. 
(4)  Levees, berms, floodwalls and similar works are not considered floodproofing for the purpose of this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 10-07-01, § 7(C), 5-3-2010) 
Sec. 34-76. - Manufactured homes. 
    Manufactured homes or travel trailers to be permanently installed on site shall be: 
(1)  Elevated to or above the flood protection elevation in accordance with section 34-74; and 
(2)  Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by being tied down in accordance with the rules and regulations for the Illinois Mobile Home Tie-Down Act issued pursuant to 77 Ill. Admin. Code 870. 
(Ord. No. 10-07-01, § 7(D), 5-3-2010) 
Sec. 34-77. - Travel trailers and recreational vehicles. 
    Travel trailers and recreational vehicles on site for more than 180 days per year shall meet the elevation requirements of section 34-76 unless the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The vehicle must be either self-propelled or towable by a light duty truck; 
(2)  The hitch must remain on the vehicle at all times; 
(3)  The vehicle must not be attached to external structures such as decks and porches; 
(4)  The vehicle must be designed solely for recreation, camping, travel, or seasonal use rather than as a permanent dwelling; 
(5)  The vehicles largest horizontal projections must be no larger than 400 square feet; 
(6)  The vehicle's wheels must remain on axles and inflated; 
(7)  Air conditioning units must be attached to the frame so as to be safe for movement of the floodplain; 
(8)  Propane tanks as well as electrical and sewage connections must be quick-disconnect and above the 100-year flood elevation; 
(9)  The vehicle must be licensed and titled as a recreational vehicle or park model; and 
(10)  The vehicle must either: 
a.  Entirely be supported by jacks; or 
b.  Have a hitch jack permanently mounted, have the tires touching the ground and be supported by block in a manner that will allow the block to be easily removed by used of the hitch jack. 
(Ord. No. 10-07-01, § 7(E), 5-3-2010) 
Sec. 34-78. - Garages or sheds and other accessory structures. 
    Garages, sheds or other minor accessory structures constructed ancillary to an existing residential use may be permitted provided the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The garage of shed must be non-habitable. 
(2)  The garage or shed must be used only for the storage of vehicles and tools and cannot be modified later into another use. 
(3)  The garage or shed must be located outside of the floodway or have the appropriate state and/or federal permits. 
(4)  The garage or shed must be on a single family lot and be accessory to an existing principle structure on the same lot. 
(5)  Below the base flood elevation, the garage or shed must be built of materials not susceptible to flood damage. 
(6)  All utilities, plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical must be elevated above the flood protection elevation. 
(7)  The garage or shed must have at least one permanent opening on each wall not more than one foot above grade with one square inch of opening for every one square foot of floor area. 
(8)  The garage or shed must be less than $10,000.00 in market value or replacement cost whichever is greater or less than 500 square feet. 
(9)  The structure shall be anchored to resist floatation and overturning. 
(10)  All flammable or toxic materials (gasoline, paint, insecticides, fertilizers, etc.) shall be stored above the flood protection elevation. 
(11)  The lowest floor elevation should be documented and the owner advised of the flood insurance implications. 
(Ord. No. 10-07-01, § 7(F), 5-3-2010) 
Chapter 38 - HEALTH AND SAFETY 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 38-1-38-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SMOKING RESTRICTIONS 

Sec. 38-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bar means an establishment that is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption by guests on the premises and that derives no more than ten percent of its gross revenue from the sale of food consumed on the premises. The term "bar" includes, but is not limited to, taverns, nightclubs, cocktail lounges, adult entertainment facilities, and cabarets. 
    Department means the department of public health. 
    Employee means a person who is employed by an employer in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profits or a person who volunteers, his services for a nonprofit entity. 
    Employer means a person, business, partnership, association, or corporation, including a municipal corporation, trust, or nonprofit entity, that employs the services of one or more individual persons. 
    Enclosed area means all space between a floor and a ceiling that is enclosed or partially enclosed with: 
(1)  Solid walls or windows, exclusive of doorways; or 
(2)  Solid walls with partitions and no windows, exclusive of doorways; 
that extend from the floor to the ceiling, including, without limitation, lobbies and corridors. 
    Enclosed or partially enclosed sports arena means any sports pavilion, stadium, gymnasium, health spa, boxing arena, swimming pool, roller rink, ice rink, bowling alley, or other similar place where members of the general public assemble to engage in physical exercise or participate in athletic competitions or recreational activities or to witness sports, cultural, recreational, or other events. 
    Gaming equipment or supplies means gaming equipment/supplies as defined in the Illinois Gaming Board Rules of the Illinois Administrative Code. 
    Gaming facility means an establishment utilized primarily for the purposes of gaming and where gaming equipment or supplies are operated for the purposes of accruing business revenue. 
    Healthcare facility means an office or institution providing care or treatment of diseases, whether physical, mental, or emotional, or other medical, physiological, or psychological conditions, including, but not limited to, hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals, weight control clinics, nursing homes, homes for the aging or chronically ill, laboratories, and offices of surgeons, chiropractors, physical therapists, physicians, dentists, and all specialists within these professions. The term "healthcare facility" includes all waiting rooms, hallways, private rooms, semiprivate rooms, and wards within healthcare facilities. 
    Place of employment means any area under the control of a public or private employer that employees are required to enter, leave, or pass through during the course of employment, including, but not limited to, entrances and exits to places of employment, including a minimum distance of 15 feet from entrances, exits, windows that open, and ventilation intakes that serve an enclosed area where smoking is prohibited; offices and work areas; restrooms; conference and classrooms; break rooms and cafeterias; and other common areas. A private residence or home based business, unless used to provide licensed child care, foster care, adult care, or other similar social service care on the premises, is not a place of employment, nor are enclosed laboratories, not open to the public, in an accredited university or government facility where the activity of smoking is exclusively conducted for the purpose of medical or scientific health-related research. 
    Private club means a not-for-profit association that: 
(1)  Has been in an active and continuous existence for at least three years prior to the effective date of the amendatory Act of the 95th General Assembly, whether incorporated or not; 
(2)  Is the owner, lessee, or occupant of a building or portion thereof used exclusively for club purposes at all times; 
(3)  Is operated solely for a recreational, fraternal, social, patriotic, political, benevolent, or athletic purpose, but not for financial gain; and 
(4)  Only sells alcoholic beverages incidental to its operation. 
The term "private club" means an organization that is managed by a board of directors, executive committee, or similar body chosen by the members at an annual meeting, has established bylaws, a constitution, or both to govern its activities, and has been granted an exemption from the payment of federal income tax as a club under 26 USC 501. 
    Private residence means the part of a structure used as a dwelling, including, without limitation: a private home, townhouse, condominium, apartment, mobile home, vacation home, cabin, or cottage. For the purposes of this definition, a hotel, motel, inn, resort, lodge, bed and breakfast or other similar public accommodation, hospital, nursing home, or assisted living facility shall not be considered a private residence. 
    Public place means that portion of any building or vehicle used by and open to the public, regardless of whether the building or vehicle is owned in whole or in part by private persons or entities, the state, or any other public entity and regardless of whether a fee is charged for admission, including a minimum distance of 15 feet from entrances, exits, windows that open, and ventilation intakes that serve an enclosed area where smoking is prohibited. The term "public place" does not include a private residence unless the private residence is used to provide licensed child care, foster care, or other similar social service care on the premises. The term "public place" includes, but is not limited to, hospitals, restaurants, retail stores, offices, commercial establishments, elevators, indoor theaters, libraries, museums, concert halls, public conveyances, educational facilities, nursing homes, auditoriums, enclosed or partially enclosed sports arenas, meeting rooms, schools, exhibition halls, convention facilities, polling places, private clubs, gaming facilities, all government owned vehicles and facilities, including buildings and vehicles owned, leased, or operated by the state or state subcontract, healthcare facilities or clinics, enclosed shopping centers, retail service establishments, financial institutions, educational facilities, ticket areas, public hearing facilities, public restrooms, waiting areas, lobbies, bars, taverns, bowling alleys, skating rinks, reception areas, and no less than 75 percent of the sleeping quarters within a hotel, motel, resort, inn, lodge, bed and breakfast, or other similar public accommodation that are rented to guests, but excludes private residences. 
    Restaurant means: 
(1)  An eating establishment, including, but not limited to, coffee shops, cafeterias, sandwich stands, and private and public school cafeterias, that gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests, or employees; and 
(2)  A kitchen or catering facility in which food is prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere. 
The term "restaurant" includes a bar area within the restaurant. 
    Retail tobacco store means a retail establishment that derives more than 80 percent of its gross revenue from the sale of loose tobacco, plants, or herbs and cigars, cigarettes, pipes, and other smoking devices for burning tobacco and related smoking accessories and in which the sale of other products is merely incidental. The term "retail tobacco store" includes an enclosed workplace that manufactures, imports, or distributes tobacco or tobacco products, when, as a necessary and integral part of the process of making, manufacturing, importing, or distributing a tobacco product for the eventual retail sale of that tobacco or tobacco product, tobacco is heated, burned, or smoked, or a lighted tobacco product is tested, provided that the involved business entity: 
(1)  Maintains a specially designated area or areas within the workplace for the purpose of the heating, burning, smoking, or lighting activities, and does not create a facility that permits smoking throughout; 
(2)  Satisfies the 80 percent requirement related to gross sales; and 
(3)  Delivers tobacco products to consumers, retail establishments, or other wholesale establishments as part of its business. 
The term "retail tobacco store" does not include a tobacco department or section of a larger commercial establishment or any establishment with any type of liquor, food, or restaurant license. 
    Smoke or smoking means the carrying, smoking, burning, inhaling, or exhaling of any kind of lighted pipe, cigar, cigarette, hookah, weed, herbs, or any other lighted smoking equipment. The term "smoke" or "smoking" does not include smoking that is associated with a native recognized religious ceremony, ritual, or activity by American Indians that is in accordance with the federal American Indian Religious Freedom Act, 42 USC 1996 and 1996a. 
    Unit of local government has the meaning ascribed to it in section 1 of article VII of the Illinois Constitution of 1970. 
(Code 2008, § 9.100; Ord. No. 08-02, 2-4-2008) 
Sec. 38-20. - Smoking in public places. 
    No person shall smoke in a public place or in any place of employment or within 15 feet of any entrance to a public place or place of employment. No person may smoke in any vehicle owned, leased, or operated by the city. An owner shall reasonably assure that smoking is prohibited in indoor public places and workplaces unless specifically exempted by section 38-25. 
(Code 2008, § 9.110; Ord. No. 08-02, 2-4-2008) 
Sec. 38-21. - Minimum distance. 
    Smoking is prohibited within a minimum distance of 15 feet from entrances, exits, windows that open, and ventilation intakes that serve an enclosed area where smoking is prohibited under this article so as to ensure that tobacco smoke does not enter the area through entrances, exits, open windows, or other means. 
(Code 2008, § 9.115; Ord. No. 08-02, 2-4-2008) 
Sec. 38-22. - Posting of signs; removal of ashtrays. 
(a)  "No smoking" signs or the international "no smoking" symbol, consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it, shall be clearly and conspicuously posted in each public place and place of employment where smoking is prohibited by this article by the owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of that place. 
(b)  Each public place and place of employment where smoking is prohibited by this article shall have posted at every entrance a conspicuous sign clearly stating that smoking is prohibited. 
(c)  All ashtrays shall be removed from any area where smoking is prohibited by this article by the owner, operator, manager, or other person having control of the area. 
(Code 2008, § 9.120; Ord. No. 08-02, § 1, 2-4-2008) 
Sec. 38-23. - Smoking prohibited in student dormitories. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, smoking is prohibited in any portion of the living quarters, including, but not limited to, sleeping rooms, dining areas, restrooms, laundry areas, lobbies, and hallways, of a building used in whole or in part as a student dormitory that is owned and operated or otherwise utilized by a public or private institution of higher education. 
(Code 2008, § 9.130; Ord. No. 08-02, § 1, 2-4-2008) 
Sec. 38-24. - Designation of other nonsmoking areas. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, any employer, owner, occupant, lessee, operator, manager, or other person in control of any public place or place of employment may designate a non-enclosed area of a public place or place of employment, including outdoor areas, as an area where smoking is also prohibited provided that such employer, owner, lessee or occupant shall conspicuously post signs prohibiting smoking in the manner described in section 38-22(a) and (b). 
(Code 2008, § 9.140; Ord. No. 08-02, § 1, 2-4-2008) 
Sec. 38-25. - Exemptions. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, smoking is allowed in the following areas: 
(1)  Private residences or dwelling places, except when used as a child care, adult day care, or healthcare facility or any other home based business open to the public. 
(2)  Retail tobacco stores, as defined in section 38-19, in operation prior to the effective date of the amendatory act of the 95th General Assembly. The retail tobacco store shall annually file with the department by January 31 an affidavit stating the percentage of its gross income during the prior calendar year that was derived from the sale of loose tobacco, plants, or herbs and cigars, cigarettes, pipes, or other smoking devices for smoking tobacco and related smoking accessories. Any retail tobacco store that begins operation after the effective date of the state amendatory act may only qualify for an exemption if located in a freestanding structure occupied solely by the business and smoke from the business does not migrate into an enclosed area where smoking is prohibited. 
(3)  Hotel and motel sleeping rooms that are rented to guests and are designated as smoking rooms, provided that all smoking rooms on the same floor must be contiguous and smoke from these rooms must not infiltrate into nonsmoking rooms or other areas where smoking is prohibited. Not more than 25 percent of the rooms rented to guests in a hotel or motel may be designated as rooms where smoking is allowed. The status of rooms as smoking or nonsmoking may not be changed, except to add additional nonsmoking rooms. 
(4)  Enclosed laboratories that are excluded from the definition of "place of employment" in section 38-19. 
(5)  Common smoking rooms in long-term care facilities operated under the authority of the state department of veterans' affairs or licensed under the Nursing Home Care Act that are accessible only to residents who are smokers and have requested in writing to have access to the common smoking room where smoking is permitted and the smoke shall not infiltrate other areas of the long-term care facility. 
(Code 2008, § 9.150; Ord. No. 08-02, § 1, 2-4-2008) 
Sec. 38-26. - Enforcement; complaints. 
(a)  The city police department shall enforce the provisions of this article and may impose fines pursuant to section 1-8. 
(b)  Any person may register a complaint with the city police department, or a state-certified local public health department for violation of this article. The department shall establish a telephone number that a person may call to register a complaint under this subsection. 
(Code 2008, § 9.160; Ord. No. 08-02, § 1, 2-4-2008) 
Sec. 38-27. - Injunctions. 
    The city shall have the right to institute a circuit court action to enjoin repeated violations of this article. 
(Code 2008, § 9.180; Ord. No. 08-02, § 1, 2-4-2008) 
Sec. 38-28. - Discrimination prohibited. 
    No individual may be discriminated against in any manner because of the exercise of any rights afforded by this article. 
(Code 2008, § 9.190; Ord. No. 08-02, § 1, 2-4-2008) 
Chapter 42 - NUISANCES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 42-1. - Failure to maintain enclosures for domestic animals; fine. 
    If any owner or occupant of any premises in the city permits any stable, pen, or place where any domestic animals or fowls are kept upon such premises to become nauseous, foul, offensive, or injurious to the public health or to his neighbors, he shall be subject to a fine of $50.00 in each and every case, for every day the same continues after such notice to abate and remove such nuisance. 
(Code 2008, § 8.20.010; Ord. No. 4, div. 3, § 10, 1912) 
Sec. 42-2. - Electric fences unlawful. 
    It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to maintain any type of electric fence or electrified fence through which an electric current flows, whether powered by battery or generated electricity, for any purpose within the city limits. The maintenance and/or operation of an electric fence of any type is a nuisance. 
(Code 2008, § 8.20.030; Ord. No. 299, § 2, 1959) 
Sec. 42-3. - Excessive noise; prohibited; defined. 
(a)  No person, firm or corporation shall create excessive noise within the corporate limits of the city, by the use of any instrumentality whatsoever. 
(b)  No person, firm or corporation shall permit to operate any instrumentality which causes excessive noise within the corporate limits of the city. 
(c)  The term "excessive noise" means that noise which restricts in an unreasonable way the quiet, peaceful enjoyment of any citizen of the city upon his own premises, which includes, but is not limited to, the following acts: 
(1)  Blowing horns. The sounding of any horn or signal device for an unnecessary or unreasonable period of time. 
(2)  Radios, musical instruments, etc. The playing of any radio, musical instrument, loud speaker or amplifier, between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(3)  Yelling, shouting, hooting, etc. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(4)  Pets. The keeping of any animal, bird or fowl which causes noise for an unnecessary or unreasonable period of time. 
(5)  Building operations. The erection, excavation, demolition, alteration or repair of any building, streets or public places in a residential area between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., except in the case of emergencies in the interest of public health and safety. 
(6)  Operation of ATVs, motorcycles, snowmobiles, lawnmowers, etc. The operation of any all-terrain vehicle, off-highway motorcycle, snowmobile, lawnmower or stationary internal combustion engine between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., except when: 
a.  Such vehicle or engine is being used for public utility purposes, including, but not limited to, snow removal, agriculture, towing of other vehicles, and inspection of public works; 
b.  Such vehicles or engines are used by law enforcement officers for law enforcement purposes; or 
c.  There is an emergency. 
(d)  It shall not be a violation of this section for any person, firm or corporation, licensed to do business in the city, to create such noise resulting from said business' regular and customary business activities during its normal business hours. Any person, firm or corporation, licensed to do business in the city, that desires to conduct a special event or conduct business outside of its normal business hours must obtain written permission from the city to conduct such activities. Nor shall it be a violation of this section to create such noise resulting from a city sponsored event or other special event which has obtained written permission from the city to conduct such event or activities. 
(Code 2008, § 8.20.050; Ord. No. 2-79, §§ 1-3, 1979; Ord. No. 16-10, § 2, 10-3-2016) 
Sec. 42-4. - Excessive fumes; prohibited; defined. 
(a)  No person, firm or corporation shall operate any instrumentality which causes excessive fumes within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  No person, firm or corporation shall permit to be operated any instrumentality which causes excessive fumes within the corporate limits of the city. 
(c)  The term "excessive fumes" means that amount of fumes which unreasonably endangers the physical health of a citizen of the city upon his own premises as determined by the county health department. Excessive fumes shall include any substance or thing emitting or causing any foul, offensive, nauseous, noxious or injurious odor or stench which annoys, discomforts or endangers the welfare, health or safety of any person within the city. 
(Code 2008, § 8.20.060; Ord. No. 2-79, §§ 4, 5, 1979) 
Secs. 42-5-42-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTIES 

Sec. 42-27. - Abatement of chronic nuisance properties. 
(a)  Any certain property within the city which becomes a chronic nuisance property is in violation of this article and is subject to its remedies. 
(b)  Any person in charge who permits property under his ownership or control to be a chronic nuisance property shall be in violation of this article and subject to its remedies. 
(Code 2008, § 8.20.080; Ord. No. 12-08, § I, 6-4-2012) 
Sec. 42-28. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Chronic nuisance property means property upon which three or more of the behaviors listed below have occurred during any 60-day period, as a result of any three separate factual events that have been independently investigated by any law enforcement agency: 
(1)  Disorderly conduct as defined in 720 ILCS 5/26-1. 
(2)  Unlawful use of weapons as defined in 720 ILCS 5/24-1 et seq. 
(3)  Mob action as defined in 720 ILCS 5/25-1. 
(4)  Discharge of a firearm as defined in 720 ILCS 5/24-1.2 and 5/24-1.5. 
(5)  Gambling as defined in 720 ILCS 5/28-1. 
(6)  Possession, manufacture or delivery of controlled substance as defined in 720 ILCS 570/401 et seq. 
(7)  Assault or battery or any related offense as defined in 720 ILCS 5/12-1 et seq. 
(8)  Sexual abuse or related offenses as defined in 720 ILCS 5/12-15 et seq. 
(9)  Public indecency as defined in 720 ILCS 5/11-9 et seq. 
(10)  Prostitution as defined in 720 ILCS 5/11-14 et seq. 
(11)  Criminal damage to property as defined in 720 ILCS 5/21-1 et seq. 
(12)  Possession, cultivation, manufacture or delivery of cannabis as defined in 720 ILCS 550/1 et seq. 
(13)  Illegal consumption or possession of alcohol as defined in 235 ILCS 5/1 et seq. 
(14)  Violation of the city property maintenance code (article IV of this chapter). 
(15)  Violation of any city ordinance or state statute controlling or regulating the sale or use of alcoholic beverages. 
    Control means the ability to regulate, restrain, dominate, counteract or govern conduct that occurs on that property. 
    Owner means any person, agent, firm or corporation having any legal or equitable interest in the property. The term "owner" includes, but is not limited to: 
(1)  A mortgage in possession in whom is vested: 
a.  All or part of the legal title to the property; 
b.  All or part of the beneficial ownership and the right to the present use and enjoyment of the premises; 
(2)  An occupant who can control what occurs on the property. 
    Permit means to suffer, allow, consent to, acquiesce by failure to prevent, or expressly ascent or agree to the doing of an act. 
    Person means any natural person, association, partnership or corporation capable of owning or using property in the city. 
    Person in charge means any person in actual or constructive possession of a property, including, but not limited to, an owner, occupant of property under his domain, ownership or control. 
    Property means any real property, including land in that which is affixed, incidental or pertinent to land, including, but not limited to, any premises, room, house, building, or structure or any separate part or portion thereof, whether permitted or not. 
(Code 2008, § 8.20.080; Ord. No. 97-38, § 2, 6-16-1997; Ord. No. 12-08, § I, 6-4-2012) 
Sec. 42-29. - Remedy. 
(a)  In the event a court determines property to be a chronic nuisance property, the court may order that the property be closed and secured against all use and occupancy for a period of not less than 30 days, but not more than 180 days, or the court may employ any other remedy deemed by it to be appropriate to abate the nuisance. 
(b)  In addition to the remedy provided in subsection (a) of this section, the court may impose upon the owner of the property a civil penalty in accordance with section 1-8, payable to the city, for each day the owner had actual knowledge that the property was a chronic nuisance property and permitted the property to remain chronic nuisance property. 
(c)  In determining what remedy or remedies shall employ, the court may consider evidence of other conduct which has occurred on the property, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  The disturbance of neighbors. 
(2)  The recurrence of loud and obnoxious noises. 
(3)  Repeated consumption of alcohol in public. 
(4)  The repeated sale or possession of controlled substances on the premises. 
(Code 2008, § 8.20.080; Ord. No. 12-08, § I, 6-4-2012) 
Sec. 42-30. - Abatement of nuisance. 
    The corporation counsel of the city or the state's attorney of the county may commence an action to abate public nuisance as described above. Upon being satisfied by affidavits or other sworn evidence that an alleged chronic nuisance exists, the court may without notice or bond enter a temporary restraining order or preliminary injunction to enjoin any defendant from maintaining such nuisance and may enter an order restraining any defendant from removing or interfering with all property used in connection with the chronic nuisance. 
(Code 2008, § 8.20.080; Ord. No. 12-08, § I, 6-4-2012) 
Sec. 42-31. - Procedure. 
    When the chief of police of the city receives two or more police reports documenting the occurrence of any chronic nuisance activity, as described above ("nuisance activity") on or within a property, the chief of police shall independently review such reports to determine whether they describe criminal acts. Upon such findings, the chief may: 
(1)  Notify the person in charge in writing that the property is in danger of becoming a chronic nuisance property. The notice shall contain the following information: 
a.  The street address or a legal description sufficient for identification of the property. 
b.  A statement that the chief of police has information that the property may be chronic nuisance property, with a concise description of the nuisance activities that may exist, or that have occurred. The chief of police shall offer the person in charge an opportunity to propose a course of action that the chief of police agrees will abate the nuisance activities giving rise to the violation. 
c.  Demand that the person in charge respond to the chief of police within ten days to discuss the nuisance activities. 
(2)  After complying with the notification procedures described herein when the chief of police receives a police report documenting the occurrence of a third nuisance activity at or within a property and determines that the property has become a chronic nuisance property, the chief of police shall: 
a.  Notify the person in charge in writing that the property has been determined to be a chronic nuisance property. The notice shall contain the following information: 
1.  The street address or legal description sufficient for identification of the property. 
2.  A statement that the chief of police has determined the property to be chronic nuisance property with a concise description of the nuisance activities leading to his findings. 
3.  Demand that the person in charge respond within ten days to the chief of police and propose a course of action that the chief of police agrees will abate the nuisance activities giving rise to the violation. 
4.  Service shall be made either personally or by first class mail, postage pre-paid, return receipt requested, addressed to the person in charge at the address of the property believed to be a chronic nuisance property, or such other place which is likely to give the person in charge notice of the determination by the chief of police. 
5.  A copy of the notice shall be served on the owner at such address as shown on the tax rolls of the county in which the property is located, and/or the occupant, at the address of the property, if these persons are different than the person in charge, and shall be made either personally or by first class mail, postage pre-paid. 
6.  A copy of the notice shall also be posted at the property after ten days has elapsed from the service or mailing of the notice to the person in charge and the person in charge has not contacted the chief of police. 
7.  The failure of any person to receive notice that the property may be a chronic nuisance property shall not invalidate or otherwise affect the proceedings under this article. 
b.  If after the notification, but prior to the commencement of legal proceedings by the city pursuant to this article, a person in charge stipulates with the chief of police that the person in charge will pursue a course of action the parties agree will abate the nuisance activities giving rise to the violation, the chief of police may agree to postpone legal proceedings for a period of not less than ten nor more than 30 days, except in the case of a nuisance activity under subsection (2)a.7 of this section where a search warrant was executed at the property. If the agreed course of action does not result in the abatement of the nuisance activity or if no agreement concerning abatement is reached within 30 days, the chief of police shall request authorization for the corporation counsel to commence a legal proceeding to abate the nuisance. 
c.  Concurrent with the notification producers set forth herein, the chief of police shall send copies of the notice, as well as, any other documentation which supports legal proceedings to the corporation counsel. 
(3)  When a person in charge makes a response to the chief of police as required above, any conduct or statements made in connection with the furnishing of that response shall not constitute an admission that any nuisance activities have or are occurring. This subsection does not require the exclusion of any evidence which is otherwise admissible or offered for any other purpose. 
(Code 2008, § 8.20.080; Ord. No. 12-08, § I, 6-4-2012) 
Sec. 42-32. - Commencement of action, burden of proof. 
(a)  In an action seeking closure of a chronic nuisance property, the city shall have the initial burden of showing by preponderance of the evidence that the property is a chronic nuisance property. 
(b)  It is a defense to an action seeking the closure of chronic nuisance property that the owner of the property at the time in question could not, in the exercise of reasonable care or diligence, determine that the property had become a chronic nuisance property, or could not, in spite of the exercise of reasonable care and diligence, control the conduct leading of the findings that the property is a chronic nuisance property. 
(c)  In establishing the amount of any civil penalty requested, the court may consider any of the following factors if they need be found appropriate, and shall site those found applicable: 
(1)  The action or lack of action taken by the person in charge to mitigate or correct the problem at the property. 
(2)  Whether the problem at the property was repeated or continuous. 
(3)  The magnitude or gravity of the problem. 
(4)  The cooperation of the person in charge with the city. 
(5)  The cost of the city investigating and correcting or attempting to correct the condition. 
(Code 2008, § 8.20.080; Ord. No. 12-08, § I, 6-4-2012) 
Secs. 42-33-42-52. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ACCUMULATIONS ON PROPERTY 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 42-53-42-77. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WEEDS 

Sec. 42-78. - Weeds declared a nuisance. 
    Any weeds on the following list, found growing in any lot or tract of land in the city are hereby declared to be a nuisance, and it shall be unlawful to permit any such weeds to grow or remain on any such place: Annual Ragweed ( Ambrosia artemixiifolia ), Giant Ragweed ( Ambrosia trifida ), Carly Dock ( Rumex crispus ), Johnsongrass ( Sorghum halepense ), Canadian Thistle ( Cirsium arvense ), Musk Thistle ( Carduus nutans ), Bull Thistle ( Cirsium vulgare ), Lambsquarters ( Chenopodium album ), Multiflora Rose ( Rosa multiflora ), Red Clover ( Trifolium pratense ), Yellow Sweet Clover ( Melilotus officinalis ), Pigweed Amaranth ( Amaranthus retroflexus ), Rough Cocklebur (X anthium strumarium ) and all other noxious weeds as defined by the statutes of the state. 
(Code 2008, § 8.28.010; Ord. No. 4-95(part), 1995; Ord. No. 15-20, § I, 12-7-2015) 
Sec. 42-79. - Height. 
    It shall be unlawful to permit any weeds, grass or plants other than trees, bushes, flowers, vegetables, ornamentals, or native plants that are not considered noxious weeds by the state, to grow to a height exceeding eight inches anywhere in the city and any such plants or weed exceeding such height are declared to be a nuisance. All plants which are permitted to grow within the city must be managed and well maintained to a standard of good care taking according to the purpose of the plants that are grown. 
(Code 2008, § 8.28.020; Ord. No. 4-95(part), 1995; Ord. No. 15-20, § I, 12-7-2015) 
Sec. 42-80. - Growth prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any party owning, leasing, occupying, controlling, or responsible for any lot or parcel of land within the city limits to permit growth as prohibited in section 42-79 between the property line of such lot or parcel of land and the curb of any adjoining alley, street, public way or highway. 
(Code 2008, § 8.28.030; Ord. No. 4-95(part), 1995) 
Sec. 42-81. - Authority to abate. 
    In the event any property is in violation of this division, the city may, at its discretion, cut any weeds, grass, or plants, other than trees, bushes, flowers, vegetables or other ornamental plants and assess the cost to the owner of the property and file a lien against the property as provided in this division. 
(Code 2008, § 8.28.040; Ord. No. 4-95(part), 1995) 
Sec. 42-82. - Abatement lien. 
    If the city has abated the nuisance, the costs thereof shall be recoverable from the owner and the city may place a lien on the land until payment is made. Within 60 days after the cost and expense is incurred by the city or the party performing the service by the authority of the city, the city in the name of the party performing the service or in the city's name, may file a notice of lien in the office of the recorder of deeds of the county. The notice shall consist of a sworn statement setting out: 
(1)  A description of the real estate sufficient for identification thereof; 
(2)  The amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred or payable for the service; and 
(3)  The date when such cost and expenses were incurred by the city. 
(Code 2008, § 8.28.050; Ord. No. 4-95(part), 1995) 
Sec. 42-83. - Payment and release. 
    Upon payment of the cost and expense by the owner of or persons interested in such property after the notice of lien has been filed, the lien shall be released by the city or person whose name the lien was filed. The release may be filed as recorded in the city filing notice of lien; provided, however, no lien shall be released until the total cost and expense including the actual cost, filing fees and other costs of administration and interest are satisfied by payment in full. 
(Code 2008, § 8.28.060; Ord. No. 4-95(part), 1995) 
Secs. 42-84-42-109. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - GARBAGE, REFUSE AND ASHES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal disposal of refuse, garbage and ashes, 65 ILCS 5/11-19-1 et seq.; Local Solid Waste Disposal Act, 415 ILCS 10/1 et seq.; Solid Waste Planning and Recycling Act, 415 ILCS 15/1 et seq.; Illinois Solid Waste Management Act, 415 ILCS 20/1 et seq.; land pollution and refuse disposal, 415 ILCS 5/20 et seq.; used tire disposal, 415 ILCS 5/53 et seq.; Litter Control Act, 415 ILCS 105/1 et seq.; open dumping, etc., of waste, 415 ILCS 5/21 et seq.; littering highways, 625 ILCS 5/11-1413. 

Sec. 42-110. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Ashes means residue from fires used for cooking and for heating buildings. 
    Garbage means wastes, resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food; or wastes from handling and sale of produce. 
    Refuse means combustible trash, including, but not limited to, paper, cartons, boxes, barrels, wood, excelsior, tree branches, yard trimmings, wood furniture, bedding, noncombustible trash, including, but not limited to, metals, tin cans, metal furniture, dirt, small quantities of rock and pieces of concrete, glass crockery, other mineral wastes, street rubbish, including, but not limited to, street sweepings, dirt, leaves, catch-basin dirt, contents of litter receptacles. The term "refuse" does not mean earth and waste from building operations, nor shall it include solid wastes resulting from industrial processes and manufacturing operations such as food processing wastes, boiler-house cinders, lumber, scraps and shavings. 
(Code 2008, § 5.17.010; Ord. No. 4-95(part), 1995) 
Sec. 42-111. - Accumulation prohibited and declared a nuisance. 
    The owner, occupant, or lessee of any premises in the city shall remove from said premises all garbage, refuse, and ashes from the premises at least once each week as nearly as practical, and any garbage, refuse, and ashes that are not so removed is hereby declared a nuisance. 
(Code 2008, § 5.17.020; Ord. No. 4-95(part), 1995) 
Sec. 42-112. - Notices. 
    The chief of police shall cause notice of any violations of this division to be made by registered letter demanding abatement of the nuisance or violation within seven days. 
(Code 2008, § 5.17.030; Ord. No. 4-95(part), 1995) 
Sec. 42-113. - Abatement, lien. 
    If the nuisance is not abated within seven days of the mailing of such notice, the city may cause the nuisance to be abated and the costs thereof to be collected from the owners of the land. If all costs are not paid within 60 days of the date the cost and expense is incurred, the city or the party performing the service by authority of the city, in his or its own name, may file a notice of lien in the office of the recorder of deeds of the county. The notice shall consist of a sworn statement setting out: 
(1)  A description of the real estate sufficient for identification thereof. 
(2)  The amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred or payable for the service. 
(3)  The date when such cost and expense was incurred by the city. The lien may be enforced by proceedings to foreclose as in case of mortgages or mechanic's liens. Suit to foreclose this lien shall be commenced within the two years after the date of filing notice of lien. 
(Code 2008, § 5.17.040; Ord. No. 4-95(part), 1995) 
Sec. 42-114. - Prior liens. 
    The lien shall not be valid as to any purchaser whose rights in and to such real estate have arisen subsequent to removal of the garbage and debris and prior to the filing of such notice, and the lien of such municipality shall not be valid as to any mortgages, judgment creditor or other lien or whose rights in and to such real estate arise prior to the filing of such notice. 
(Code 2008, § 5.17.050; Ord. No. 4-95(part), 1995) 
Sec. 42-115. - Payment and release. 
    Upon payment of the cost and expense by the owner or persons interested in such property after notice of the lien has been filed and the release may be filed, the lien shall be released by the city or person in whose name notice of lien; provided, however, no lien shall be released until the total cost and expense including the actual costs, filing fees and other costs of administration and interest are satisfied by payment in full. 
(Code 2008, § 5.17.060; Ord. No. 4-95(part), 1995) 
Secs. 42-116-42-143. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MAINTENANCE OF PRIVATE PROPERTY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal powers as to nuisances, 65 ILCS 5/11-60-2; nuisances generally, 720 ILCS 5/47-25; municipal sanitation code violations, 65 ILCS 5/11-19.2-1 et seq.; acts constituting public nuisances, 740 ILCS 55/221; Abandoned Refrigerator Act, 720 ILCS 505/0.01; Litter Control Act, 415 ILCS 105/1 et seq.; Environmental Protection Act, 415 ILCS 5/1 et seq. 

Sec. 42-144. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Nuisance means any condition or use of premises or building exteriors which is detrimental to the property of others or which causes or tends to cause substantial diminution in the value of other property in the neighborhood in which such premises are located. The term "nuisance" includes, but is not limited to, the keeping or depositing on, or the scattering over the premises of any of the following: 
(1)  Lumber, junk, trash, or debris. 
(2)  Abandoned, discarded or unused objects or equipment such as automobiles or parts, furniture, stoves, refrigerators, freezers, cans, containers, or building materials such as windows, cement blocks, piping, or wiring. 
(3)  Any compost pile which is of such a nature as to spread or harbor disease, emit unpleasant odors or harmful gases, or attract rodents, vermin, or other disease-carrying pests, animals or insects, provided that the presence of earthworms in a compost pile shall not constitute a nuisance. 
(4)  Unsanitary, deleterious or septic material kept upon any premises, unless such material is retained in containers or vessels which deny access to humans, flies, insects, rodents, or animals. 
(5)  Weeds such as jimson, burdock, ragweed, thistle, cocklebur, or other weeds of the like kind. 
(6)  Weeds, grasses, or plants, other than trees, bushes, flowers, or other ornamental plants exceeding eight inches in height anywhere in the city. 
(7)  Abandoned motor vehicles or motor vehicles with expired license or inoperative motor vehicles and equipment. 
(8)  Sounds, animals or any other things which interfere with the peace and comfort, or disturbs the quiet of any person in the city. 
(9)  Anything which is made, permitted, used, kept, maintained or operated, or any building or any animal that is kept in the city or outside of the city but within 11/2 miles of its limits, in a manner that is offensive, injurious or dangerous to the health of individuals or the public. 
(10)  Tanneries, soap factories, tallow chandleries, bone factories, or the steaming, boiling or rendering of tainted lard, tallow, offal, or other unwholesome animal substance within the city limits and within 11/2 miles thereof, without first having obtained such permission to conduct or carry on any such business. 
(11)  Discharging, placing, throwing or permitting to be discharged, or to flow from or out of any house or premises, any filthy, foul, or offensive matter or liquid of any kind, into any street, alley, or public place, or upon any adjacent lot or ground within the city. 
(12)  Any other condition dangerous to health; offensive to community moral standards, unlawfully obstructing the public in the free use of public property; or behavior which unreasonably interferes with the health, safety, peace, comfort or convenience of the general community. 
(13)  Causing, allowing, or permitting stormwater, surface water, groundwater, runoff water, subsurface drainage water or the like to be discharged into the sanitary sewer system of the city, by way of downspouts, footing tile, or otherwise, or allowing or permitting the same to be done by any person connected with the premises, under his control, thereby contributing to the backup, surcharge, overflow, or discharge of said sanitary sewer system into or onto the premises of another, or causing or tending to cause substantial diminution in the value of other property in the neighborhood in which such premises are located. 
The various nuisances described and enumerated in this section shall not be deemed to be exclusive, but shall be in addition to all other nuisances prescribed or prohibited by this Code and those offenses known to the common law or to the statutes of this state as nuisances. 
(Code 2008, § 15.04.010; Ord. No. 07-19, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 42-145. - Duty of maintenance of private property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person owning, leasing, occupying, or having charge of any premises to maintain or keep any nuisance thereon, or to keep or maintain such premises in a manner causing substantial devaluation in the value of the other property located in the neighborhood in which such premises are located. To prevent the devaluation of other property, the following minimum standards must be met at all times, including, but not limited, to the following: 
(1)  Foundations, exterior walls and roofs. Every foundation, exterior wall and roof of every building shall be substantially weathertight, and rodentproof; shall be kept in sound condition and good repair; shall be kept free of holes or breaks and of loose or rotting boards, timbers, bricks, stones and other structural material; and shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the load which normal use may cause to be placed thereon. 
(2)  Exterior surfaces. All exterior surfaces of any building shall be reasonably capable of withstanding the effects of the elements and decay. Any exterior surface which is deteriorated, decaying, disintegrating or which has lost its capability to reasonably withstand the effects of the elements shall be replaced. 
(3)  Windows and exterior doors. Every window, exterior door, basement or cellar door and hatchway shall be generally weathertight and rodentproof; shall be equipped with all appropriate hardware; shall be capable of being easily opened unless designed to be fixed; and all windows; exterior doors and screens shall be kept in good repair. 
(4)  Stairways and porches. Every inside and outside stairway and porch and every appurtenance thereto shall be maintained in a good state of repair and free from rotting, loose, or deteriorating supports, rails, floors and stairs so as to be safe to use and capable of supporting the loads that normal use may cause to be placed thereon. 
(5)  Accessory structures. All garages, tool sheds and all other accessory structures shall be kept in good repair so as not to be unsafe or a harbor for rats and other rodents. Fences and roadside mailboxes shall be maintained in good repair, solid and in the same condition required for other exterior surfaces. If attached to the exterior of a building, a television antenna shall be firmly and securely fastened to the building and shall be maintained in good repair. No television antenna shall be attached to any tree located on public property. 
(6)  Driveways and walkways. Cement or asphalt driveways and parking areas shall be maintained free of loose or broken material, cracks which are safety hazards and such driveways and parking areas shall be repaired as necessary to avoid safety hazards. Stone driveways, walkways and parking areas shall be maintained in forms designed to prevent the spread of gravel to public ways, easements and adjoining private property. 
(7)  Gutters, downspouts and sump pumps. All gutters, downspouts and sump pump discharge pipes shall be maintained free of debris which might prevent their proper functioning and shall not be allowed to discharge in a manner which might create unnecessary erosion. Downspouts shall discharge onto open vegetated areas to the greatest extent practicable and direct connection to sump pump laterals shall be avoided. No discharge pipes shall cut through existing street curbs, nor shall pipes discharge to the ground surface within ten feet of a roadway or sidewalk, unless discharge enters a ditch without flowing over paved surfaces. Pump discharge piping shall utilize a lateral connection to the storm sewer wherever practicable. All gutters and downspouts shall be securely fastened to the building which they serve. 
(8)  Ingress and egress. The means of ingress to and egress from any building, including, but not limited to, hallways, corridors, stairs and porches, shall be maintained in good repair and free from any obstructions. 
(9)  Protective railings. Any handrails, guardrails or other types of protective railings required to be constructed or installed under any provision of this Code or which have otherwise been constructed and installed shall be maintained in good repair. 
(Code 2008, § 15.04.020; Ord. No. 4-95(part), 1995; Ord. No. 07-19, 12-3-2007; Ord. No. 14-10, § I, 10-6-2014) 
Sec. 42-146. - Impermissible discharges into sanitary sewer system; abatement and other remedies. 
(a)  When the existence of a violation of section 74-194 is brought to the attention of the city administrator, he shall cause an inspection and investigation to be made by the appropriate agencies to determine whether abatement is necessary. 
(b)  The city administrator, or any employee duly authorized by him, shall be permitted access to any part of any property where access is necessary for the purpose of inspecting, observing, measuring, sampling, or testing to determine compliance with the provisions of section 74-194. If any person should refuse to permit access to the property the city administrator, with consent by the mayor or city council use the assistance of the city attorney, to obtain the necessary court order to obtain access. 
(c)  If the city administrator finds any violation of this Code at the premises of any person, the city administrator shall notify the owner, occupant, or user of the sanitary sewer system of the city in writing stating the nature of the violation, the time, place, and date of the inspection, and the right of the person to demand a retest as provided for in subsection (d) of this section, and providing for a reasonable time for abatement to be made. In the absence of unusual circumstances, 30 days shall be considered a reasonable time. An extension of the time to abate any violation may be granted by the city administrator upon written request signed by the owner, occupant, or user of said sanitary sewer system, acknowledging a violation of section 74-194 and promising to abate within a reasonable time. 
(d)  The owner, occupant, or user of said sanitary sewer system shall, upon request, have an absolute right to a retest in the event a violation is discovered. In order to obtain a retest, it shall be necessary that the owner, occupant, or user notify the city administrator, in writing, of the demand for a retest within ten days of the receipt of the notice from the city administrator of a violation. 
(e)  If the owner, occupant, or user of the sanitary sewer system does not abate the violation within the prescribed time limit, or any extension thereof, the following abatement remedies, or any of them, may be resorted to by the city: 
(1)  Abatement by the city for illegal sewer connection. The city may abate the violation, under the direction of the city administrator, and the cost of so doing shall be collected from the person who is responsible for maintaining, allowing, and permitting the violation to exist, with the filing of a lien, filing suit in an appropriate court of competent jurisdiction, suit to collect and may be included in the billing with the city water and sewer services, if water/sewer service is provided the residence. The result of non-payment of utility billing statement which includes the cost for the abatement shall constitute the same means of penalty and collection as described in sections 74-427 through 74-429. 
(2)  Disconnection of sewer service to premises. The city may abate said violation, under the direction of the city administrator, by disconnecting or discontinuing sewer service to the premises found to be in violation, including, but not limited to, the capping of the sanitary sewer serving said premises. 
(3)  Suit to enjoin violation. In addition to the other remedies and penalties provided in this section, the city administrator with council or mayor authorization file appropriate civil actions for a temporary restraining order, temporary injunction, permanent injunction, damages or for contribution, against any person violating this section. 
(4)  Surcharge by city. The city administrator may forward the pertinent information to the city office staff with instructions that the premises are to be surcharged. The surcharge shall be calculated by measuring the perimeter of footage of the dwelling, based upon the outside measurement of the dwelling's foundation. A surcharge of $0.25 per linear foot so calculated plus ten percent of the water usage for each billing period shall be charged. There shall be no maximum charge for such surcharge calculation. The surcharges shall be billed with the regular statements for water and sewer use and shall be due and payable and be deemed to become delinquent at the same time. That surcharge will be discontinued when proof is submitted to the city of a proper disconnection from the sanitary sewer system. 
(f)  Any person aggrieved by any notice of the city administrator under this section may obtain a hearing upon the filing of a written request for such a hearing with the city administrative offices. The request for hearing must be filed with the city administrator within the time allowed for abatement, as provided for in subsection (c) of this section. The written request for a hearing shall contain, at a minimum, the following information: the time, date, and place of the original inspection; the time, date, and place of any retest; the name and address of the person requesting the hearing; the address of the premises subject to the abatement request; and a brief statement of the reasons for requesting a hearing. Any such written request will postpone the date for abatement contained in the original notice to abate until after the hearing has been held. The city administrator shall set the date for the hearing, upon receipt of a written request for such a hearing, as soon as possible, but not more than 15 days after the request is received. 
(1)  The hearing shall be before a board consisting of the city administrator or designee of the maintenance committee, a member of the zoning board of appeals designated by the mayor, and the mayor. The city clerk shall act as the hearing board's secretary and the director of public works shall act as a consultant to the board. The aggrieved person may present any facts or arguments he desires to present, he may be represented by counsel, and he may present such expert testimony or technical evidence as to establish his contentions. Within ten days after the hearing, the board, by a majority vote, may affirm, modify, or reverse any decision of the city administrator. 
(2)  Notice of the board's decision shall be mailed to the aggrieved person within three working days after the rendering of the board's decision. The notice shall be sent by the board to the address of the aggrieved person provided in the request for hearing, and shall contain the following information: a short statement describing the board's decision; the period in which abatement, if any, is required, which shall be at least 15 days but no more than 30 days after said decision is rendered; and a statement describing the aggrieved person's right to appeal to the city council. 
(g)  A person aggrieved by any decision of the hearing board under the provisions of this section may appeal to the city council. The appeal shall be by notice, in writing, addressed to the mayor, stating the reason for the appeal. The notice of appeal must be filed by the person aggrieved within ten days after receipt of the notice of the hearing board's decision. The filing of the notice of appeal shall delay the effective date of the hearing board's order until a decision is rendered in the appeal to the city council. The aggrieved person may present additional facts or arguments as he may desire to the city council. The city council may affirm, modify, or reverse any decision of the hearing board by a vote of a majority of said council in attendance. 
(Code 2008, § 15.04.025; Ord. No. 07-19, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 42-147. - Nuisance prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in charge of or in control of any premises within the city, whether as owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or otherwise, to maintain, cause, allow or permit the existence of any nuisance upon the premises. 
Sec. 42-148. - Permitting, occupancy prohibited. 
    It is unlawful to maintain or permit the existence of any dangerous building in the city. It is unlawful for the owner, occupant or person in custody of any dangerous building to permit the same to remain in a dangerous condition, or to occupy such building or permit it to be occupied while it is or remains in a dangerous condition. 
(Code 2008, § 15.04.050; Ord. No. 4-95(part), 1995; Ord. No. 07-19, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 42-149. - Notice of condemnation. 
    Whenever the chief of police, the fire marshal or the health officer is of the opinion that any building or structure in the city is a dangerous building, he shall file a written statement to this effect with the city clerk. The clerk shall thereupon cause written notice to be served upon the owner thereof, and upon the occupant thereof, if any, by registered mail or by personal service. Such notice shall state that the building has been declared to be in a dangerous condition, and that such dangerous condition must be removed or remedied by repairing or altering the building or by demolishing it; and that the condition must be remedied within 15 days of the date of the notice. Such notice may be in the following terms: 
"To(owner-occupant) of premises of the premises known as (describe building). You are hereby notified that the premises above mentioned has been condemned as a nuisance and a dangerous building after inspection by ____________ . The cause(s) for this decision is/are (insert the facts as to the dangerous decision). You must remedy this condition or demolish the building within 15 days of the date of this notice, or the City will proceed to do so." 
If the person receiving the notice has not compiled therewith or taken an appeal from the determination of the officer or employee finding that a dangerous building exists, within 15 days from the time when this notice is served upon such person by personal service or registered mail, the chief of police may, upon orders of the mayor and city council, proceed to remedy the condition or demolish the dangerous building. 
(Code 2008, § 15.04.060; Ord. No. 4-95(part), 1995; Ord. No. 07-19, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 42-150. - Notice to abate; abatement procedure. 
    The chief of police is hereby authorized and empowered to notify the person in control of any private property, whether as owner, lessee, tenant, occupant, or otherwise, to remove to an enclosed area on the property or otherwise remove from the property, any junk, trash, debris, abandoned, discarded or unused objects or equipment such as furniture, stoves, refrigerators, freezers, cans or containers which are stored in violation of any section of this article. Said notice shall allow said person ten days to remove said property. Such notice shall be given by certified or registered mail, addressed to the person occupying the premises in question. 
(1)  Abatement procedure. 
a.  Inspection and investigation. When the existence of a public nuisance is brought to the attention of the city administrator, he shall cause an inspection and investigation to be made by the appropriate agencies to determine whether removal is necessary. 
b.  Notice to abate. 
1.  The police chief shall, after inspection and investigation under the provisions of chapter 74, cause a notice in writing to be served upon the person who is responsible for the existence of the nuisance. The notice may be served by mailing a copy thereof to the last known address of the person who is responsible for the existence of the nuisance, return receipt requested. 
2.  The notice shall indicate the date of the inspection and investigation, and the hour and location where the inspection was made. The notice shall set forth what the nuisance consists of and indicate the abatement remedy required. 
(2)  Notification. When any nuisance, or anything likely to become a nuisance, may be found upon any premises, and the person causing such nuisance is unknown or cannot be found, the owner, agent, or occupant of the premises shall be notified by the city administrator or chief of police to abate the same. If owner, agent, or occupant, whose duty it is to abate such nuisance, fails to promptly comply with such notice, abatement remedies, alternatives may be taken. 
(3)  General abatement remedies; alternative. After the expiration of ten days from the date the return receipt requested notice was returned or returned unclaimed to the city, if the nuisance is not abated or other remedy made as required, the city may choose either one of the following abatement remedies: 
a.  Cost of abatement. The nuisance may be abated by the city, under the direction of the city administrator, and the cost of so doing shall be collected from the person who is responsible for the nuisance as stated in subsection (3)b of this section. 
b.  Abatement by the city. The city may abate the violation, under the direction of the city administrator, and the cost of so doing shall be collected from the person who is responsible for maintaining, allowing, and permitting the violation to exist, or owner with the filing of a lien, filing suit in an appropriate court of competent jurisdiction, suit to collect and may be included in the billing with the city water and sewer service statement, if water and or sewer service is provided the residence or property. The result of non-payment of utility billing statement which includes the cost for the abatement shall constitute the same means of penalty and collection as described in sections 74-427 through 74-429. 
(4)  Disconnection of water and or sewer service to premises. The city may abate the nonpayment of said violation, under the direction of the city administrator, by disconnecting or discontinuing water/sewer service to the premises. 
(5)  Suit to enjoin violation. In addition to the other remedies and penalties provided in this section, the city administrator with council or mayor authorization file appropriate civil actions for a temporary restraining order, temporary injunction, permanent injunction, damages or for contribution, against any person violating this section. 
(6)  Abatement in case of emergency. If a nuisance constitutes an emergency, the time for abatement may be reduced by the city administrator in the notice which specifies that the emergency exists. 
(7)  City abatement of weed nuisances and any nuisance as defined in section 42-144. In the event the city chooses to abate a weed or nuisance, the following additional remedies are available to the city: 
a.  Charges. The actual cost incurred by the city for the removal of weeds or any nuisance violation identified in section 42-144; provided, however, if the city uses its own employees to remove the weeds, or any nuisance there is hereby established a charge of $50.00 per hour per employee for the removal of weeds and grasses or any defined nuisance pursuant to this article plus any fees charged for disposal of same. Whether the removal of weeds or the nuisance is accomplished by city employees or not, the charge to the property owner or occupant shall not be less than $100.00, in any event. 
b.  Lien. 
1.  Charges for such grass and weed or nuisance removal shall be a lien upon the premises. Within ten days after such cost and expense is incurred by the city, the city clerk may file a notice of lien with the recorder of deeds of the county. This claim of lien statement shall contain a legal description of the premises, the expenses and costs incurred and the date the weeds, grass were cut, or nuisance removed and a notice that the city claims a lien for this amount. 
2.  Notice of such lien claim shall be mailed to the owner of the premises if his address is known. 
c.  Foreclosure of lien. 
1.  Property subject to a lien for unpaid weed and grass cutting charges or nuisance removal shall be sold for nonpayment of the same and the proceeds of such sale shall be applied to pay the charges after deducting costs, as is the case in the foreclosure of statutory liens. Such foreclosure shall be in equity in the name of the city. 
2.  The city attorney is hereby authorized and directed to institute such proceedings, at the direction of the corporate authorities in the name of the city, in any court having jurisdiction over such matter, against any property for which such bill has remained unpaid for a period of 120 days after the filing of said notice of lien, and for such service a reasonable attorney's fee shall be allowed against the owner of said premises in the foreclosure action. 
(Code 2008, § 15.04.080; Ord. No. 4-95(part), 1995; Ord. No. 07-19, 12-3-2007) 
Sec. 42-151. - Enforcement. 
    Enforcement of this chapter may be accomplished by the city in any manner authorized by law; and, in addition, any person who by reason of another's violation of any provision of this chapter, suffers special damage to himself different from that suffered by other property owners throughout the city generally. The city may bring an action to enjoin or otherwise abate an existing violation. 
(Code 2008, § 15.04.090; Ord. No. 07-19, 12-3-2007) 
Chapter 46 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 46-1. - Public indecency. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any indecent, lewd or lascivious act in any public place within the city, including, but not limited to, appearing in any public place in a state of nudity or making any indecent exposure of his person. The term "public place," for purposes of this section, means any place where such conduct may reasonably be expected to be viewed by others. 
Sec. 46-2. - Obscenity. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any obscene act within the city. An act is obscene if the average person would find that it appeals to the prurient interest and lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value, and shall include, but is not limited to, the following acts: 
(1)  Selling, delivering, providing, offering or agreeing to sell, deliver or provide any obscene material or other representation; 
(2)  Presenting or directing an obscene play, dance or other performance or participating directly in such performance; 
(3)  Publishing, exhibiting or otherwise making available any obscene material or performance; 
(4)  Creating, buying, procuring or possessing obscene material with intent to disseminate it; or 
(5)  Advertising or otherwise promoting the sale of material represented or held out by him to be obscene, whether or not it is actually obscene. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section: 
(1)  The term "material" means any book, magazine, newspaper, pamphlet, poster, print, picture, figure, image, description, motion picture film, record, recording tape, or videotape. 
(2)  The term "performance" means any motion picture, film, video tape, played record, phonograph or tape, preview, trailer, play, show, skit, dance, or other exhibition performed or presented to or before an audience of one or more, with or without consideration. 
Secs. 46-3-46-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY 

Sec. 46-23. - Unauthorized placement of advertisements. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to stick, nail, paint, brand, or stamp or in any other manner put upon any house, fence, wall or pavement or other public or private place in this city any written, printed, painted or other advertisement, bill, notice, sign or poster, without having first obtained the consent of the owner or occupant of any such house, fence, wall, pavement or other public or private place. 
(Code 2008, § 9.40.010; Ord. No. 4, div. 5, § 23, 1912) 
Sec. 46-24. - Vandalism; bridges, other public property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to injure, deface, destroy, or assist in injuring, defacing or destroying any building , fence, sign, tree, tree-box, lamppost, public way, or other property belonging to the city, private business, or person by cutting, breaking, daubing with paint or other substance, driving against, or in any other manner whatsoever. 
(Code 2008, § 9.40.040; Ord. No. 4, div. 6, § 5, 1912) 
Secs. 46-25-46-51. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND ORDER 

Sec. 46-52. - Tumultuous, disorderly conduct. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any violent, tumultuous, offensive or disorderly conduct by: 
(1)  Threatening, traducing, quarreling, challenging to fight or fighting; 
(2)  Using obscene, offensive, profane or unseemly language to the annoyance, disturbance or vexation of another; or 
(3)  Engaging in any conduct likely to provoke a breach of the peace. 
(Code 2008, § 9.24.010; Ord. No. 4, div. 5, § 6, 1912) 
State Law reference- Disorderly conduct, 720 ILCS 5/26-1; municipal authority to prevent disorderly conduct, 65 ILCS 5/1-5-3. 
Sec. 46-53. - Disturbing, lawful assembly. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully interrupt or disturb any lawful assembly, by menace, profanity, vulgar language, or any other disorderly conduct, behavior or discourse within the assembly, or so near to the same as to disturb the good order and peace of the assembly. 
(Code 2008, § 9.24.030; Ord. No. 4, div. 5, § 10, 1912) 
Sec. 46-54. - Endangering pedestrians. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to pursue any amusement or exercise likely to injure or annoy any person passing along the streets or sidewalks which shall collect a crowd of persons so as to interfere with the passage of any vehicle or person upon and along the streets or sidewalks. 
(Code 2008, § 9.24.040; Ord. No. 4, div. 5, § 11, 1912) 
Sec. 46-55. - Throwing stones, missiles. 
    No person shall purposely or heedlessly cast or throw any stone or other missiles from or into any public place, or at any person. 
(Code 2008, § 9.24.050; Ord. No. 4, div. 5, § 12, 1912) 
Sec. 46-56. - Fighting in public place. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly start a fight, or to fight, or to commit any assault or assault and battery anywhere within the city. A person commits an assault when, without lawful authority, engages in conduct which places another in reasonable apprehension of receiving a battery. A person commits a battery when he intentionally or knowingly, without legal justification, and by any means, causes bodily harm to another or makes physical contact of an insulting or provoking nature with another. 
(Code 2008, § 9.24.060; Ord. No. 4, div. 5, § 18, 1912; Ord. No. 13-13, § I, 8-5-2013) 
Sec. 46-57. - Allowing disorderly conduct prohibited. 
    No keeper of any place of amusement, restaurant, or other place of business shall cause or permit any: 
(1)  Loud or boisterous talking; 
(2)  Obscene or profane language; 
(3)  Quarreling, singing, fighting; or 
(4)  Other disturbance likely to breach the peace; 
in or about his place of business, or in any place adjacent thereto subject to his control, to the annoyance or disturbance of another. 
(Code 2008, § 9.24.070; Ord. No. 4, div. 5, § 15, 1912) 
Sec. 46-58. - False alarm. 
    No person shall knowingly make a false alarm of fire, or false cry for assistance when there is no fire. Violations shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-8. 
(Code 2008, § 8.04.010; Ord. No. 4, div. 7, § 3, 1912) 
Sec. 46-59. - Explosives, fireworks and weapons. 
(a)  Discharge of weapons or firearms prohibited. The discharge of any weapon or firearm within the city is hereby prohibited except by sworn officers while in the performance of their regular duties and in conformance with established departmental policy, or for the furtherance of the appropriate use of weaponry or weaponry training by authority of the chief of police with approval by the public safety committee of the city. Prior to the discharge of firearms or weaponry for purposes of training while under the authority of the chief of police, there shall be established a safety policy for such use, with approval given by a majority vote of the members of the public safety committee of the city, which such vote shall be included in the minutes record of said committee. 
(b)  Restrictions on the sale, use or explosion of fireworks. Provisions enacted by the legislature of the state for the sale, use and explosion of fireworks as defined by the Pyrotechnic Use Act (425 ILCS 35/1 et seq.), and as amended from time to time, are hereby adopted in their entirety. Strict adherence to the permit application and procedure at 425 ILCS 35/2 et seq. shall be required of all applicants. All permits shall require approval by the chief of police of the city. Any person, firm, co-partnership, or corporation violating the provisions of said act shall receive punishment in accordance with 425 ILCS 35/5. 
(Code 2008, §§ 8.12.010, 8.12.030; Ord. No. 21-03, § 1(part), 2003; Ord. No. 22-03, § 1, 2003) 
Secs. 46-60-46-76. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MINORS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 46-77-46-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TOBACCO 

Sec. 46-96. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Electronic smoking device means any electronically operated device which causes the user to inhale or exhale any smoke, nicotine, vapor, or other substance other than those produced by unenhanced human expiration of air from the lungs. The term "electronic smoking device" includes any such device, whether manufactured, distributed, marked, or sold as an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, electronic hookah, or any other similar device. The term "electronic smoking device" does not include any asthma inhaler or other medical device or product specifically approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for the use in the mitigation, treatment, or prevention of a medical condition and when such device or product is being used solely for such purpose. 
    Electronic smoking device liquid means a liquid whether packaged in a cartridge containing nicotine or in combination with flavor and chemicals sold or marketed for the refilling of an electronic smoking device. 
(Ord. No. 15-14, § 1, 6-1-2015) 
Sec. 46-97. - Sale of tobacco products. 
    It shall be unlawful to sell, furnish or give away to any minor under the age of 18 years any tobacco product in any form within the city limits, which includes, but is not limited to, electronic smoking device or electronic smoking device liquid. 
(Code 2008, § 9.54.010; Ord. No. 5-01, § 2(part), 2001; Ord. No. 15-14, § 1, 6-1-2015) 
Sec. 46-98. - Possession of tobacco products. 
    It is unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to possess any tobacco product in any form within the city limits, which includes, but is not limited to, electronic smoking device or electronic smoking device liquid. 
(Code 2008, § 9.54.010; Ord. No. 5-01, § 2(part), 2001; Ord. No. 15-14, § 1, 6-1-2015) 
Secs. 46-99-46-124. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CURFEW 

Sec. 46-125. - Violation of curfew by minors. 
(a)  It is unlawful for a person less than 17 years of age to be present at or upon any public assembly, building, place, street or highway at the following times: 
(1)  Between 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Saturday; 
(2)  Between 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Sunday; and 
(3)  Between 11:00 p.m. on Sunday to Thursday, inclusive, and 6:00 a.m. on the following day. 
The following shall not constitute a curfew violation: 
(1)  The minor was accompanied by a parent, legal guardian or other person in custody or control of the minor; 
(2)  The minor was on an errand at the direction of a parent or legal guardian, without any detour or stop; 
(3)  The minor was in a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel; 
(4)  The minor was going to or returning home from an employment activity without any detour or stop; 
(5)  The minor was involved in an emergency; 
(6)  The minor was going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by a government or governmental agency, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, without any detour or stop; or 
(7)  The minor is married or an emancipated minor under the Emancipation of Minors Act. 
(b)  It is unlawful for a parent, legal guardian, or other person to knowingly permit a person in his custody or control to violate subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 2008, § 9.60.010; Ord. No. 25-03, § 1(part), 2003) 
Chapter 50 - PARKS AND RECREATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 50-1-50-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LAKE EUREKA 

Sec. 50-19. - Hours. 
    The hours during which the lake and park area may be used by the general public shall be from sunrise until 11:00 p.m.; no person or persons shall be permitted to use the lake or park area other than during the aforementioned hours. 
(Code 2008, § 8.16.010; Ord. No. 10-83, § 2, 1983) 
Sec. 50-20. - Fishing-Method. 
    No fishing shall be allowed in Lake Eureka except with a pole and line; not to exceed two poles per person and/or two hooks per line; and it is unlawful to fish with the use of either dead or live minnows for bait. 
(Code 2008, § 8.16.020; Ord. No. 10-83, § 3, 1983; Ord. No. 14-12, § I, 11-17-2014) 
Sec. 50-21. - Fishing-Limit. 
    No person shall be allowed to catch or remove from Lake Eureka more than the number allowed on the posted signs at Lake Eureka. Harvesting of bass is prohibited. No bass may be removed from Lake Eureka. 
(Code 2008, § 8.16.030; Ord. No. 14-04, § I, 5-5-2014) 
Sec. 50-22. - Ice skating. 
    Ice skating is prohibited on Lake Eureka. 
(Code 2008, § 8.16.040; Ord. No. 9-96, 1996; Ord. No. 10-83, § 5, 1983) 
Sec. 50-23. - Snowmobiles; ice boats. 
    It is unlawful for anyone or any person to operate a snowmobile or ice boat on Lake Eureka property. 
(Code 2008, § 8.16.050; Ord. No. 10-83, § 6, 1983) 
Sec. 50-24. - Boats-Construction; permit required. 
    No person shall be allowed to place or use a boat of any type on the lake unless the following conditions have been met: 
(1)  Boat construction must be in a safe or watertight condition, as may be prescribed by the consumer products commission and other regulatory agencies governing consumer products. 
(2)  All state boating regulations as well as this Code shall apply. In the event a conflict may arise, the more restrictive regulations shall prevail. 
(Code 2008, § 8.16.060) 
Sec. 50-25. - Boats-Motor restrictions. 
    A special permit will be allowed to permit watercrafts to launch onto Lake Eureka with a gasoline motor attached to the transom. 
(1)  At no time will gasoline motors be allowed to be started or used for any reason on Lake Eureka. 
(2)  Electric motors will remain the only authorized motor for use on any type of watercraft. 
(3)  Gasoline motor powered watercraft. The administrative offices for the city will provide for sale, special permits for the purpose of allowing watercrafts that have a gasoline motor attached to be launched on Lake Eureka. These permits will be offered for sale to individuals that cannot or choose not to remove the gasoline motor from their watercraft. 
(4)  Non-gasoline powered watercraft. Watercraft without a gasoline motor attached will not be required to purchase a permit and may continue to launch on Eureka Lake at no cost. 
(5)  Permits will be issued through the administration office during regular office hours. 
(6)  Fee for the two-part annual permit for nonresidents will be $40.00 and once paid is non-refundable. The fee for the two-part annual permit for residents will be $20.00 and once paid is non-refundable. The fee for a day permit will be $10.00. 
(7)  Replacement permits may be issued at the discretion of the administrative office for a fee of $15.00 and must contain the same information as the original permit issued. 
(8)  This shall be a two-part permit created by the administrative office and will contain the following information: 
a.  Hull identification number issued from the IDNR; 
b.  Permit requesters name and address; 
c.  Valid permit dates; 
d.  Authorized city signature. 
(9)  Display. One permit is to be displayed in visual manner on the dash of the tow vehicle. The second permit must be kept on the permitted watercraft. 
(10)  Permits must be shown to any authorized city personnel or police officer upon request. 
(11)  A copy of all permits issued will be kept on file at the administrative offices. 
(12)  Eureka High School bass fishing team. The Eureka High School bass fishing team will be allowed to launch watercrafts with gasoline motors for the purpose of practicing and for the purpose of competition at no cost. A special permit will be issued to identify these watercrafts. 
(13)  Any watercraft gasoline engine permit issued by the city can be revoked at any time for any violation of the watercraft code. 
(14)  Exceptions. The following are exempt from this section: city officials or employees acting in an official capacity; Eureka/Goodfield Fire Protection District members for training or emergency purposes; state department of conservation employees acting in an official capacity; or other individuals granted permission by the city council for maintenance of Lake Eureka. Approval must be granted by the administrative offices of the city prior to the starting or use of the gasoline motor on Lake Eureka except in an emergency. 
(Code 2008, § 8.16.070; Ord. No. 10-03, 3-1-2010; Ord. No. 12-07, § I, 5-7-2012; Ord. No. 13-07, § I, 5-6-2013) 
Sec. 50-26. - Boats-Hours permitted. 
    Boating is permitted on the lake from sunrise to sunset only. 
(Code 2008, § 8.16.080; Ord. No. 10-83, § 9, 1983) 
Sec. 50-27. - Operation of watercraft near dam. 
    It is unlawful for any watercraft to be used or operated closer than feet 100 from the concrete spillway or closer than 50 feet of any device used for the maintenance of the lake. 
(Code 2008, § 8.16.090; Ord. No. 10-83, § 10, 1983) 
Sec. 50-28. - Watercraft prohibited overnight. 
    It is unlawful to allow any boat or other watercraft to remain overnight on the lake or on lake property. 
(Code 2008, § 8.16.100; Ord. No. 10-83, § 11, 1983) 
Sec. 50-29. - Boat launching area. 
    There will be one boat launching area with a paved ramp. It is unlawful to unload boats from trailers at any location other than the launching area. Canoes are an exception to this rule and may be launched anywhere on the lake. No trailers for hauling watercraft will be allowed to remain on lake property overnight. 
(Code 2008, § 8.16.110; Ord. No. 10-83, § 12, 1983) 
Sec. 50-30. - Swimming prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person to swim in any portion of the lake except for events approved by the city council. 
(Code 2008, § 8.16.120; Ord. No. 13-08, § I, 5-6-2013) 
Sec. 50-31. - Motor vehicle speed limit. 
    It is unlawful to operate or drive any motor vehicle or other type of vehicle in the park area at a speed greater than ten miles per hour. 
(Code 2008, § 8.16.130; Ord. No. 07-06, 6-4-2007) 
Sec. 50-32. - Feeding water fowl. 
    It is unlawful for any person to feed water fowl on Lake Eureka property at any time. 
(Code 2008, § 8.16.140; Ord. No. 10-83, § 15, 1983; Ord. No. 10-01, § I, 1-18-2010) 
Sec. 50-33. - Horses. 
    It is unlawful to have horses on Lake Eureka property except by permission of the city and then only during parades and other city functions. 
(Code 2008, § 8.16.150; Ord. No. 10-83, § 16, 1983) 
Sec. 50-34. - Motor vehicle location restriction. 
    No motorcycles, automobiles, trucks, or vehicles of any type are permitted on Lake Eureka property except on the paved or gravel roads. The only exception to this rule is during city council approved special occasions. 
(Code 2008, § 8.16.160; Ord. No. 10-83, § 17, 1983) 
Sec. 50-35. - Alcoholic beverages prohibited. 
    No alcoholic beverages shall be permitted at any time within Lake Eureka property with the exception for the festival organizing board of the Eureka Reagan Festival an annual event shall be allowed to have a beer tent. 
(Code 2008, § 8.16.170; Ord. No. 10-10, § I, 8-16-2010) 
Sec. 50-36. - Disorderly conduct prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person to conduct oneself as to cause a breach of the peace on Lake Eureka property. The causing or making of any unnecessary loud noise that is likely to disturb the public shall be considered disorderly conduct, as well. 
(Code 2008, § 8.16.180; Ord. No. 10-83, § 20, 1983) 
Sec. 50-37. - Garbage control. 
    No garbage, refuse, paper, or litter of any kind shall be left on the ground or thrown or left in the lake or so placed that it could be blown about or scattered by the wind anywhere on Lake Eureka property. 
(Code 2008, § 8.16.190; Ord. No. 10-83, § 21, 1983) 
Sec. 50-38. - Fires. 
    It is unlawful for any person to start a fire on Lake Eureka property unless such fire is contained in a receptacle designed for that purpose. 
(Code 2008, § 8.16.200; Ord. No. 10-83, § 22, 1983) 
Sec. 50-39. - Exceptions. 
    All emergency watercraft and watercraft being used for the maintenance of Lake Eureka are exempt from all provisions of this article, including, but not limited to, hours of operation and the use of gasoline engines. 
(Code 2008, § 8.16.210; Ord. No. 10-83, § 24, 1983) 
Sec. 50-40. - Park fee schedule. 
(a)  Main pavilion rental: $30.00 per day for residents, $50.00 per day for a nonresident. A $50.00 refundable deposit is required prior to picking up the key. The deposit will be returned if the pavilion is left clean and everything is returned to its original condition. 
(b)  Softball summer league fee: $125.00 per team per league, per season. As an example: an eight-team league, $1,000.00. 
(c)  Softball fall league fee: team league play beginning August will be $75.00 per team per league. Figured the same as in subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)  Softball tournaments: $50.00 per day for use of the ball diamonds and lights. 
(e)  Special events: $50.00 per day for special events will be charged if the city personnel are needed to empty trash and check restrooms during the event. If the city personnel did not have to clean and replenish the restrooms or empty trash the $50.00 fee will be returned. 
(f)  Diamond light rental: $15.00 per hour. 
(g)  Diamond rental: a fee of $10.00 per hour will be charged for reserving a diamond if without lights. 
(Code 2008, § 8.16.215) 
Chapter 54 - SOLID WASTE 

Sec. 54-1. - Refuse accumulations restricted; permit required. 
    No person, firm, association, or corporation shall discharge, deposit, place, or permit the discharging, depositing, or placing on any premises within the city limits any garbage, filth, offal, or refuse accumulation of animal, fruit, or vegetable matter, or any other nauseous matter substance of organic or inorganic nature, or waste from sewage disposal facilities, which by reason of its properties, quantity, or decomposition would become foul, odorous, subject to spontaneous combustion, or tend to breed rodents, flies, mosquitoes, or harmful bacteria, or otherwise become detrimental to public health or conducive to the spread of disease, or create, or tend to create a nuisance, except in accordance with a permit first having been obtained from the city. 
(Code 2008, § 8.32.010; Ord. No. 6-76, § 1, 1976; Ord. No. 16-07, § 1, 7-5-2016) 
Sec. 54-2. - When containers should be placed for scheduled pick up. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place waste in front of any premises, or the front line extended of said premises, even though in a proper container, sooner than 24 hours prior to or later than 24 hours after the scheduled pick-up time by a waste disposal firm. 
(Code 2008, § 8.32.011; Ord. No. 16-07, § 1, 7-5-2016) 
Sec. 54-3. - Permit; application; expiration. 
(a)  Applications for permits shall be in writing and in such form as shall be prescribed by the city. The permit, when issued, shall be signed by the city administrator. 
(b)  Permits shall be issued for the period of the time stated therein, and shall expire at the time stated. 
(Code 2008, § 8.32.020; Ord. No. 6-76, §§ 2, 3, 1976; Ord. No. 16-07, § 1, 7-5-2016) 
Sec. 54-4. - Transportation of refuse; vehicle requirements. 
    No person owning or controlling any vehicle used for the purpose of carrying, transporting, hauling or otherwise moving any substance named in section 54-1, or ashes, refuse or waste, shall cause, suffer, allow or permit any such vehicle to be so loaded, to be in such defective condition, so out of repair, of such faulty construction, or so improperly driven, managed, or controlled that any of the contents thereof shall drop or fall upon any public way or any other public place. Such vehicle shall be so constructed, covered, managed, and controlled as to prevent any part of the contents thereof from falling, leaking or spilling there from. 
(Code 2008, § 8.32.030; Ord. No. 6-76, § 4, 1976; Ord. No. 16-07, § 1, 7-5-2016) 
Sec. 54-5. - Violation; complaint procedure; action by city. 
    Whenever a violation of this chapter occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a written complaint with the city. Such complaint shall state fully the causes and basis thereof. The city administrator shall record the complaint, investigate and take such further action as is appropriate. 
(Code 2008, § 8.32.040; Ord. No. 6-76, § 6, 1976; Ord. No. 16-07, § 1, 7-5-2016) 
Chapter 58 - STORMWATER 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 58-1-58-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STORMWATER CONTROL 

Sec. 58-19. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, definitions for terms shall be the same as given in section 66-3. 
(Code 2008, § 20.010; Ord. No. 14-10, § I, 10-6-2014) 
Sec. 58-20. - Applicability. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall apply to: 
(1)  Any country estates residential subdivision involving four acres or more of property. 
(2)  Any single-family or duplex residential subdivision involving one acre or more of property. 
(3)  Any multifamily residential, commercial, institutional or industrial subdivision. 
(4)  Any development on single or multiple lots after the date of adoption of this article which results in the cumulative net addition of 12,000 square feet of impervious area to the site. 
(Code 2008, § 20.020; Ord. No. 14-10, § I, 10-6-2014) 
Sec. 58-21. - General considerations. 
(a)  An adequate stormwater drainage system shall be constructed by the developer or owner as part of the development. If the amount of stormwater detention storage can be increased to provide benefit to the city, negotiations for public participation in the cost of development may be initiated. 
(b)  All components of the stormwater drainage system, including conduits, channels, outlet structures, spillways, earthen structures and the like shall be built as permanent facilities and all materials and their manner of construction shall be assembled to accomplish as much permanency as is possible. 
(c)  For multifamily residential, commercial, institutional and industrial developments, ownership and maintenance responsibilities of the entire stormwater drainage system shall remain with the property owner or developer. For single-family residential development, the city will accept maintenance responsibility for the entire stormwater conveyance system, including the pipes, culverts, channels and structures, provided that appropriate easements are provided, including adequate public ingress and egress to the stormwater detention facilities from the public street. Maintenance of the vegetative cover in and around the stormwater detention facilities shall remain the responsibility of the property owner. 
(d)  Where in the opinion of the civil engineer, the development of a property presents the threat of flooding or damage by runoff to downstream properties; the facilities for stormwater runoff control shall be constructed as part of the first phase of construction. 
(e)  During the construction phase of development, all practical measures shall be employed to minimize and control soil erosion. A soil erosion and sediment control plan shall be developed and implemented. The developer shall obtain the required state stormwater discharge permit for construction site activity for any development involving the disturbance of one acre or more of land. 
(Code 2008, § 20.030; Ord. No. 14-10, § I, 10-6-2014) 
Sec. 58-22. - Runoff calculation methodology. 
(a)  All runoff calculations shall be according to the methodology described in the Natural Resources Conservation Service's Technical Release 55, "Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds" (commonly referred to as TR-55) or computer programs based on this methodology such as such as HEC-1, HEC-HMS, TR-20, PondPak, HydroCAD or XP-SWMM. Alternate methods of analysis may be considered if their technical validity and accuracy is demonstrated and approved by the civil engineer. 
(b)  Each X-year storm shall utilize the SCS Type II distribution over a 24-hour duration. 
(c)  Each X-year storm shall utilize precipitation amounts as published in NOAA Atlas 14 Volume 2 Version 3.0 as follows: 
1. Two-year 24-hour precipitation: 3.00 inches 2. Five-year 24-hour precipitation: 3.73 inches 3. Ten-year 24-hour precipitation: 4.32 inches 4. 25-year 24-hour precipitation: 5.14 inches 5. 50-year 24-hour precipitation: 5.81 inches 6. 100-year 24-hour precipitation: 6.52 inches  
(d)  For determining runoff from proposed development, impervious area coverage shall be: 
(1)  Equal to the impervious area shown on the site plan, if the site has a specific proposal for construction (i.e. a commercial site plan showing a building, parking lot, and associated sidewalk of specific size). 
(2)  Equal to the maximum lot coverage value specified in chapter 78, the zoning ordinance, for the applicable zoning district, if the site has no immediate specific proposal for construction (i.e., a residential subdivision where homes may be built of various sizes and configurations over an undefined period of time). If the zoning ordinance does not specify a maximum lot coverage value, calculations shall be based upon the assumption of 100 percent of the useable lot area having impervious surface. 
(e)  Calculations must account for upstream areas that are tributary to the proposed development. For determining runoff from existing development, impervious area coverage shall be equal to the maximum lot coverage value specified in the zoning ordinance for the applicable zoning district, or if the zoning ordinance does not specify a maximum lot coverage value, calculations shall be based upon the assumption of 100 percent of the useable lot area having impervious surface. 
(f)  The maximum runoff curve number (RCN) used in such calculations shall be: 
(1)  For agricultural land or the natural undeveloped state: 62 for HSG A, 71 for HSG B, 78 for HSG C, and 81 for HSG D. HSG is the abbreviation for Hydrologic Soil Group and is defined in TR-55. 
(2)  For lawn-type open space land uses: as specified in Table 2-2a of TR-55 for the appropriate HSG category. 
(3)  For non-lawn open space land uses: as specified in Table 2-2c of TR-55 for the appropriate HSG category. 
(4)  For impervious surfaces: as specified in Table 2-2a of TR-55 for the appropriate HSG category. 
(g)  The TR-55 flow segment method shall be used for determining time of concentration (Tc) for each watershed, with the following restrictions: 
(1)  Sheet flow lengths for vegetated areas shall not exceed 100 feet. 
(2)  Manning's n values for sheet flow on lawn-type open space land uses or the natural undeveloped state shall be 0.24. 
(3)  Manning's n values for sheet flow on agricultural land shall be 0.17. 
(4)  Manning's n values for sheet flow on impervious surfaces shall be 0.11. 
(5)  Manning's n values for sheet flow on non-lawn non-agricultural open space land uses shall be as specified in Table 3-1 of TR-55. 
(h)  Separate calculations for RCN and Tc shall be utilized for the directly connected impervious areas (DCIAs) of the watershed and for the aggregate of unconnected impervious and pervious areas of the watershed. 
(Code 2008, § 20.040; Ord. No. 14-10, § I, 10-6-2014) 
Sec. 58-23. - Performance standards for rate control. 
(a)  In the case where the development consists of new development on an undeveloped lot or tract, stormwater storage areas shall be provided to control the rate of stormwater release from the development so as to limit the post-development peak runoff rate for the 25-year storm to the two-year storm rate from the area in its natural undeveloped state. 
(b)  In the case where the development consists only of expansion, addition, redevelopment or an improvement to an existing building or structure, stormwater storage areas shall be provided to control the rate of stormwater release from the development so as to limit the post-development peak runoff rate for the 25-year storm to the two-year storm rate from the area in its state as of the date of adoption of this article. 
(c)  For any type of development, stormwater storage areas shall be provided to control the rate of stormwater release from the development so as to limit the post-development peak runoff rate for the 50-year storm to the 50-year storm rate from the area in its state as of the date of adoption of this article. 
(d)  For any type of development, stormwater storage areas shall be provided to control the rate of stormwater release from the development so as to limit the post-development peak runoff rate for the 100-year storm to the 100-year storm rate from the area in its state as of the date of adoption of this article. 
(e)  For any type of development within areas of the city that have limitations on runoff peak flow rates (either absolute rates or per-acre rates) due to downstream system limitations established by a city-approved master planning document, limit post-development peak runoff rates as specified by the planning document. 
(f)  Routing of a portion of the stormwater runoff within the development away from the detention facility may be allowed where it is absolutely necessary due to topography of the site. However, provisions must be made so the release of stormwater from these areas does not adversely impact adjacent property. Particular attention shall be given to the release of stormwater from any impervious surfaces, including roof drains, which are not directed to the detention facility. The release rate from the detention facility must be reduced accordingly so the total release rate from the development is no greater than the runoff rates specified in subsections (a) through (d) of this section. 
(Code 2008, § 20.050; Ord. No. 14-10, § I, 10-6-2014) 
Sec. 58-24. - Stormwater storage area design standards. 
(a)  Design and construction. Stormwater storage areas and appurtenant structures shall be designed and constructed to fully protect the public health, safety, and welfare. Stormwater velocities shall be kept to a minimum and turbulent conditions will not be permitted without safeguards implemented for the public safety. The use of fences shall be kept to a minimum and used only when no other method of protection is feasible. 
(b)  Primary outlet control structures. 
(1)  Primary outlet control structures are those structures (standpipes, culverts, and other non-open channel type restrictive devices) that are designed to pass the post-developed 50-year rainfall event without engaging the emergency spillway. 
(2)  Primary outlet control structures shall be designed as simply as possible and shall require no human intervention for proper operation. 
(c)  Emergency spillways. 
(1)  Emergency spillways are weirs, channels, or other open-air conveyances which allow stormwater to pass over a section of the stormwater storage area perimeter in a controlled manner. 
(2)  Emergency spillways shall be designed to pass the post-developed 100-year storm runoff such that a minimum one foot of freeboard is maintained from the next-lowest overflow point on the stormwater storage area. 
(3)  Emergency spillways shall be designed with erosion protection adequate for the 100-year storm event. 
(d)  Dry bottom stormwater storage areas. 
(1)  Dry bottom stormwater storage areas shall have a concrete paved channel or pipe capable of conveying low flow through the basin and where necessary a system of under drains to prevent soggy areas. 
(2)  The embankments around a dry bottom stormwater storage areas located in residential developments shall have a slope of no greater than 4 to 1, horizontal to vertical, to allow for safe and easy mowing. Slopes up to 3 to 1 may be allowed for commercial, institutional, or industrial developments. 
(3)  For large developments, such as subdivisions, consideration should be given to designing dry bottom stormwater storage areas to serve a secondary purpose such as providing open space, recreation facilities, or other types of uses that will not be adversely affected by intermittent flooding. 
(4)  For small developments, consideration should be given to use of well-defined detention swales in lieu of dry bottom stormwater storage areas. 
(5)  For commercial and industrial developments, consideration should be given to detaining stormwater in parking lots to depths of no more than 0.5 feet and/or in underground oversized culverts. 
(6)  No enclosed or habitable structures shall be constructed within dry bottom stormwater storage areas. However, playgrounds and open spaces, and utility easements shall be considered compatible primary uses of these areas. Additional volume must be provided to compensate for the volume occupied by the placement of any structures, trees, etc. within the storage area. 
(e)  Wet bottom stormwater storage areas. 
(1)  Wet bottom stormwater storage areas shall have a minimum normal water depth of four feet. If fish are to be maintained, some portion of the pond area should be a minimum of nine feet deep. 
(2)  The surface area at minimum normal water depth shall not exceed one-fifteenth of the tributary drainage area. 
(3)  Only that portion of the wet bottom stormwater storage areas above the normal water level shall be used in calculating the storage volume. 
(4)  Shoreline protection shall be provided to prevent erosion from wave action. 
(5)  The embankments around the wet bottom stormwater storage areas shall have a slope of no greater than 4 to 1 horizontal to vertical to allow for safe and easy mowing. 
(Code 2008, § 20.060; Ord. No. 14-10, § I, 10-6-2014) 
Sec. 58-25. - Stormwater conveyance design standards. 
(a)  Storm sewers and open channels (not including street gutters) shall be adequate to carry runoff generated by the development and all other upstream areas that are tributary to the development for a 25-year storm, without exceeding the pipe or channel's storm drainage capacity. 
(b)  Street gutters and streets shall be adequate to carry runoff generated by the development and all other upstream areas that are tributary to the development for a 100-year storm without exceeding the elevation of the top of the curb. 
(c)  Existing natural waterways in subdivisions shall be preserved or improved as part of the channel system. 
(d)  A flood route consisting of natural and/or manmade surface channels shall be provided with adequate capacity to convey through and from the development the stormwater runoff from all tributary upstream areas with due consideration to the planned degree of upstream development. This channel system shall be designed to carry the peak rate of runoff from a 100-year storm. An allowance may be made for upstream detention when evidence of such detention can be shown. 
(1)  No structures, including fences, landscaping, or trees, shall be constructed within the flood route. 
(2)  Appropriate surface drainage easements shall be provided for any flood route channels that traverse private property. 
(3)  The flood route shall be designed to prevent damage to immediately adjacent downstream properties and facilities during a 100-year storm. 
(Code 2008, § 20.070; Ord. No. 14-10, § I, 10-6-2014) 
Sec. 58-26. - Stormwater plan submittal requirements. 
    A stormwater plan shall include the following components: 
(1)  A site plan on a scale no smaller than one inch equals 100 feet showing the site and immediately adjacent areas, exhibiting the following information: 
a.  Existing conditions as listed in section 66-37. 
b.  Locations and dimensions of all proposed land disturbing activities and development, including, but not limited to, grading, buildings, driveways, sidewalks, parking areas, etc. 
c.  Proposed topographical data. For all land that slopes less than two percent show contours with an interval of one foot. For all land that slopes more than two percent show contours with an interval of two feet. All elevations shall be based on state plane coordinates. 
d.  For subdivision plans, a construction pad for each lot with spot elevations. The construction pad shall be the limits of construction for any improvements on the lot. 
e.  For subdivision plans, finished grade on each lot allowing for a minimum slope of ten percent for a minimum of ten feet from any building foundation and a minimum of two percent from any building beyond the ten-foot limit. 
f.  Any and all storm sewers, swales, ditches or other features that may be used to convey stormwater. Spot elevations, grades and typical cross sections shall be shown for all swales, ditches and defined overland drainageways. Invert elevations, pipe sizes and material, pipe lengths, and rim elevations shall be shown for storm sewers. 
g.  Anti-erosion measures for temporary soil and aggregate stockpiles. 
h.  Location, dimension, and construction details of all construction site management control measures necessary to meet the requirements of this article, including proposed re-vegetation of disturbed areas. 
i.  Statement regarding provisions for maintenance and maintenance requirements of the construction site management control measures during construction. 
(2)  Design calculations and information related to the permanent stormwater management and conveyance system, including: 
a.  A map showing the drainage area divides, including off site drainage areas that drain onto the site. 
b.  Location and identification of soil types and land cover for the entire watershed. 
c.  RCN calculations for both pre-project and post-project conditions for all subwatersheds. 
d.  Time of concentration calculations for both pre-project and post-project conditions for all subwatersheds, including a map showing hydraulic flow lengths used. 
e.  Peak flow rate calculations for the two-year, 25-year, 50-year, and 100-year storms for both pre-project and post-project conditions. 
f.  Hydraulic design calculations for components of the conveyance system, including storm sewers, open channels, streets, gutters, and flood route. 
g.  Design calculations for stormwater storage basins and outlets, including stage storage table and outlet hydraulic calculations. 
h.  A summary of peak flow rates for pre-project, post-project (without storage), and post-project (with storage) conditions, demonstrating that the requirements of this article are met. 
(3)  A schedule or sequence of development or installation of the elements of the site plan. 
(4)  A written plan for the continued management and maintenance of permanent stormwater control measures. 
(Code 2008, § 20.080; Ord. No. 14-10, § I, 10-6-2014) 
Secs. 58-27-58-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STORMWATER UTILITY 

Sec. 58-56. - Establishment of a stormwater utility. 
    The city hereby establishes a stormwater utility to provide for the management, protection, control, regulation, use, and enhancement of the stormwater systems, and facilities owned or operated by the city. 
(Code 2008, § 13.16.010; Ord. No. 15-08, § 13.16.010, 4-20-2015) 
Sec. 58-57. - Stormwater utility management. 
    The management and supervision of the stormwater utility shall be under the direction of the director of public works (DPW). 
(Code 2008, § 13.16.020; Ord. No. 15-08, § 13.16.020, 4-20-2015) 
Sec. 58-58. - Establishment of a stormwater fund. 
    The city hereby establishes a stormwater fund. All revenues of the stormwater utility shall be deposited into the stormwater fund and used for purposes of the stormwater utility as deemed appropriate by the city council. 
(Code 2008, § 13.16.030; Ord. No. 15-08, § 13.16.030, 4-20-2015) 
Sec. 58-59. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Credit means a conditional reduction in the amount of a stormwater service charge to an individual property based upon the provisions of the city stormwater credit manual as now in effect or as may be amended from time to time. 
    Customers means and includes all persons, properties and entities serviced by and/or benefiting from the utility's acquisition, management, maintenance, extension and improvement of the public stormwater management systems and facilities and regulation of public and private stormwater systems, facilities and activities related thereto, and persons, properties and entities which will ultimately be served or benefited as a result of the stormwater management program. See also User and Occupant. 
    Developed land means property altered from its natural state by the construction or installation of more than zero square feet of impervious surface as defined in this article. 
    Duplex means developed land containing two dwelling structures, each of which contains one or more bedrooms, with a bathroom and kitchen facilities, designed for occupancy by one family per dwelling structure. Billing for stormwater user fees is based on land usage, not zoning. Some residentially zoned properties house small businesses, resulting in a classification of nonresidential property. 
    Equivalent residential unit (ERU) of impervious area means the median average impervious coverage of residential parcels in the city as determined by the city, and shall be used as the basis for determining stormwater service charges to residential parcels and other properties. 3,250 square feet of impervious area is one equivalent unit. 
    Hydrologic response of a property means the manner and means whereby stormwater collects, remains and infiltrates and is conveyed from a property. It is dependent on several factors, including, but not limited to, the presence of impervious area, the size, shape, topographic, vegetative and geologic conditions of a property, antecedent moisture conditions and groundwater conditions on a property. 
    Impervious surfaces means those areas which prevent or impede the infiltration of stormwater into the soil as it enters natural conditions prior to development. Common impervious areas include, but are not limited to, rooftops, sidewalks, walkways, patio areas, driveways, parking lots, storage areas, compacted gravel and soil surfaces, awnings and other fabric or plastic coverings, and other surfaces which prevent or impede the natural infiltration of stormwater runoff which existed prior to development. 
    Multifamily residential means developed land containing three or more dwelling structures, each of which contains one or more bedrooms, with a bathroom and kitchen facilities, designed for occupancy by one family per dwelling structure. Billing for stormwater user fees is based on land usage, not zoning. Some residentially zoned properties house small businesses, resulting in a classification of nonresidential property. 
    Nonresidential means, but is not limited to, developed land containing commercial or office buildings, public buildings or structures, industrial or manufacturing buildings, storage buildings and storage areas covered with impervious surfaces, parking lots, parks, recreation properties, public and private schools, research stations, hospitals or convalescent centers or agricultural uses covered by impervious surfaces. 
    Occupant means the person residing or doing business on the property. In a family or household situation, the person responsible for the obligation imposed shall be the adult head of the household. In a shared dwelling or office situation, the adult legally responsible for the management or condition of the property shall be responsible. 
    Owner means the legal owner of record as shown on the tax rolls of the county except where there is a recorded land sale contract, the purchaser there under shall be deemed the owner. 
    Service charge means the periodic rate, fee or charge applicable to a parcel of developed land, which charge shall be reflective of the service provided by the city stormwater utility. Service charges are based on measurable parameters which influence the stormwater utility's cost of providing services and facilities, with the most important factor being the amount of impervious area on each parcel of developed land. 
    Single-family residential (SFR) means developed land containing one dwelling structure which is not attached to another dwelling and which contains one or more bedrooms, with a bathroom and kitchen facilities, designed for occupancy by one family. SFR units may include houses, manufactured homes, and mobile homes located on one or more individual lots or parcels of land. Billing for stormwater user fees is based on land usage, not zoning. Some residentially zoned properties house small businesses, resulting in a classification of nonresidential property. 
    Stormwater system means a conveyance or system of conveyances and shall include sewers, storm drains, curbs, gutters, ditches, retention ponds or basins, dams, stream impoundments, manmade channels or storm drains, and flood control facilities and appurtenances thereof which are designed or used for the collection, control, transportation, treatment, or discharge of stormwater. 
    Undeveloped means property that has not been altered from its natural state by the construction or installation of impervious surface as defined in this article. 
    User means any person who uses property which maintains connection to, discharges to, or otherwise receives services from the city for stormwater management. The occupant of any habitable property is deemed the user. If the property is not occupied, then the owner shall be deemed the user. 
(Code 2008, § 13.16.040; Ord. No. 15-08, § 13.16.040, 4-20-2015) 
Sec. 58-60. - Scope of responsibility for the stormwater utility. 
    The stormwater utility shall be responsible for the operation, maintenance, management, and improvement of the stormwater system owned by the city. 
(Code 2008, § 13.16.050; Ord. No. 15-08, § 13.16.050, 4-20-2015) 
Sec. 58-61. - Determination of stormwater service charges. 
(a)  Stormwater service charges are hereby imposed at the rate of $6.00 per month per ERU; the same being the amount necessary, together with any other sources of revenue that may be made available to the stormwater utility, to meet the obligations of the stormwater utility. 
(b)  On each May 1, the billing clerk shall adjust the minimum monthly charge per ERU by adding to the monthly charge in effect on the date of adjustment a sum equal to the prior 12 months' average increase, if any, in the Consumer Price Index (C.P.I.) for the Midwest urban areas. The current rate based on the C.P.I is available in the city clerk's office. 
(Code 2008, § 13.16.060; Ord. No. 15-08, § 13.16.060, 4-20-2015) 
Sec. 58-62. - Stormwater service charges. 
(a)  Stormwater service charges shall be billed periodically to customers, except as specific exemptions and credits may apply. 
(b)  The following ERU standards shall apply: 
(1)  Single-family residential property. Single-family residential properties will be charged one ERU each. 
(2)  Duplex residential property. Duplex residential properties will be charged two ERUs each. 
(3)  Multifamily residential property. Multifamily residential properties will be charged one ERU for each 3,250 square feet of impervious surface or increment thereof with a minimum charge of one ERU. The number of ERUs shall be rounded to the nearest tenth. 
(4)  Nonresidential property. Developed nonresidential properties will be charged one ERU for each 3,250 square feet of impervious surface or increment thereof with a minimum charge of one ERU. The number of ERUs shall be rounded to the nearest tenth. 
(5)  Undeveloped property. Undeveloped property will not be charged during the time period where the property is undeveloped. 
(Code 2008, § 13.16.070; Ord. No. 15-08, § 13.16.070, 4-20-2015) 
Sec. 58-63. - Exemptions applicable to stormwater service charges. 
    Streets, alleyways, and highways in the public domain shall be exempt from stormwater service charges. Except as provided in this section, no public or private property shall be exempt from stormwater utility service charges. 
(Code 2008, § 13.16.080; Ord. No. 15-08, § 13.16.080, 4-20-2015) 
Sec. 58-64. - Credits applicable to stormwater service charges. 
    Parcels shall be eligible to receive a stormwater service charge credit of up to 50 percent, based upon the requirements of the city stormwater credit manual. The following credits may be obtained toward a reduction of the stormwater fee chargeable to a given parcel that is attributable to the operation and maintenance expenses of the utility: 
(1)  Discharge rate reduction. Owners of nonresidential developed parcels having impervious area with greater than two ERUs assigned to such parcels may receive a credit, arising from the portion of the stormwater fee related to impervious areas if on-site stormwater facilities as required by ordinance, permit, statute or regulation are installed that reduce stormwater discharge rates. In all cases, reduction shall be calculated in accordance with the then-current calculation methodologies as set forth in the city stormwater credit manual. 
(2)  Direct discharge. Any parcel which directly discharges to waters of the state, without first passing through an element of publicly owned stormwater collection and conveyance system operated or maintained by the city or without crossing any public rights-of-way, may apply for a credit towards the variable part of the stormwater utility bill. The amount of this credit shall be in direct proportion to the faction of the impervious area to the parcel that drains directly to the waters of the state. In all cases, reduction shall be calculated in accordance with the then-current calculation methodologies as set forth in the city stormwater credit manual. 
(Code 2008, § 13.16.090; Ord. No. 15-08, § 13.16.090, 4-20-2015) 
Sec. 58-65. - Maintaining credits. 
    Any credit allowed against the stormwater service charge is conditioned upon continuing compliance with the city stormwater credit manual. 
(Code 2008, § 13.16.100; Ord. No. 15-08, § 13.16.100, 4-20-2015) 
Sec. 58-66. - Appeals. 
    Any customer who believes the provisions of this article have been applied in error may appeal in the following manner: 
(1)  Appeal to the director of public works. An appeal must be filed in writing with the DPW. In the case of service charge appeals, the appeal shall include a survey prepared by a registered land surveyor or professional engineer containing information on the total property area, the impervious surface area, and any stormwater management features, such as detention ponds, or conditions which influence the hydrologic response of the property to rainfall events. 
(2)  Responsibilities of the director of public works. Using the information provided by the appellant, the DPW shall conduct a technical review of the conditions on the property and respond to the appeal in writing within 60 days. If the review reveals the customer has been overcharged for the stormwater utility fee, the public works department will notify the city billing department of the amount of the refund due to the customer paying the stormwater utility fee. Any refund due as a result of overcharging of the stormwater utility fee will be credited to the customer's future utility bills. The maximum time frame for credit reimbursement shall be no more than six months. If the review indicates the customer has been receiving a stormwater utility bill that is less than the amount he should have been charged, the public works department shall notify the city billing department of the increase necessary to bring the stormwater utility fee to the proper amount. The city will not make any attempt to recoup the stormwater utility fees previously uncollected. 
(3)  Appeal of the director of public works decision. A decision of the DPW that is adverse to an appellant may be appealed to the city council within 30 days of receipt of notice of the adverse decision. The appeal must be filed in writing with the city council by the appellant and include a detailed explanation of the grounds for the appeal. The city council shall issue a written decision on the appeal within 60 days. 
(4)  Appeal of the city council decision. Any appeal of the decision of the city council must be made pursuant to the Illinois Administrative Review Act. 
(Code 2008, § 13.16.110; Ord. No. 15-08, § 13.16.110, 4-20-2015) 
Sec. 58-67. - Unpaid bills to become a lien; notice. 
(a)  Whenever a bill for stormwater service remains unpaid for 60 days after it has been rendered, the city shall file with the county recorder of deeds a statement of lien claim. This statement shall contain the legal description of the premises served, the amount of the unpaid bill, and a notice that the city claims a lien for this amount as well as for all charges subsequent to the period covered by the bill. 
(b)  If the user whose bill is unpaid is not the owner of the premises and the city has notice of this; notices shall be mailed to the owner of the premises if his address is known to the city, whenever such bill remains unpaid for the period of 45 days after it has been rendered. 
(c)  The failure of the city to record such lien or to mail such notice or the failure of the owner to receive such notice shall not affect the right to foreclose the lien for unpaid bills as mentioned in the foregoing section. 
(Code 2008, § 13.16.120; Ord. No. 15-08, § 13.16.120, 4-20-2015) 
Sec. 58-68. - Foreclosure of lien. 
(a)  If payment shall not be made as provided in this article, any amount due for sewer service, benefits, or other charges provided for in this chapter when the same becomes due, the city may file or cause to be filed a complaint in the circuit court of the county for a foreclosure of such lien, or, upon becoming a defendant in any pending suit affecting the premises or real estate, an answer to the complaint in the nature of an intervening petition or a cross-complaint, and the city may proceed in its corporate name to foreclose such lien in like manner and with like effect as provided by statutes of the state in foreclosure of mortgages on real estate. Any decree rendered in the court may be enforced and collected as other decrees or judgments in the same court. 
(b)  The city attorney is hereby authorized and directed to institute such proceedings in the name of the city, in the circuit court of the county or in any court having jurisdiction over such matters, against any property for which a bill for stormwater sewer use charges has remained unpaid 60 days after it has been rendered. 
(c)  The remedy provided in this section for the collection of delinquent stormwater sewer use, charges or benefits shall not be construed to abridge or in any manner interfere with the right and power of the city to enforce a collection thereof by any other action or as otherwise provided in this article, but the remedy herein provided shall be taken and held as an additional means to enforce payment of such delinquent water rates, charges or benefits. 
(d)  Expenses incurred by the city for the purpose of collecting delinquent service charges, delinquent facilities assessments or other delinquent fees payable pursuant to this article shall be assessed as a supplemental service charge. All owners, occupants and users of the premises provided with service with respect to which such a delinquency exists shall be jointly and severally liable for the payment of expenses of collection. Expenses of collection to be assessed as a supplemental service charge under authority of this subsection include, without limitation, attorney's fees incurred by the city for the purpose of collecting any delinquent amounts. 
(Code 2008, § 13.16.130; Ord. No. 15-08, § 13.16.130, 4-20-2015) 
Sec. 58-69. - Liability of owner, occupant, user. 
    The owner of the premises, the occupant thereof and the user of the stormwater sewer services of the city shall be jointly and severally liable for the payment of the stormwater sewer service on such premises, and the stormwater sewer service is furnished to the premises by the city only upon the condition that the owner of the premises, the occupant thereof and the user of the stormwater sewer services are jointly and severally liable therefor to the city. 
(Code 2008, § 13.16.131; Ord. No. 15-08, § 13.16.131, 4-20-2015) 
Chapter 62 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 62-1. - Shades and awnings. 
    No person, firm or corporation shall construct, maintain or use over or across any public sidewalk in the city any shade or awning any part of which is less than 61/2 feet above the top surface of the sidewalk immediately thereunder. 
(Code 2008, § 12.24.010; Ord. No. 4, div. 6, § 24, 1912) 
Sec. 62-2. - Removal of automobiles during snowstorms. 
    All automobiles shall be removed from city streets immediately after a snowfall of two or more inches or any time such a snowfall is predicted. 
(Code 2008, § 12.32.020; Ord. No. 2-76, § 3, 1976) 
Secs. 62-3-62-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION OF SIDEWALKS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal sidewalk construction and repair, 65 ILCS 5/11-84-1 et seq. 

Sec. 62-23. - Specifications; responsibilities. 
    Sidewalks shall be a minimum of four inches thick, six inches across driveways, of poured Portland cement concrete, four feet wide in residential areas and ten feet wide in commercial areas, and shall be located between one and two feet from the property line. 
(Code 2008, § 12.04.020; Ord. No. 11, § 2, 1912) 
Sec. 62-24. - Costs-Billing as special tax. 
(a)  Any ordinance providing for the construction of a sidewalk pursuant to section 62-23 shall provide that a bill of cost of such sidewalk, or sidewalks, showing the cost of the construction and supervision thereof, shall be made by the officer or committee designated by such ordinance to take charge of the same, together with a list of lots or parcels of land touching upon the line of such sidewalks, the names of the parties who paid the last general taxes on the respective lots or parcels of land, and the frontage. 
(b)  Thereupon if the owner of any lot, block, tract or parcel of land has failed, neglected or refused to construct said sidewalk or sidewalks in accordance with the provisions of said ordinance, said officer or board shall proceed to prepare a special tax list against said lots, tracts or parcels of land in front of or touching upon which said sidewalk or sidewalks have not been constructed, ascertaining by computation the amount of special taxes to be charged against each of said lots, tracts or parcels of land on account of the construction of said sidewalk or sidewalks, according to the rule fixed for the levy of such special tax by said ordinance, which special tax list shall be filed in the office of said officer or board. Said officer or board shall thereupon issue warrants directed to the city clerk in his capacity of city collector, or to such officer as may be designated in such ordinance for the collection of the amount of special tax so ascertained and appearing from said special tax list to be due from the respective lots, tracts or parcels of land touching upon the line of such sidewalk or sidewalks. Such officer shall proceed to collect such warrants by giving notice in writing by mailing same to the address of the party who paid the last general taxes on the respective lots, tracts or parcels of land in said list that said tax list is in the hands of said officer for collection. All moneys so collected by said officer shall be by him paid over immediately to the city treasurer. 
(Code 2008, § 12.04.030; Ord. No. 11, § 3(part), 1912) 
Sec. 62-25. - Costs-Delinquent payment. 
    Upon failure to collect such special tax, it shall be the duty of said officer, on or before August 1 in each year, to make report of all such special tax, in writing, to the county collector of the county of all the lots or parcels of land upon which such special tax is so unpaid, with the names of the respective owners thereof, so far as the same are known to said officer, and the amount due and unpaid upon each lot and tract, together with a copy of the ordinance ordering the construction of said sidewalk, which report shall be accompanied by the oath of the officer that the list is a correct return of the lots and parcels of land on which the special tax levied by authority of said city for the cost of the sidewalk or sidewalks in said ordinance specified remains due and unpaid, and that the amounts therein stated as due and unpaid have not been collected, nor any part thereof. 
(Code 2008, § 12.04.040; Ord. No. 11, § 3(part), 1912) 
Sec. 62-26. - Contracts; bidding. 
    All contracts for the construction or repair of sidewalks when the expense thereof exceeds $1,500.00 shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder in the following manner: Notice shall be given by the officer or committee designated in the ordinance to take charge of the construction or repair and supervision of the sidewalk by advertisement in some newspaper of general circulation in said city, or if no newspaper is published in said city, by four notices posted in the vicinity of the proposed sidewalk, or sidewalks, that bids will be received for the construction or repair of such sidewalk in accordance with the ordinance therefor. Such notice shall state the time of opening said bids, not more than ten nor less than five days thereafter. All proposals or bids offered shall be accompanied by cash or a check payable to the order of the officer or board having charge of the improvement, and certified by a responsible bank, for an amount which shall not be less than ten percent of the aggregate of the proposal. All contracts shall be approved by the mayor or the committee on streets and alleys. 
(Code 2008, § 12.04.050; Ord. No. 11, § 4, 1912) 
Sec. 62-27. - Application of provisions. 
    Nothing contained in this article shall prevent the mayor and city council of said city from constructing by special ordinance any sidewalk in any manner sanctioned and allowed by the laws of the state at the time of the passage of such special ordinance. 
(Code 2008, § 12.04.070; Ord. No. 11, § 7, 1912) 
Secs. 62-28-62-57. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RAILROAD CROSSINGS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Street Railroad Right of Way Act, 610 ILCS 115/0.01 et seq.; safety requirements for track, facilities and equipment, 625 ILCS 5/18c-7401. 

Sec. 62-58. - Tracks to conform to street grades. 
    It shall be the duty of each and every railroad company operating any railroad within the limits of said city to raise or lower their tracks to conform to any grade which may at any time be established by said city. When said tracks run lengthwise of any such street, alley or highway, said railroad companies are required to grade up on each side of said track or tracks so that teams and persons can pass lengthwise of said street said railroad at any place on such street, alley or highway. 
(Code 2008, § 12.08.010; Ord. No. 4, div. 6, § 15, 1912) 
Sec. 62-59. - Maintenance of drainage facilities. 
    It shall be the duty of each and every railroad company operating any railroad within the limits of said city to make and keep open and to keep in repair ditches, drains, sewers and culverts along and under their railroad tracks so that pools of water cannot stand on their grounds or impede the right-of-way. 
(Code 2008, § 12.08.020; Ord. No. 4, div. 6, § 16, 1912) 
Sec. 62-60. - Street crossing maintenance. 
    It shall be the duty of each and every railroad company operating any railroad within said city to construct and maintain and keep in repair all street crossings at the railroad crossings in said city and the approaches to said crossings within their respective rights-of-way so that the said crossings shall at all times be safe and convenient to the lives of persons and to property. 
(Code 2008, § 12.08.030; Ord. No. 4, div. 6, § 17, 1912) 
Secs. 62-61-62-78. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EXCAVATIONS 

Sec. 62-79. - Unauthorized obstructions. 
    No person shall dig any hole, drain or ditch in any street, avenue or alley, or pile or cause to be piled, lumber, wood, coal, stone, rock, hay, straw or other substance in any street, avenue or alley. 
(Code 2008, § 12.12.010; Ord. No. 4, div. 6, § 2, 1912) 
Sec. 62-80. - Damaging. 
    No person shall injure or tear up any sidewalk, pavement, crosswalk, drain or sewer, or any part thereof, or any part of the city's infrastructure, or hinder or obstruct the making or repairing by the city or its agents of any sidewalk, pavement, crosswalk, drain or sewer, or any part of the city's infrastructure, or hinder or obstruct any person employed by the city or any of its officers in making or repairing any public improvement or work ordered to be done by the city or any of its officers in the performance of their duty. 
(Code 2008, § 12.12.020; Ord. No. 4, div. 6, § 3, 1912) 
Sec. 62-81. - Tile drains. 
    Any person may connect tile drains with any of the public tile drains belonging to the city at his own expense and under the supervision of the director of public works or engineer approved by city. 
(Code 2008, § 12.12.030; Ord. No. 4, div. 6, § 22, 1912) 
Sec. 62-82. - Consent of maintenance committee, abutting property owners required. 
    It is unlawful for any person to dig any hole, drain, or ditch, or remove any sod, sand, earth, or gravel from any street, alley, park, or public ground within or belonging to this city, unless by the written consent of the maintenance committee and also the written consent of the abutting property owner. 
(Code 2008, § 12.12.040; Ord. No. 114, § 1, 1926) 
Secs. 62-83-62-107. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OBSTRUCTIONS AND ENCROACHMENTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 62-108-62-127. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - OBSTRUCTIONS 

Sec. 62-128. - Unauthorized deposits; fine. 
    No person shall place, throw, leave, or cause to be placed, thrown or left, any obstruction or encumbrance not authorized by law or ordinance upon any sidewalk, or in any street, avenue or alley. Tables, chairs, benches and umbrellas or other forms of permanent seating shall be permitted upon sidewalks and within municipal rights-of-way within any B-1 Central Business District or any B-2 General Retail Business District upon compliance with the following list of requirements and upon the approval of an application for building permit by the zoning administrator. Such temporary fixtures shall be permitted between May 1 and November 1 upon approval by the city zoning administrator of the following requirements: 
(1)  Applicant shall file an application for building permit with the city clerk and receive approval by the city zoning administrator prior to such use; 
(2)  Applicant shall provide upon approval of said permit, and annually thereafter, a certificate of insurance listing the city as additional insured on the applicant's liability insurance policy in the minimum amount of $1,000,000.00; 
(3)  No permitted devise or fixture shall extend farther than four feet from an existing building, except umbrellas that comply with subsection (4) of this section; 
(4)  Umbrellas, if the subject of this permit, shall maintain a minimum height above ground surface of six feet eight inches; 
(5)  Owner shall maintain all fixtures or devices in good condition any shall be responsible at all times for any fixture or related device placed on said sidewalk right-of-way; 
(6)  The minimum width remaining for pedestrian walkway after the installation of such devices or fixtures shall be five feet; 
(7)  The violation of any of the above provisions shall be reason for revocation of said permit by the zoning administrator. 
(Code 2008, § 12.16.010; Ord. No. 23-03, § 1, 2003; Ord. No. 4, div. 6, § 1, 1912) 
Sec. 62-129. - Watercourses, ditches, sewers-Obstruction; fine. 
    No person or corporation shall obstruct or cause to be obstructed any watercourse, main drain, public ditch or sewer at any place where the same crosses the lands owned or occupied by said person or corporation, or at any other place, so that said obstruction hinders or obstructs the free passage of the water in said watercourse, main drain, public ditch or sewer. 
(Code 2008, § 12.16.020) 
Sec. 62-130. - Watercourses, ditches, sewers-Construction maintenance; fine. 
    No person or corporation shall suffer or permit any private bridge, culvert or other construction over or upon any watercourse, main drain, public ditch or sewer flows through lands owned or occupied by such person or corporation to fall down or to become out of repair, so as to obstruct or hinder the free passage of the water of the watercourse, main drain, public ditch, or sewer. 
(Code 2008, § 12.16.030; Ord. No. 4, div. 6, § 14, 1912) 
Sec. 62-131. - Littering; fine. 
    No person shall throw, discard, or deposit garbage, rubbish, yard waste, or any other solid waste or hazardous material in any manner or amount in or upon any public property or private property, highway, street, alley, right-of-way, body of water or park in the city, except in public receptacles. 
(Code 2008, § 12.16.040; Ord. No. 13-14, § I, 8-5-2013) 
Secs. 62-132-62-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ENCROACHMENTS 

Sec. 62-161. - Definitions. 
    The City of Eureka, hereinafter known as the city, and the State of Illinois, acting by and through its department of transportation, have entered into an agreement relative to the improvement of Center Street (U.S. Route 24, RA Route 49, State Section 35RS-2, (35 Ext. W-2, 39)RS-1) within the city limits from Illinois Route 117 westward; and in order to facilitate the improvement, it is necessary for the city to adopt an ordinance regulating encroachment on the right-of-way for the improvement in accordance with the following definitions: 
    Construction easement area means the area lying between the project right-of-way limits and the platted street limits within which the city, by concurrence in the establishment of the project right-of-way lines, will permit the state to enter to perform all necessary operations. 
    Encroachment means any building, fence, sign or any other structure or object of any kind (with the exception of utilities and public road signs), which is placed, located or maintained, in, on, under or over any portion of the project right-of-way or the roadway right-of-way where no project right-of-way line has been established. 
    Permissible encroachment means any existing awning, marquee or sign advertising activity on the property, or similar overhanging structure supported from a building immediately adjacent to the limits of the platted street where there is a sidewalk extending to the building line and which does not impair the free and safe flow of pedestrian traffic or traffic on the highway. The permissive retention of overhanging signs is not to be construed as being applicable to those signs supported from poles constructed outside the project right-of-way line and not confined by adjacent buildings. 
    Project right-of-way means those areas within the project right-of-way lines established jointly by the city and state which will be free of encroachments except as defined in this section. 
    Roadway right-of-way means those areas existing or acquired by dedication or by fee simple for highway purposes; also, the areas acquired by temporary easement during the time the easement is in effect. 
(Code 2008, § 12.18.010; Ord. No. 7-83(part), 1983) 
Sec. 62-162. - Erection or maintenance of encroachments unlawful. 
    It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect or cause to be erected, to retain or cause to be retained, any encroachment, as defined in section 62-161, within the limits of the project right-of-way or roadway right-of-way where no project right-of-way lines have been established. 
(Code 2008, § 12.18.020; Ord. No. 7-83, § 1, 1983) 
Secs. 62-163-62-192. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - IMPROVEMENTS AND VACATION PROCEDURE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal administration of streets, 605 ILCS 5/7-101 et seq. 

Sec. 62-193. - City council authority. 
    The city council may, by ordinance, layout, open, extend, alter, widen or vacate any street, alley or avenue in the city. The ordinance shall prescribe whether the expense of the improvement shall be made by special assessment, or by special taxation of contiguous property or by general taxation, or by both. 
(Code 2008, § 12.20.010; Ord. No. 12, § 1, 1912) 
Sec. 62-194. - Work encroaching upon private property-Compensation. 
    Should the ordinance designated in section 62-193 provide for an improvement which requires the taking or damaging of private property for public use, the city shall file a petition in some court of record of the county, in the name of the city, requesting that the just compensation to be made for the private property to be taken or damaged for the improvement or purpose specified in such ordinance shall be ascertained by a jury according to law. 
(Code 2008, § 12.20.020; Ord. No. 12, § 2, 1912) 
Sec. 62-195. - Work encroaching upon private property-Petition. 
    The petition designated in section 62-194 shall contain a copy of the ordinance designated in section 62-193, certified by the city clerk, under the corporate seal. The petition shall contain the following information: 
(1)  A reasonably accurate description of the lots, parcels of land and property which will be taken or damaged and the names of the owners and occupants thereof, so far as known to the city council, or officers filing the petition; 
(2)  Where any known owners are nonresidents of the state, stating the fact of nonresidence. In case any of the owners are unknown or reside out of the state, an affidavit shall be filed with the petition showing such fact. 
(Code 2008, § 12.20.030; Ord. No. 12, § 3, 1912) 
Sec. 62-196. - Work encroaching upon private property-City rights designated. 
    After the damages have been ascertained and paid or deposited, and an order entered by the court as prescribed by law, the city shall have the right at any time thereafter to take possession of or damage the property in respect to which such compensation shall have been paid or deposited. 
(Code 2008, § 12.20.040; Ord. No. 12, § 4, 1912) 
Sec. 62-197. - Works encroaching on rights-of-way-Application. 
    The provisions contained in this article are in addition to all other ordinances, rules and regulations concerning encroachments and shall not be construed as repealing or rescinding any other ordinance or part of any ordinance unless in direct conflict therewith. 
(Code 2008, § 12.20.042; Ord. No. 8-79, § 2, 1979) 
Sec. 62-198. - Works encroaching on rights-of-way-Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Construction easement area means the area lying between the project right-of-way limits and the platted street limits within which the city, by concurrence in the establishment of the project right-of-way lines will permit the state to enter to perform all necessary construction operations. 
    Encroachment means any buildings, fence, sign or any other structure or object of any kind (with the exception of utilities and public road signs) which is placed, located or maintained in, on, under or over any portion of the project right-of-way of the roadway right-of-way where no project right-of-way line has been established. 
    Permissible encroachment means any existing awning, marquee, advertising sign or similar overhanging structure supported from a building immediately adjacent to the limits of the platted street where there is a sidewalk extending to the building line and which does not impair the free and safe flow of traffic on the highway, the permissive retention of overhanging signs is not to be construed as being applicable to those signs supported from poles constructed outside the project right-of-way line and not confined by adjacent buildings. 
    Project right-of-way means those areas within the project right-of-way lines established jointly by the city and the state which will be free of encroachments except as defined in this section. 
    Roadway right-of-way means those areas existing or acquired by dedication or by fee simple for highway purpose; also, the areas acquired by temporary easement during the time the easement is in effect. 
(Code 2008, § 12.20.044; Ord. No. 8-79(part), 1979) 
Sec. 62-199. - Works encroaching on rights-of-way-Restrictions. 
    It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, or cause to be erected, to retain, or cause to be retained, by encroachment, as defined in section 62-198, within the limits of the project right-of-way or roadway right-of-way where no project right-of-way lines have been established. 
(Code 2008, § 12.20.046; Ord. No. 8-79, § 1, 1979) 
Sec. 62-200. - Levy of general, special taxes. 
    When the ordinance under which the improvement is ordered to be made provides that such improvement shall be made by general taxation, the cost of such improvement shall be added to the general appropriation bill of the city and shall be levied and collected with, and as a part of, the general taxes of the city. When the ordinance provides that such improvement shall be made by special assessment or by special taxation, or both, of contiguous property, the cost shall be levied, assessed and collected in the mode provided by law for making, levying, assessing and collecting special assessments. 
(Code 2008, § 12.20.050; Ord. No. 12, § 5, 1912) 
Secs. 62-201-62-223. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - STREET NAMES AND NUMBERING 

Sec. 62-224. - Court Street. 
    The name of First Street now existing in the city shall be changed to Court Street, and shall henceforth bear the name Court Street. 
(Code 2008, § 12.28.010; Ord. No. 252, § 1, 1951) 
Sec. 62-225. - Center Street. 
    The name of Second Street now existing in the city shall be changed to Center Street, and shall henceforth bear the name Center Street. 
(Code 2008, § 12.28.020; Ord. No. 252, § 2, 1951) 
Sec. 62-226. - Eureka Avenue. 
    The name of Third Street now existing in the city shall be changed to Eureka Avenue, and shall henceforth bear the name Eureka Avenue. 
(Code 2008, § 12.28.030; Ord. No. 252, § 3, 1951) 
Sec. 62-227. - Cruger Avenue. 
    The name of Fourth Street now existing in the city shall be changed to Cruger Avenue, and shall henceforth bear the name Cruger Avenue. 
(Code 2008, § 12.28.040; Ord. No. 252, § 4, 1951) 
Sec. 62-228. - Keller Street. 
    The alley located between Lots Ten and Thirteen on the east and Lot Eleven on the west in Darst Third Addition to the city shall hereafter be known and designated as Keller Street. 
(Code 2008, § 12.28.050; Ord. No. 227, § 1, 1946) 
Sec. 62-229. - West Crow Street. 
    The name of the street which begins at the west of North Main Street, and is situated between Lot Five on the north, Lot Seven on the south, said lots being in Plat "B" in the city, of the east half of Section Twelve in Township Twenty-six North, Range Two West of the Third Principal Meridian in the city, and extending west to the east line of Lot Twenty-two in said Plat "B" in the city shall be known and designated as West Crow Street. 
(Code 2008, § 12.28.060; Ord. No. 190, § 1, 1940) 
Sec. 62-230. - Graham Street. 
    The street known as North First Street in the city and which is located between Blocks Two and Three, and One and Four of Fisher's Addition to the city shall hereafter be known and designated as Graham Street and be a continuation of the Graham Street which meets the aforesaid North First Street at the east end of said North First Street. 
(Code 2008, § 12.28.070; Ord. No. 185, § 1, 1939) 
Sec. 62-231. - Main Street. 
    The name of the street now known as College Street, which street extends from the north limits of the city to the south limits of the city on the line between Township Twenty-six North, Range One West of the Third Principal Meridian, and Township Twenty-six North, Range Two West of the Third Principal Meridian in the city is changed to Main Street. 
(Code 2008, § 12.28.080; Ord. No. 163, § 1, 1935) 
Sec. 62-232. - Reagan, Vennum and Campus Streets. 
    The street running from east to west between the northwest quarter of Section Eighteen and the southwest quarter of Section Eighteen in Township Twenty-six North of Range One West of the Third Principal Meridian in the city is designated as Reagan Drive. The street running north and south from College Avenue to the street designated in this section as Reagan Drive and west of and adjoining Lots Sixty-eight and Twenty-three of Plat "B" of the west half of Section Eighteen shall be known and designated as Vennum Street. The street running east and west, north of and adjoining Lot Sixty-eight shall be known as Campus Street. 
(Code 2008, § 12.28.090; Ord. No. 128, § 1, 1927) 
Sec. 62-233. - Vennum Street. 
    The street running north and south from College Street in the city to Reagan Drive in the city, along the north side of Lot One in Block Two of Richardson's Addition to the original town, now city, of Eureka, and running thence south to Cemetery Street is named Vennum Street. 
(Code 2008, § 12.28.100; Ord. No. 76, § 1, 1920) 
Sec. 62-234. - Tower Street. 
    The street commencing at the north end of Callender Street in the city and running from thence west to the corporate limits of the city is named Tower Street. 
(Code 2008, § 12.28.110; Ord. No. 76, § 2, 1920) 
Sec. 62-235. - Campus Street. 
    The street running east and west along the north side of Lot Sixty-eight and a part of Lot Sixty-nine of Plat "B" of the west half of Section Eighteen in Township Twenty-six North, Range One West of the Third Principal Meridian in the city, and commencing on the east line of the street heretofore named Vennum Street and running thence east to the college campus, is named Campus Street. 
(Code 2008, § 12.28.120; Ord. No. 76, § 3, 1920) 
Sec. 62-236. - Neil Reagan Circle. 
    The street which runs in a northeasterly direction from Lake Road to the Eureka Lake Park pavilion shall be known as Neil Reagan Circle. 
(Code 2008, § 12.28.130; Ord. No. 3-86, § 1, 1986) 
Secs. 62-237-62-265. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - PUBLIC WORKS CONSTRUCTION 

Sec. 62-266. - Prevailing rate of wages-Posting. 
    The city clerk shall publicly post or keep available for inspection by any interested party in the main office of this city this determination of such prevailing rate of wage. 
(Code 2008, § 2.72.010; Ord. No. 8-81, § 3, 1981; Ord. No. 5-83, § 3, 1983) 
Sec. 62-267. - Prevailing rate of wages-Copy to employers. 
    The city clerk shall mail a copy of the determination to any employer, and to any association of employers and to any person or association of employees who have filed, or file their names and addresses, requesting copies of any determination stating the particular rates and the particular class of workmen whose wages will be affected by such rates. 
(Code 2008, § 2.72.020; Ord. No. 5-83, § 4, 1983; Ord. No. 8-81, § 4, 1981) 
Secs. 62-268-62-297. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - USE AND CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE RIGHTS-OF-WAY 

Sec. 62-298. - Purpose and scope. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this article is to establish policies and procedures for constructing facilities on rights-of-way within the city's jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit consistent with the preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the city rights-of-way and the city as a whole. 
(b)  Conflicts with other chapters and laws. This article supersedes all chapters or parts of chapters adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the extent of such conflict. In the event that applicable federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this article, the utility shall comply with the requirements of this article to the maximum extent possible without violating federal or state laws or regulations. 
(Code 2008, § 12.36.010; Ord. No. 16-01, § 2(12.36.010), 1-18-2016) 
Sec. 62-299. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Any term not defined in this section shall have the meaning ascribed to it in 92 Ill. Admin. Code 530.30, unless the context clearly requires otherwise. 
    Backfill means the methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a trench or pit. 
    Bore or boring means to excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the insertion of a pipe or electrical conductor. 
    Construction or construct means the installation, repair, maintenance, placement, alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification or abandonment in place of facilities. 
    Disrupt the right-of-way means any work that obstructs the right-of-way or causes a material adverse effect on the use of the right-of-way for its intended use. Such work may include, without limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting; placement (whether temporary or permanent) of materials, equipment, devices, or structures; damage to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil, and shall not include the parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not materially obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway. 
    Emergency means any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the safety of the public using or in the vicinity of the right-of-way or immediate maintenance required for the health and safety of the general public served by the utility. 
    Facility means all structures, devices, objects, and materials (including, but not limited to, track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable, antennas, vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, cabinets, pedestals, poles, conduits, grates, covers, pipes, cables, and appurtenances thereto) located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights-of-way under this article. For purposes of this article, the term "facility" shall not include any facility owned or operated by the city. 
    Highway means a specific type of right-of-way used for vehicular traffic including rural or urban roads or streets. The term "highway" includes all highway land and improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges, drainage structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and appurtenances necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic. 
    Highway Code means the Illinois Highway Code, 605 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq., as amended from time to time. 
    Right-of-way or rights-of-way means any street, alley, other land or waterway, dedicated or commonly used for pedestrian or vehicular traffic or other similar purposes, including utility easements, in which the city has the right and authority to authorize, regulate or permit the location of facilities other than those of the city. 
    Utility means the individual or entity owning or operating any facility as defined in this article. 
(Code 2008, § 12.36.020; Ord. No. 16-01, § 2(12.36.020), 1-18-2016) 
Sec. 62-300. - Permit required; applications and fees. 
(a)  Permit required. No person shall construct (as defined in this article) any facility on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within any city right-of-way which: 
(1)  Changes the location of the facility; 
(2)  Adds a new facility; 
(3)  Disrupts the right-of-way (as defined in this article); 
(4)  Damages the right-of-way; or 
(5)  Materially increases the amount of area or space occupied by the facility on, over, above, along, under across or within the right-of-way; 
without first filing an application with the city for a permit therefor. No permit shall be required for installation and maintenance of service connections to customers' premises where there will be no disruption of the right-of-way. 
(b)  Permit application. All applications for permits pursuant to this article shall be filed with the city clerk, who shall forward such applications to the city administrator or his designee. The applicant may designate those portions of its application materials that it reasonably believes contain proprietary or confidential information as "proprietary" or "confidential" by clearly marking each page of such materials accordingly. 
(c)  Minimum permit application requirements. A permit application under this article shall contain, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  The utility's name and address and telephone and telecopy numbers; 
(2)  The applicant's name and address, if different than the utility, its telephone, telecopy numbers, e-mail address, and its interest in the work; 
(3)  The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers and e-mail addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with respect to the application; 
(4)  A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will be put. The scope and detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature and character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on those matters likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed; 
(5)  Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the city: 
a.  A written traffic control plan demonstrating the protective measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, to prevent injury or damage to persons or property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular traffic; and 
b.  An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of potential emergencies, including, without limitation, construction and hazardous materials emergencies, and the intended response by the applicant. The intended response shall include notification to the city and shall promote protection of the safety and convenience of the public. Compliance with ICC regulations for emergency contingency plans constitutes compliance with this section unless the city finds that additional information or assurances are needed; 
(6)  Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed, including the certification of an engineer that such drawings, plans, and specifications comply with applicable codes, rules, and regulations; 
(7)  Evidence of insurance as required in section 62-303; 
(8)  Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of this article (see section 62-313); and 
(9)  Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the city. 
(d)  Applicant's duty to update information. Throughout the entire permit application review period and the construction period authorized by the permit, any amendments to information contained in a permit application shall be submitted by the utility in writing to the city within 30 days after the change necessitating the amendment. 
(e)  Application fees. Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar agreement, all applications for permits pursuant to this article shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount of $50.00. No application fee is required to be paid by any electricity utility that is paying the municipal electricity infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the Electricity Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act. 
(f)  Permit fees. Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar agreement, permit fees pursuant to this article shall be as follows: 
For Up to 7 Days For Each Day 8-180 Major arterial street $70.00 $120.00/lane/day Minor arterial street 70.00 60.00/lane/day Commercial collector street 70.00 30.00/lane/day Residential collector street 70.00 12.00/lane/day Local street 70.00 6.00 lane/day Sidewalk/parkway 70.00 6.00/sidewalk/day  
**Fees for total closure of the street shall be double the single lane fees. Each permit will cover up to mile in length. Additional permits will be required for each additional mile. 
(Code 2008, § 12.36.030; Ord. No. 16-01, § 2(12.36.030), 1-18-2016) 
Sec. 62-301. - Action on permit applications. 
(a)  City review of permit applications. Completed permit applications, containing all required documentation, shall be examined by the city administrator or his designee within a reasonable time after filing. If the application does not conform to the requirements of applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the city administrator or his designee shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the city administrator or his designee is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this article and applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the city administrator or his designee shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable. In all instances, it shall be the duty of the applicant to demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the city administrator or his designee that the construction proposed under the application shall be in full compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(b)  Additional city review of applications of holders of state authorization under the Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007. Applications by a utility that is a holder of a state-issued authorization under the Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007 shall be deemed granted 45 days after submission to the city, unless otherwise acted upon by the city, provided the holder has complied with applicable city codes, ordinances, and regulations. 
(Code 2008, § 12.36.040; Ord. No. 16-01, § 2(12.36.040), 1-18-2016) 
Sec. 62-302. - Effect of permit. 
(a)  Authority granted; no property right or other interest created. A permit from the city authorizes a permittee to undertake only certain activities in accordance with this article on city rights-of-way, and does not create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to impinge upon the rights of others who may have an interest in the rights-of-way. 
(b)  Duration. No permit issued under this article shall be valid for a period longer than six months unless construction is actually begun within that period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion. 
(c)  Compliance with all laws required. The issuance of a permit by the city does not excuse the permittee from complying with other requirements of the city and applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations. 
(Code 2008, § 12.36.050; Ord. No. 16-01, § 2(12.36.050), 1-18-2016) 
Sec. 62-303. - Insurance. 
(a)  Required coverages and limits. Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar agreement, each utility occupying right-of-way or constructing any facility in the right-of-way shall secure and maintain the following liability insurance policies insuring the utility as named insured and naming the city, and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents, and employees as additional insureds on the policies listed in subsection (a)(1) and (2) of this section: 
(1)  Commercial general liability insurance, including premises-operations, explosion, collapse, and underground hazard (commonly referred to as "X," "C," and "U" coverages) and products-completed operations coverage with limits not less than: 
a.  $5,000,000.00 for bodily injury or death to each person; 
b.  $5,000,000.00 for property damage resulting from any one accident; and 
c.  $5,000,000.00 for all other types of liability; 
(2)  Automobile liability for owned, non-owned and hired vehicles with a combined single limit of $1,000,000.00 for personal injury and property damage for each accident; 
(3)  Worker's compensation with statutory limits; and 
(4)  Employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than $1,000,000.00 per employee and per accident. 
If the utility is not providing such insurance to protect the contractors and subcontractors performing the work, then such contractors and subcontractors shall comply with this section. 
(b)  Excess or umbrella policies. The coverages required by this section may be in any combination of primary, excess, and umbrella policies. Any excess or umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying insurance on a following-form basis such that when any loss covered by the primary policy exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella policy becomes effective to cover such loss. 
(c)  Copies required. The utility shall provide copies of any of the policies required by this section to the city within ten days following receipt of a written request therefor from the city, or at the time a utility makes a permit application under this article if copies of such policies are not already on file with the city. 
(d)  Maintenance and renewal of required coverages. The insurance policies required by this section shall contain the following endorsement: 
"It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the intention not to renew be stated until 30 days after receipt by the city, by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested, of a written notice addressed to the city administrator of such intent to cancel or not to renew." 
Within ten days after receipt by the city of said notice, and in no event later than ten days prior to said cancellation, the utility shall obtain and furnish to the city evidence of replacement insurance policies meeting the requirements of this section. 
(e)  Self-insurance. A self-insured utility otherwise meeting the requirements of subsection (a) of this section is not required, to the extent of such self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of additional insureds under subsection (a) of this section, or the requirements of subsections (b), (c) and (d) of this section. A utility that elects to self-insure shall provide to the city evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the insurance coverage and limit requirements required under subsection (a) of this section, such as evidence that the utility is a "private self-insurer" under the Workers Compensation Act. 
(f)  Effect of insurance and self-insurance on utility's liability. The legal liability of the utility to the city and any person for any of the matters that are the subject of the insurance policies or self-insurance required by this section shall not be limited by such insurance policies or self-insurance or by the recovery of any amounts thereunder. 
(g)  Insurance companies. All insurance provided pursuant to this section shall be effected under valid and enforceable policies, issued by insurers legally able to conduct business with the licensee in the state. 
(Code 2008, § 12.36.060; Ord. No. 16-01, § 2(12.36.060), 1-18-2016) 
Sec. 62-304. - Indemnification. 
    By occupying or constructing facilities in the right-of-way, a utility shall be deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and hold the city and its elected and appointed officials and officers, employees, agents and representatives harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney's fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of or result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the utility or its affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors in the construction of facilities or occupancy of the rights-of-way, and in providing or offering service over the facilities, whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this article or by a franchise, license, or similar agreement; provided, however, that the utility's indemnity obligations hereunder shall not apply to any injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses or expenses arising out of or resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach of this article by the city, its officials, officers, employees, agents or representatives. 
(Code 2008, § 12.36.070; Ord. No. 16-01, § 2(12.36.070), 1-18-2016) 
Sec. 62-305. - Permit suspension and revocation. 
(a)  City right to revoke permit. The city may revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this article for one or more of the following reasons: 
(1)  Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially incomplete statements in the permit application; 
(2)  Noncompliance with this article; 
(3)  Permittee's physical presence or presence of permittee's facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights-of-way presents a direct or imminent threat to the public health, safety, or welfare; 
(4)  Permittee's failure to construct the facilities substantially in accordance with the permit and approved plans; 
(5)  Permittee's failure to immediately report to the city administrator any damages to city utilities; 
(6)  Permittee's failure to compensate the city for any city utilities that must be repaired by city employees or a third party due to damages incurred during construction; or 
(7)  Permittee's failure to employ a licensed plumber to repair any private potable water service line due to any damages incurred during construction. 
(b)  Notice of revocation or suspension. The city shall send written notice of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this article stating the reason for the revocation or suspension and the alternatives available to permittee under this section. 
(c)  Permittee alternatives upon receipt of notice of revocation or suspension. Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from the city, the permittee shall have the following options: 
(1)  Immediately provide the city with evidence that no cause exists for the revocation or suspension; 
(2)  Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the city, the deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof of such correction to the city within five working days after receipt of the written notice of revocation; or 
(3)  Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights-of-way and restore the rights-of-way to the satisfaction of the city providing written proof of such removal to the city within ten days after receipt of the written notice of revocation. 
The city may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend the time periods provided in this subsection. 
(d)  Stop work order. In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation or suspension, the city may issue a stop work order immediately upon discovery of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within subsection (a) of this section. 
(e)  Failure or refusal of the permittee to comply. If the permittee fails to comply with the provisions of subsection (c) of this section. The city or its designee may, at the option of the city: 
(1)  Correct the deficiencies; 
(2)  Upon not less than 20 days' notice to the permittee, remove the subject facilities or equipment; or 
(3)  After not less than 30 days' notice to the permittee of failure to cure the noncompliance, deem them abandoned and property of the city. 
The permittee shall be liable in all events to the city for all costs of removal. 
(Code 2008, § 12.36.080; Ord. No. 16-01, § 2(12.36.080), 1-18-2016) 
Sec. 62-306. - Traffic control. 
(a)  Minimum requirements. The city's minimum requirements for traffic protection are contained in IDOT's Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices and this Code. 
(b)  Warning signs, protective devices, and flaggers. The utility is responsible for providing and installing warning signs, protective devices and flaggers, when necessary, meeting applicable federal, state, and local requirements for protection of the public and the utility's workers when performing any work on the rights-of-way. 
(c)  Interference with traffic. All work shall be phased so that there is minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic. 
(d)  Notice when access is blocked. At least 48 hours prior to beginning work that will partially or completely block access to any residence, business or institution, the utility shall notify the resident, business or institution of the approximate beginning time and duration of such work; provided, however, that in cases involving emergency repairs under this article, the utility shall provide such notice as is practicable under the circumstances. 
(e)  Compliance. The utility shall take immediate action to correct any deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought to the utility's attention by the city. 
(Code 2008, § 12.36.090; Ord. No. 16-01, § 2(12.36.090), 1-18-2016) 
Sec. 62-307. - Location of facilities. 
(a)  General requirements. In addition to location requirements applicable to specific types of utility facilities, all utility facilities, regardless of type, shall be subject to the general location requirements of this subsection. 
(1)  No interference with city facilities. No utility facilities shall be placed in any location if the city administrator or his designee determines that the proposed location will require the relocation or displacement of any of the city's utility facilities or will otherwise interfere with the operation or maintenance of any of the city's utility facilities. 
(2)  Minimum interference and impact. The proposed location shall cause only the minimum possible interference with the use of the right-of-way and shall cause only the minimum possible impact upon, and interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin said right-of-way. 
(3)  No interference with travel. No utility facility shall be placed in any location that interferes with the usual travel on such right-of-way. 
(4)  No limitations on visibility. No utility facility shall be placed in any location so as to limit visibility of or by users of the right-of-way. 
(5)  Size of utility facilities. The proposed installation shall use the smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, power pedestals, and/or cabinets then in use by the facility owner, regardless of location, for the particular application. 
(b)  Freestanding facilities. 
(1)  The city may restrict the location and size of any freestanding facility located within a right-of-way. 
(2)  The city may require any freestanding facility located within a right-of-way to be screened from view. 
(c)  Facilities installed aboveground. Aboveground facilities may be installed only if: 
(1)  No other existing facilities in the area are located underground; 
(2)  New underground installation is not technically feasible; and 
(3)  The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest protection of aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed without adversely affecting safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to, self-supporting armless, single-pole construction with vertical configuration of conductors and cable. Existing utility poles and light standards shall be used wherever practicable; the installation of additional utility poles is strongly discouraged. 
(d)  Appearance standards. 
(1)  The city may prohibit the installation of facilities in particular locations in order to preserve visual quality. 
(2)  A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features visible to the right-of-way user or to adjacent residents and property owners, and if it does not impair the aesthetic quality of the lands being traversed. 
(Code 2008, § 12.36.100; Ord. No. 16-01, § 2(12.36.100), 1-18-2016) 
Sec. 62-308. - Construction methods and materials. 
(a)  Backfilling. 
(1)  Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the installation of facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth, and length using methods and materials in accordance with IDOT's "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction." When excavated material is hauled away or is unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be used. 
(2)  For a period of three years from the date construction of a facility is completed, the utility shall be responsible to remove and restore any backfilled area that has settled due to construction of the facility. If so ordered by the city administrator or his designee, the utility, at its expense, shall remove any pavement and backfill material to the top of the installed facility, place and properly compact new backfill material, and restore new pavement, sidewalk, curbs, and driveways to the proper grades, as determined by the city administrator or his designee. 
(b)  Pavement cuts and potholing. Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair shall be permitted on a highway only if that portion of the highway is closed to traffic. If a variance to the limitation set forth in this subsection is permitted under this article, the following requirements shall apply: 
(1)  Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled and compacted as soon as practicable with granular material of CA-6 or CA-10 gradation, as designated by the city administrator or his designee. 
(2)  Restoration of pavement and potholing, in kind, shall be accomplished as soon as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous mixture shall be provided immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the city. 
(3)  All saw cuts shall be full depth. 
(4)  For all rights-of-way which have been reconstructed with a concrete surface/base in the last seven years, or resurfaced in the last three years, permits shall not be issued unless such work is determined to be an emergency repair or other work considered necessary and unforeseen before the time of the reconstruction or unless a pavement cut is necessary for a J.U.L.I.E. locate. 
(c)  Minimum cover of underground facilities. Cover shall be provided and maintained at least in the amount specified in the following table for minimum cover for the type of facility: 
Type of Facility Minimum Cover Electric lines 30 inches (0.8 m) Communication, cable or video service lines 18 to 24 inches (0.6 m, as determined by city) Gas or petroleum products 30 inches (0.8 m) Water line 48 inches Sanitary sewer, storm sewer, or drainage line Sufficient cover to provide freeze protection  
(d)  Ground-mounted appurtenances. Ground-mounted appurtenances to overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a right-of-way, shall be provided with a vegetation-free area extending one foot (305 mm) in width beyond the appurtenance in all directions. The vegetation-free area may be provided by an extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy duty plastic or similar material approved by the city administrator or his designee. With the approval of the city administrator or his designee, shrubbery surrounding the appurtenance may be used in place of vegetation-free area. The housing for ground-mounted appurtenances shall be painted a neutral color to blend with the surroundings. 
(e)  Materials. 
(1)  General standards. The materials used in constructing facilities within rights-of-way shall be those meeting the accepted standards of the appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT's "Standards Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction," the requirements of the state commerce commission, or the standards established by other official regulatory agencies for the appropriate industry. 
(2)  Material storage on right-of-way. No material shall be stored on the right-of-way without the prior written approval of the city administrator or his designee. When such storage is permitted, all pipe, conduit, wire, poles, cross arms, or other materials shall be distributed along the right-of-way prior to and during installation in a manner to minimize hazards to the public or an obstacle to right-of-way maintenance or damage to the right-of-way and other property. If material is to be stored on right-of-way, prior approval must be obtained from the city. 
(f)  Operational restrictions. 
(1)  Construction operations on rights-of-way may, at the discretion of the city, be required to be discontinued when such operations would create hazards to traffic or the public health, safety, and welfare. Such operations may also be required to be discontinued or restricted when conditions are such that construction would result in extensive damage to the right-of-way or other property. 
(2)  These restrictions may be waived by the city administrator or his designee when emergency work is required to restore vital utility services. 
(3)  Unless otherwise permitted by the city, the hours of construction are 7:00 a.m. until 5:00 p.m. Monday-Friday. Work on weekends and holidays will be not be permitted unless emergency work is required. 
(g)  Location of existing facilities. Any utility proposing to construct facilities in the city shall contact J.U.L.I.E. and ascertain the presence and location of existing aboveground and underground facilities within the rights-of-way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The city will make its permit records available to a utility for the purpose of identifying possible facilities. When notified of an excavation or when requested by the city or by J.U.L.I.E., a utility shall locate and physically mark its underground facilities within 48 hours, excluding weekends and holidays, in accordance with the Illinois Underground Facilities Damage Prevention Act (220 ILCS 50/1 et seq.). 
(h)  Trenching. Trenching for facility installation, repair, or maintenance on rights-of-way shall be done in accord with the applicable portions of section 603 of IDOT's "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction." 
(1)  Length. The length of open trench shall be kept to the practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipe-line testing. Only one-half of any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless special permission is obtained from the city director of public works. 
(2)  Open trench and excavated material. Open trench and windrowed excavated material shall be protected as required by chapter 6 of the Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Where practicable, the excavated material shall be deposited between the roadway and the trench as added protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the paved portion of the roadway. Where right-of-way width does not allow for windrowing excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated material shall be hauled to an off-road location. 
(3)  Drip line of trees. The utility shall not trench within the drip line of any tree designated by the city to be preserved. 
(i)  Boring or jacking. 
(1)  Pits and shoring. Boring or jacking under rights-of-way shall be accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance specified by the city director of public works from the edge of the pavement. Pits for boring or jacking shall be excavated no more than 48 hours in advance of boring or jacking operations and backfilled within 48 hours after boring or jacking operations are completed. While pits are open, they shall be clearly marked and protected by barricades. Shoring shall be designed, erected, supported, braced, and maintained so that it will safely support all vertical and lateral loads that may be imposed upon it during the boring or jacking operation. 
(2)  Wet boring or jetting. Wet boring or jetting shall not be permitted under the roadway. 
(3)  Borings with diameters greater than six inches. Borings over six inches (0.15 m) in diameter shall be accomplished with an auger and following pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the outside diameter of the following pipe by more than one inch (25 mm). 
(4)  Borings with diameters six inches or less. Borings of six inches or less in diameter may be accomplished by either jacking, guided with auger, or auger and following pipe method. 
(5)  Tree preservation. Any facility located within the drip line of any tree designated by the city to be preserved or protected shall be bored under or around the root system. 
(Code 2008, § 12.36.110; Ord. No. 16-01, § 2(12.36.110), 1-18-2016) 
Sec. 62-309. - Vegetation control. 
(a)  Electric utilities; compliance with state laws and regulations. An electric utility shall conduct all tree trimming and vegetation control activities in the right-of-way in accordance with applicable state laws and regulations, and additionally, with such local franchise or other agreement with the city as permitted by law. 
(b)  Other utilities; tree trimming permit required. Tree trimming that is done by any other utility with facilities in the right-of-way and that is not performed pursuant to applicable state laws and regulations specifically governing same, shall not be considered a normal maintenance operation, but shall require the application for, and the issuance of, a permit, in addition to any other permit required under this article. 
(1)  Application for tree trimming permit. Applications for tree trimming permits shall include assurance that the work will be accomplished by competent workers with supervision who are experienced in accepted tree pruning practices. Tree trimming permits shall designate an expiration date in the interest of assuring that the work will be expeditiously accomplished. 
(2)  Damage to trees. Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for cancellation of the tree trimming permit and for assessment of damages. The city will require compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees removed without authorization. The formula developed by the International Society of Arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the compensation for damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The city may require the removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical pruning would leave them in an unacceptable condition. 
(c)  Specimen trees or trees of special significance. The city may require that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of special significance. The required measures may consist of higher poles, side arm extensions, covered wire or other means. 
(d)  Chemical use. 
(1)  Except as provided in the following subsection, no utility shall spray, inject or pour any chemicals on or near any trees, shrubs or vegetation in the city for any purpose, including the control of growth, insects or disease. 
(2)  Spraying of any type of brush-killing chemicals will not be permitted on rights-of-way unless the utility demonstrates to the satisfaction of the city administrator or his designee that such spraying is the only practicable method of vegetation control. 
(Code 2008, § 12.36.120; Ord. No. 16-01, § 2(12.36.120), 1-18-2016) 
Sec. 62-310. - Removal, relocation, or modifications of utility facilities. 
(a)  Notice. Within 90 days following written notice from the city, a utility shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily or permanently disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any utility facilities within the rights-of-way whenever the corporate authorities have determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration, is reasonably necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance, or installation of any city improvement in or upon, or the operations of the city in or upon, the rights-of-way. 
(b)  Removal of unauthorized facilities. Within 30 days following written notice from the city, any utility that owns, controls, or maintains any unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the rights-of-way shall, at its own expense, remove all or any part of such facilities or appurtenances from the rights-of-way. A facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in the following circumstances: 
(1)  Upon expiration or termination of the permittee's license or franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law; 
(2)  If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant of a license or franchise, if required; 
(3)  If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance of a required permit in violation of this article; or 
(4)  If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not permitted by the permittee's license or franchise. 
(c)  Emergency removal or relocation of facilities. The city retains the right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within the rights-of-way of the city, as the city may determine to be necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If circumstances permit, the municipality shall attempt to notify the utility, if known, prior to cutting or removing a facility and shall notify the utility, if known, after cutting or removing a facility. 
(d)  Abandonment of facilities. Upon abandonment of a facility within the rights-of-way of the city, the utility shall notify the city within 90 days. Following receipt of such notice the city may direct the utility to remove all or any portion of the facility if the city administrator or his designee determines that such removal will be in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare. In the event that the city does not direct the utility that abandoned the facility to remove it, by giving notice of abandonment to the city, the abandoning utility shall be deemed to consent to the alteration or removal of all or any portion of the facility by another utility or person. 
(Code 2008, § 12.36.130; Ord. No. 16-01, § 2(12.36.130), 1-18-2016) 
Sec. 62-311. - Clean-up and restoration. 
    The utility shall remove all excess material and restore all pavement, turf, terrain, and other property within ten days after any portion of the rights-of-way are disturbed, damaged or destroyed due to construction or maintenance by the utility, all to the satisfaction of the city. This includes restoration of entrances and side roads. Restoration of roadway surfaces shall be made using materials and methods approved by the city administrator or his designee. Such cleanup and repair may be required to consist of backfilling, regrading, reseeding, resodding, or any other requirement to restore the right-of-way to a condition substantially equivalent to that which existed prior to the commencement of the project. The time period provided in this section may be extended by the city administrator or his designee for good cause shown. 
(Code 2008, § 12.36.140; Ord. No. 16-01, § 2(12.36.140), 1-18-2016) 
Sec. 62-312. - Maintenance and emergency maintenance. 
(a)  General. Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights-of-way are to be maintained by or for the utility in a manner satisfactory to the city and at the utility's expense. 
(b)  Emergency maintenance procedures. Emergencies may justify non-compliance with normal procedures for securing a permit: 
(1)  If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the right-of-way, the utility shall take immediate steps to provide all necessary protection for traffic on the highway or the public on the right-of-way including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If a hazard does not exist on the traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is such as to require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in repair operations, adequate signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on the shoulder in such an emergency will only be permitted when no other means of access to the facility is available. 
(2)  In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible, notify the city administrator or his designee or his duly authorized agent of the emergency, informing him as to what steps have been taken for protection of the traveling public and what will be required to make the necessary repairs. If the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere with the free movement of traffic, the city police shall be notified immediately. 
(3)  In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand to complete repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least inconvenience to the traveling public. 
(c)  Emergency repairs. The utility must file in writing with the city a description of the repairs undertaken in the right-of-way within 48 hours after an emergency repair. 
(Code 2008, § 12.36.150; Ord. No. 16-01, § 2(12.36.150), 1-18-2016) 
Sec. 62-313. - Variances. 
(a)  Request for variance. A utility requesting a variance from one or more of the provisions of this article must do so in writing to the city administrator or his designee as a part of the permit application. The request shall identify each provision of this article from which a variance is requested and the reasons why a variance should be granted. 
(b)  Authority to grant variances. The city administrator or his designee shall decide whether a variance is authorized for each provision of this article identified in the variance request on an individual basis. 
(c)  Conditions for granting of variance. The city administrator or his designee may authorize a variance only if the utility requesting the variance has demonstrated that: 
(1)  One or more conditions not under the control of the utility (such as terrain features or an irregular right-of-way line) create a special hardship that would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable, given the public purposes to be achieved by the provision; and 
(2)  All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that would conform with the provision from which a variance is requested are impracticable in relation to the requested approach. 
(d)  Additional conditions for granting of a variance. As a condition for authorizing a variance, the city administrator or his designee may require the utility requesting the variance to meet reasonable standards and conditions that may or may not be expressly contained within this article but which carry out the purposes of this article. 
(e)  Right to appeal. Any utility aggrieved by any order, requirement, decision or determination, including denial of a variance, made by the city administrator or his designee under the provisions of this article shall have the right to appeal to the city board, or such other board or commission as it may designate. The application for appeal shall be submitted in writing to the city clerk within 30 days after the date of such order, requirement, decision or determination. The city board shall commence its consideration of the appeal at the board's next regularly scheduled meeting occurring at least seven days after the filing of the appeal. The city board shall timely decide the appeal. 
(Code 2008, § 12.36.160; Ord. No. 16-01, § 2(12.36.160), 1-18-2016) 
Sec. 62-314. - Penalties. 
    Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to fine in accordance with the penalty provisions of this Code. There may be times when the city will incur delay or other costs, including third party claims, because the utility will not or cannot perform its duties under its permit and this article. Unless the utility shows that another allocation of the cost of undertaking the requested action is appropriate, the utility shall bear the city's costs of damages and its costs of installing, maintaining, modifying, relocating, or removing the facility that is the subject of the permit. No other administrative agency or commission may review or overrule a permit related cost apportionment of the city. Sanctions may be imposed upon a utility that does not pay the costs apportioned to it. 
(Code 2008, § 12.36.170; Ord. No. 16-01, § 2(12.36.170), 1-18-2016) 
Sec. 62-315. - Enforcement. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed as limiting any additional or further remedies that the city may have for enforcement of this article. 
(Code 2008, § 12.36.180; Ord. No. 16-01, § 2(12.36.180), 1-18-2016) 
Chapter 66 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Plat Act, 765 ILCS 205/0.01 et seq.; subdivision regulations, 65 ILCS 5/11-12-4 et seq., 65 ILCS 5/11-15-1. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 66-1. - Purpose, application and jurisdiction. 
(a)  The purpose of this subdivision code, which is part of the comprehensive plan of the City of Eureka, is to ensure that the subdivision and development of land is accomplished in a timely manner, in conformance with all city and state regulations and standards, and in a manner that minimizes or eliminates adverse impacts and encourages and facilitates the orderly development of the city and its environs. 
(b)  The provisions of this subdivision code shall be applicable to all subdivisions and developments within the city and in unincorporated territory within a mile and one-half of the city's corporate limits. It is the intent of this code to permit subdivision development within all zoning classifications in its controlled area. 
(c)  Any preliminary plat which has been approved by the city council as of the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall continue to be construed as approval of the subdivision layout only. In all other respects the provisions of this code shall govern. 
(d)  The provisions of this subdivision code shall also apply to any other developments, whether a subdivision is required or not under the laws, statutes, ordinances or regulations of the governing body or agency having jurisdiction or control, and regardless of whether the same is labeled a subdivision or not, it being the intent of the chapter to apply to all types of development, both within the city and to unincorporated areas lying within a mile and one-half of the city's corporate limits. This shall apply to all types of land subdivisions or developments that impact adjacent land, including, but not limited to, the dedication or construction of public or private streets, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, stormwater drainage facilities and similar types of improvements, whether a subdivision of land is required or not under the laws, statutes, ordinances or regulations of the governing bodies or agencies having jurisdiction. 
(Code 2008, title 16, § 1-1; Ord. No. 02-04, § 1-1, 7-15-2002) 
Sec. 66-2. - Rules for interpreting language. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms or words used herein shall be interpreted as follows: 
(1)  The term "used" or "occupied" includes the term "intended, designed or arranged to be used or occupied," as well as "constructed, altered, converted, rented, leased or intended to be used." 
(2)  The term building includes the term structure. 
(Code 2008, title 16, § 1-2; Ord. No. 02-04, § 1-2, 7-15-2002) 
Sec. 66-3. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
    Access road means a street that connects to a major thoroughfare, collector street or minor street for the purpose of providing access to abutting properties. 
    Alley means a right-of-way primarily designed to serve as access to the side or rear of those properties whose principal frontage is on a street. 
    Association means the owner's association to be formed for the owners of property in a subdivision to maintain any open space, common grounds or common buildings not dedicated to and accepted by a public agency. 
    Base flood means a flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. The base flood is also known as the 100-year flood. 
    Bond, etc., means a performance bond issued by a surety company or a cash bond or a letter of credit issued by a financial institution to guarantee a contract and the payment of all obligations for the construction of public improvements. 
    Building means any structure erected for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind. 
    Bypass channel means a channel formed in the topography of the earth's surface to carry stormwater runoff through a specified area. 
    Certificate of registration means a certificate issued by the city clerk indicating registration with the city to develop and/or construct public improvements that will be or have been dedicated to the city during a subdivision process. This certificate shall not be denied, suspended or revoked except by city council action. 
    City means the City of Eureka, Woodford County, Illinois. 
    Civil engineer means the civil engineer of the city. 
    Comprehensive Plan means the official Comprehensive Plan and the Land Use Map of Eureka adopted by the city council, as amended from time to time. 
    Condominium subdivision means any subdivision or part of a subdivision that is intended for multifamily buildings to be constructed and sold by the subdivider as condominium units rather than as apartments. 
    Construction plans and specifications means plans prepared by a registered engineer of the subdivider to show the types, location, lines and grades of the proposed streets, storm sewers, sanitary sewers and water mains, etc., in the subdivision. 
    Consulting engineer means the consulting engineer appointed by the mayor with the consent of the city council to assist the city as described in the city's Code of Ordinances. 
    Control structure means a structure designed to control the flow of stormwater runoff over a specific length of time. 
    Country estate means a zoning classification which requires single-family detached dwellings with lots at least two acres in area and a lot width at the building setback line of 120 feet or more. 
    Development means any manmade change to real estate, including: 
(1)  Construction, reconstruction or placement of a building or any structure or addition to a building valued at more than $1,000.00. 
(2)  Installing a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a manufactured home or installing a travel trailer on a site for more than 180 days. 
(3)  Drilling, mining, installing utilities or facilities and constructing roads, bridges or similar projects valued at more than $1,000.00. 
(4)  Filling, dredging, grading, excavating or other non-agricultural alterations of the ground. 
(5)  Storage of materials. 
(6)  Any other activity that might change the direction, height or velocity of floodwater or surface water. 
The term "development" does not include maintenance of existing buildings and facilities, gardening, plowing and similar agricultural practices. 
    Directly connected impervious area or DCIA means an impervious surface that is directly connected to a storm sewer or other conveyance via an impervious flow path. 
    Drybottom stormwater storage area means a facility designed to be normally dry and contain water only during storm events generating runoff. 
    Dwelling unit means one or more rooms constituting a dwelling or part of a dwelling used exclusively as living quarters for one family and not more than two roomers or boarders, and which contains cooking facilities, sink or other kitchen facilities. 
    Easement means a right or privilege to enter and use private land for specified purposes. 
    Excess stormwater means that portion of stormwater runoff that exceeds the conveyance capacity of storm sewers or natural drainage channels serving a specific watershed. 
    Final acceptance means acceptance of the subdivision improvements by the city council. 
    Final plat means the final map or drawing on which the subdivider's plan of subdivision is presented to the city council for approval, and which, if approved, shall be recorded in the county recorder's office for the purpose of conveying land. 
    Flag lot means a lot, the main or principal use or the building area of which does not abut or adjoin a public street but is connected to such public street by a narrow strip of land which is part of the lot. Flag lots shall have a frontage on a public street of not less than 30 feet. 
    Flood hazard area means areas susceptible to the base flood and delineated as "A" zones on a flood insurance rate map prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). Flood hazard areas of unincorporated Woodford County that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city that are identified on a flood insurance rate map (FIRM) prepared for the county by FEMA. 
    Frontage means the length of the front property line of a lot or tract of land abutting a public street. 
    Frontage road means a street that runs parallel to a major thoroughfare for the purpose of providing access to properties near such major thoroughfare. 
    Grade means the slope of a road, street or other public way, specified in percent and shown on street profile plans as required herein. 
    Impervious surface means a relatively non-porous surface over which water will readily pass without any appreciable amount of the water soaking into the surface. 
    Lot means a portion of a subdivision or parcel of land considered a unit intended for transfer of ownership or for building development. 
(1)  The minimum frontage, depth, width and area requirements shall not be less than the standards for corresponding use established by the zoning ordinance of the city. 
(2)  In the case of wedge-shaped residential lots fronting on a curved street, the minimum width at the street line shall be 30 feet. 
(3)  Lots intended for commercial or industrial use and development shall have adequate off-street parking facilities and shall in all ways conform to the city's zoning ordinance. 
(4)  Insofar as practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight street lines or radial to curved street lines. 
(5)  Building setback lines shall be established on all lots, and the minimum building setback lines shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision and for the type of development and use contemplated; provided, however, that they shall not be less than the standards established by the city zoning ordinance. 
(6)  Corner lots shall have sufficient width to permit front setbacks on both streets, as set forth for the district in the city zoning ordinance. 
(7)  Through lots and reverse frontage lots are prohibited except when deemed essential to provide separation from traffic thoroughfares. A screening easement of a minimum of ten feet in width utilizing proper indigenous plants and foliage of a minimum of eight feet in height shall be required across the rear line of commercial and industrial lots. Screening is also suggested for residential lots. 
    Natural drainage means channels formed in the existing surface topography prior to changes made by unnatural causes. 
    Natural undeveloped state means the condition of the existing surface topography and vegetative cover of a parcel of land prior to any development having occurred, with exception of typical agricultural practices. 
    Outlot means a remnant of land that remains from a subdivision which, by reason of lot width, depth, area, frontage, topography or lack of access, cannot be built upon or zoned for use. 
    Owner means any person having legal or equitable title to the land sought to be subdivided under this chapter. 
    Pavement width means the shortest distance between the backs of parallel curbs or outer parallel limits of the paved portion of a street. 
    Planning commission means the city planning commission. 
    Plat officer means an officer appointed by the mayor with the consent of the city council, whose vested duty is to administer and enforce the regulations and standards of this subdivision code. 
    Preliminary plat means a preliminary map or drawing indicating the proposed layout of the subdivision as submitted to the planning commission for recommendation to the city council for action. 
    Public water supply means a potable water system serving at least 15 service connections or regularly serves at least 25 persons at least 60 days per year, as more specifically defined by the Illinois Environmental Protection Act (415 ILCS 513.28). 
    Reserve strip means a strip of land, usually the boundary of a subdivision, that is withheld from sale or dedication to control the development of adjacent land. 
    Re-subdivision means any change in an approved or recorded subdivision plat. 
    Reverse frontage means a lot that is bounded in front and in back by a street or thoroughfare. 
    Sanitary sewer means a constructed conduit to collect and carry liquid and solid sewage wastes, other than stormwaters, to a sewage treatment plant. 
    Select granular backfill means selected backfill as defined by the state water and sewer main specifications and as approved by the civil engineer. 
    Sidewalk means that portion of a public right-of-way, paved and intended for pedestrian use only. 
    Standard water and sewer specifications means the "Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois," as adopted and from time to time amended or replaced by the Illinois Society of Professional Engineers, the Illinois Municipal League, the Associated General Contractors of Illinois and the Underground Contractors Association together with such additional regulations related to the construction of water and sewer mains as may from time to time be adopted by the city. 
    State road specifications means the most recent edition of the Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, as adopted by the state department of transportation. 
    State water and sewer main specifications means the most recent edition of the Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois. 
    Storm drainage capacity means the volumetric flow rate of stormwater runoff that can be transported by a channel or conduit without causing a rise of the water surface over the top of the conduit or adjacent to the channel. Stormwater runoff that exceeds capacity is termed "excess stormwater." 
    Storm sewer means a constructed conduit to collect and carry surface waters to a drainage course. 
    Stormwater drainage system means the complete system of pipes, culverts, channels, swales and structures employed to convey and control stormwater runoff. 
    Stormwater runoff means the flow of water resulting from precipitation that was not absorbed by the soil or plant material. 
    Stormwater runoff release rate means the rate at which stormwater runoff is released to adjacent land. 
    Stormwater storage area means any area designated to store excess stormwater. 
    Streets and alleys means a way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, or however designated, in the following hierarchy: 
(1)  Major thoroughfares are streets and highways used to provide the through movement of a high volume of traffic. 
(2)  Collector streets are those that carry traffic from minor streets to major arterial streets, including the principal entrance streets of a residential development and streets for circulation within such a development. 
(3)  Minor streets are those local streets that are used primarily for access to abutting properties. 
(4)  Alleys are a public way used primarily for service access to the rear or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
    Subdivider means any individual, association, corporation or other legal entity who is an owner or agent responsible for subdividing or developing land and who is responsible for requirements outlined in these regulations for the subdividing of land. 
    Subdivision means the division of a parcel of land into two or more lots or parcels for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building development shall be deemed a subdivision. The term "subdivision" includes re-subdivision. When appropriate to the context, the term "subdivision" shall relate to the process of subdividing or to the land subdivided. The term "subdivision" also applies to the following, which, while not requiring submission of a subdivision plat nor approval of the city council, requires city approval through the plat officer and compliance with the other requirements of this subdivision code: 
(1)  Division or subdivision of land into lots of five acres or more that does not involve any new streets or easements of access. 
(2)  Division of lots or blocks less than one acre in any recorded subdivision that does not involve any new streets or easements of access. 
(3)  The sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining and contiguous land. 
(4)  The conveyance of parcels of land or interests therein for use as a right-of-way for railroads, utilities or pipe lines which does not involve any new streets or easements of access. 
(5)  The conveyance of land owned by a railroad or other public utility that does not involve any new streets or easements for access. 
(6)  The conveyance or dedication of land for highway or other public purposes or the vacation of land dedicated for a public use. 
(7)  Conveyance made to correct descriptions in prior conveyances. 
(8)  The sale or exchange of parcels following the division into no more than two parts of a particular parcel of land existing on July 17, 1959, and not involving any new streets or easements of access. 
(9)  It is the intent of the section to eliminate the exception stated in 765 ILCS 205/1.1(b)9. 
    Subdivision code means this subdivision code of the city and contiguous areas. 
    Substantial conformance means no changes in a subdivision's street configuration; the number, sizes and configuration of lots; the configuration of stormwater drainage plans or the configuration of any other utility services. 
    Tributary watershed means all the area that contributes stormwater runoff to a given point. 
    Unimproved lot or parcel means property on which there is no existing building or structure. 
    Wet bottom stormwater storage area means a facility designed to be maintained as a pond with a free water surface and which has capacity to contain excess stormwater runoff. 
    X year storm means the average recurrence interval within which a rainfall of given intensity and duration will be equaled or exceeded only once. A 100-year storm would have an intensity of rainfall that would, on average, be equaled or exceeded only once in 100 years. This does not imply that it will occur only once in 100 years, or having occurred, will not happen again for 100 years. 
(Code 2008, title 16, § 1-3; Ord. No. 02-04, § 1-3, 7-15-2002; Ord. No. 14-10, § 1, 10-6-2014) 
Sec. 66-4. - Interpretation. 
    In their interpretation and application, the provisions of these regulations shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of public health, safety and general welfare. 
(Code 2008, title 16, § 1-4; Ord. No. 02-04, § 1-4, 7-15-2002) 
Sec. 66-5. - Conflict with public and private provisions. 
(a)  Public provisions. These regulations are not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute or other provision of law. Where any provision of these regulations imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other provision of these regulations or any other ordinance, rule or regulation or other provisions of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher standards shall control. 
(b)  Private provisions. These regulations are not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant or any other private agreement or restriction, provided that where the provisions of these regulations are more restrictive or impose higher standards or regulations than such easement, covenant or other private agreement or restriction, the requirements of these regulations shall govern. 
(Code 2008, title 16, § 1-5; Ord. No. 02-04, § 1-5, 7-15-2002) 
Sec. 66-6. - Entitlement of record upon approval. 
(a)  Each subdivider who seeks the council's approval of a subdivision shall follow these procedures and conform to the city's approved Comprehensive Plan, as amended from time to time. All requests for preliminary plat of a subdivision shall be referred to the planning commission for review and recommendation before action by the city council. 
(b)  No owner or agent of the owner of any parcel of land located in a proposed subdivision shall transfer or sell such a parcel until a plat of the subdivision has been approved by the city council and filed with the county recorder of deeds. 
(c)  Amendments to the subdivision code become effective with approval by the city council. Any final requests, based on preliminary plats that were approved by the city council within one year of the date of the request for final plat approval, shall not be required to comply with the amendments to the subdivision code made within that one-year period. All other final plats must comply with the then existing subdivision code requirements in effect on the date of the request for final plat approval. All requests for final plat approval must be made in compliance with the provisions of this subdivision code. 
(d)  If a plat has been approved and afterward it is desirable to change or vary the lot lines as shown, this constitutes a re-subdivision, and re-platting of the lots is required, following these subdivision procedures. 
(e)  Upon the approval of a final plat by the city, the subdivider thereby grants the city, its officers, employees and agents access to the subdivision for the purpose of inspecting improvements. 
(Code 2008, title 16, § 1-9; Ord. No. 02-04, § 1-9, 7-15-2002) 
Sec. 66-7. - Abbreviated procedure for certain small subdivisions. 
    The subdivider of any proposed subdivision having five or fewer lots fronting on an existing street complying with the standards imposed by this chapter may, at the discretion of the plat officer, submit a final plat, together with any construction plans deemed necessary, without following the steps which ordinarily precede the submission of a final plat. 
(Code 2008, title 16, § 1-10; Ord. No. 02-04, § 1-10, 7-15-2002) 
Sec. 66-8. - Subdivision inspection fees. 
(a)  Rate fee structure for inspection of subdivisions. 
(1)  Fees to be charged for subdivision inspections of improvements as built shall be as follows: 
a.  The developer shall notify the city 24 hours prior to installing or constructing any required improvement in a subdivision covered by inspections. The city will require a $1,000.00 deposit for any subdivision with 20 or more lots, and will require $50.00 per hour for additional inspections that exceed the initial 20 hours of inspections covered by the deposit. Unless otherwise stated, inspections will be conducted by the city inspector or superintendent of public works. The developer will be required to have inspections at the time of construction of the following improvements in the subdivision: 
1.  Sanitary sewer mains and appurtenance installation. The sanitary sewer mains and all appurtenances will be inspected for location and backfill of the utility prior to covering the mains. The developer will be charged $50.00 per hour for each inspection (one-hour minimum charge), payable within ten days of the date of the inspection. 
2.  Water mains and appurtenance installation. The water mains and all appurtenances will be inspected for location and backfill of the utility prior to covering the mains. Following the required pressure testing per E.P.A. standards and as provided by contractor, all service lines will be visually inspected for leaks. The developer will be charged $50.00 per hour for each inspection (one-hour minimum charge), payable within ten days of the date of the inspection. 
3.  Storm sewers and appurtenance installation. The storm sewers and all appurtenances will be inspected for location and backfill of the utility prior to covering the mains. The developer will be charged $50.00 per hour for each inspection (one-hour minimum charge), payable within ten days of the date of the inspection. 
4.  Street fill and compaction testing. Compaction testing for gravel layer and overlay must be conducted by a geotechnical engineer. The street backfill and compaction testing shall be inspected prior to laying gravel or paving. A proof roll will be required before gravel is installed to identify deficiencies. Any deficiency must be adequately remedied before proceeding with gravel layer. The developer will be charged $50.00 per hour for each inspection (one-hour minimum charge), payable within ten days of the date of the inspection. 
5.  Manholes. All manholes will be vacuum-tested per state guidelines and then visually inspected for any deficiencies. The developer will be charged $50.00 per hour for each inspection (one-hour minimum charge), payable within ten days of the date of the inspection. 
6.  Curb and gutter. The developer will provide the city with satisfactory test results from an independent lab regarding compression tests and air entrainment tests for curb and gutter. Cylinder testing for compression tests and air entrainment tests to measure a sufficient amount of air is contained within concrete will be conducted at the developer's expense. 
7.  Stormwater storage areas. The stormwater storage areas and outlet structures will be inspected for adherence to approved plans with respect to size, grade, location, depth, and elevation prior to coverage with topsoil and seeding. The developer will be charged $25.00 per stormwater storage area for each inspection, payable within ten days of the date of the inspection. 
8.  Site grading. Non-paved portions of the site, including, but not limited to, yard areas, landscape areas or islands, open channel drainageways, and street terraces shall be inspected for adherence to approved plans grade, slope, shape, and elevation prior to coverage with topsoil and seeding. The developer will be charged $25.00 per disturbed acre (disturbed acreage is rounded up to the nearest acre for purposes of determining fee) for each inspection, payable within ten days of the date of the inspection. 
9.  Failure to meet requirements. Failure to meet any of the minimum requirements of the subdivision code will result in a re-inspection and additional inspection fee will be charged at a rate of $50.00 per hour per inspection until the minimum requirements are met. 
(b)  Fee structure. 
(1)  Plat and/or subdivision fees. 
a.  Preliminary plat fee: $150.00 (applicant pays for required newspaper advertising charges separately); 
b.  Final plat filing fee: $25.00 (applicant pays advertising charges separately). 
(2)  Lot fees after final plat approval. 
a.  Condominium subdivision fees: $20.00 per unit; 
b.  Residential subdivisions fees: 
1.  First ten lots: $25.00 per lot; 
2.  Lots 11-20: $20.00 per lot; 
3.  Lots 21-40: $17.50 per lot; 
4.  Lots 40 plus: $12.50 per lot. 
(Code 2008, title 16, § 1-11, § 17.1440(F); Ord. No. 02-04, § 1-11, 7-15-2002; Ord. No. 09-06, § I, 5-4-2009; Ord. No. 09-08, § I, 11-16-2009; Ord. No. 11-02, § I, 2-21-2011; Ord. 11-11, § 1, 10-3-2011; Ord. No. 12-10, 5-20-2012; Ord. No. 12-12, § I, 7-2-2012; Ord. No. 12-21, § I, 11-5-2012; Ord. No. 14-10, 10-6-2014; Ord. No. 15-01, § I, 1-5-2015) 
Secs. 66-9-66-34. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PROCEDURE 

Sec. 66-35. - Sequence of events. 
    The following listing is not intended to be all-inclusive but only a guide to assist the subdivider through the various steps in the proper sequence. 
(1)  Step 1, pre-application (optional). Informal discussion with the plat officer and planning commission to assist the developer in preparing an acceptable preliminary plat. 
(2)  Step 2, submit preliminary plat to the plat officer. 
(3)  Step 3, planning commission holds public hearing on the preliminary plat. 
(4)  Step 4, review of preliminary plat by the planning commission. A recommendation from the planning commission to the city for approval or disapproval. If approved, a reproducible plat shall be filed with the city clerk and a filing fee of $25.00 paid. This approval authorizes the subdivider to proceed with the final plat. 
(5)  Step 5, submit final plat and all supporting data to plat officer within one year of the date of approval of the preliminary plat and pay subdivision fee. 
(6)  Step 6, planning commission holds public hearing and recommends to the city council approval or disapproval of the final plat. 
(7)  Step 7, city council approves final plat. 
(8)  Step 8, plat officer files final plat with county recorder of deeds. 
(9)  Step 9, subdivider constructs all improvements within two years from date of approval of the final plat. 
(10)  Step 10, subdivider retains the services of a professional engineer to supervise the construction of all required improvements, and all required improvements are tested and approved. 
(11)  Step 11, subdivider's engineer certifies to the city council that all improvements have been installed according to the approved plans and specifications and submits reproducible copies of as-built plans. 
(12)  Step 12, city council approves and accepts improvements. 
(13)  Step 13, subdivider guarantees improvements for one year from date of acceptance. 
(Code 2008, title 16, § 2-1; Ord. No. 02-04, § 2-1, 7-15-2002) 
Sec. 66-36. - Pre-application (optional). 
    Informal discussion with the plat officer and planning commission to assist the developer in preparing an acceptable preliminary plat. 
(Code 2008, title 16, § 2-2; Ord. No. 02-04, § 2-2, 7-15-2002) 
Sec. 66-37. - Preliminary plat. 
(a)  The subdivider shall prepare and submit 12 scaled copies of the preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision. An application for subdivision shall be filed with the preliminary plat. 
(b)  Preliminary plat materials shall be submitted to the plat officer no later than the 15th day of the month prior to the meeting at which the planning commission shall review and recommend action on the preliminary plat. Twelve additional scaled copies of the preliminary plat, as recommended by the planning commission, shall be submitted to the plat officer within five days following recommendation. 
(c)  Within 45 days from the date of the submission of the preliminary plat by the subdivider, or the filing by the subdivider of the last item of required supporting data, whichever is later, the planning commission shall recommend that the city council either approve or disapprove the preliminary plat. If the planning commission recommends disapproval of a preliminary plat, it shall within said 45 days provide both the subdivider and the city council with a written explanation of the reasons for its recommendation. If the preliminary plat is not satisfactory, the planning commission may give qualified approval of the preliminary plat and permit the subdivider to make recommended changes and additions before submission to the city council. A recommendation for disapproval does not constitute rejection of a preliminary plat. The city council may approve or disapprove a preliminary plat regardless of the recommendation of the planning commission. If the planning commission fails to make a recommendation within the time limits established by this subsection, unless such time is extended by mutual consent, the preliminary plat shall be submitted to the city council for its consideration without a recommendation by the planning commission. 
(d)  If such preliminary plat is disapproved, the planning commission will recommend denial to the city council unless the subdivider requests reconsideration by the planning commission in writing prior to the first meeting of the city council following written denial by the planning commission. If the subdivider requests reconsideration by the planning commission, the planning commission shall have an additional 45 days to consider the subdivider's request. 
(f)  Within 30 days after the next regular meeting of the city council following action by the planning commission, the city council shall either approve or reject the preliminary plat. Failure by the city council to act within the period established by this subsection shall constitute rejection of the preliminary plat. The city council and the subdivider may mutually agree to extend the 30-day period. 
(g)  The preliminary plat shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Existing conditions. 
a.  A detailed drawing of the proposed subdivision at a scale not smaller than 100 feet per inch. 
b.  Existing topographical data. For all land that slopes less than two percent, show contours with an interval of one foot. For land that slopes more than two percent, show contours with an interval of two feet. All elevations shall be based on state plane coordinates. 
c.  Other site conditions and significant features including flood hazard areas, watercourses, marshes and wooded areas. 
d.  Conditions on land adjacent to the site including approximate direction of ground slope including embankments and retaining walls, buildings, railroads, towers and all other nearby nonresidential land uses. 
e.  Zoning on and adjacent to the tract, including land separated by a transportation feature. Designation of any lots for duplex development. 
f.  Names of owners of adjacent unplatted land and names of adjacent platted subdivisions. 
g.  Existing streets and roads on or adjacent to the tract showing the location, name, right-of-way width and street surface width. All existing walks, curbs, gutters and culverts, etc. 
h.  Existing utilities on or adjacent to the tract, including: 
1.  The location and size of all water mains. If water mains are not adjacent to the tract, indicate the direction and distance to the nearest main, and its size. 
2.  The location and size of all sanitary and storm sewer mains, manholes and inlets. If sanitary sewer mains are not adjacent to the tract, indicate the direction, distance and invert elevation of the nearest sanitary sewer and its size. 
3.  The location of all gas mains. 
4.  The location of all electric and telephone poles and street lights. 
(2)  Proposed conditions. 
a.  Proposed improvements or other major projects planned by public authorities to be constructed on or near the tract. 
b.  Sites and acreage, if any, for multifamily dwellings, shopping centers, churches, industry or other nonpublic uses exclusive of single-family dwellings. 
c.  Sites and acreage, if any, to be dedicated for parks, playgrounds, bikeways, schools and other public uses. 
d.  Proposed streets including right-of-way and pavement widths. 
e.  Location and dimensions of all other proposed rights-of-way and easements. 
f.  Lot lines, block and lot numbers and lot sizes shall be shown. 
g.  Minimum building setback lines. 
h.  Location and sizes of all proposed utilities. 
i.  Location and size of stormwater control facilities including stormwater, storage areas, storm sewers, and constructed channels. 
j.  Arrows indicating general proposed drainage patterns. 
k.  Title, scale, north arrow, and date. 
l.  Additional information, if required by the plat officer, including: 
1.  Profiles showing existing ground surface and proposed street extensions showing grades and cross sections for a reasonable distance beyond the limits of the proposed subdivision. 
2.  Preliminary plans of proposed sanitary and storm sewers with grades and sizes indicated for a reasonable distance beyond the limits of the proposed subdivision. 
m.  Draft of restrictive covenants (if any) whereby the subdivider proposes to regulate land use in the subdivision and otherwise protect the proposed development. 
(Code 2008, title 16, § 2-3; Ord. No. 02-04, § 2-3, 7-15-2002; Ord. No. 14-10, § I, 10-6-2014) 
Sec. 66-38. - Bonds, fees, and certifications. 
(a)  All subdividers shall obtain a certificate of registration from the city prior to the submittal of preliminary plats. 
(b)  All public improvement contractors shall obtain a certificate of registration from the city prior to the start of construction of any public improvements. 
(c)  The applicant for a condominium subdivision shall furnish a bond with a corporate surety licensed to do business in this state, guaranteeing that all common areas and facilities and all common recreational facilities will be completed. 
(d)  The subdivider, prior to approval of the final plat by the city council, shall furnish surety that public improvements, including, without limitation, sidewalks, shall be completed satisfactorily. Surety shall be provided to the city when development occurs within the boundaries of the city and jointly to the city and county when development occurs within the mile and one-half jurisdiction of the city. The surety submitted to the city shall take any of three separate forms. 
(1)  The subdivider may elect to furnish a corporate surety bond approved by the city council, in the amount of 110 percent of the verified estimate of expenditure. 
(2)  In lieu of a surety bond, the subdivider may provide a cash bond in the form of a cashier's check or certified check payable to the city in an amount equal to 110 percent of the verified estimate of expenditure. The cash bond will be invested by the city, and the subdivider shall receive the interest earned on the cash bond when final repayment is made to the subdivider. 
(3)  In lieu of a surety or cash bond, the subdivider may provide an irrevocable letter of credit from a bank or other financial institution in an amount equal to 110 percent of the verified estimate of expenditure and in the form acceptable to the city. 
(e)  If the subdivider obtains guaranteed contracts from the contractors for all improvements in the subdivisions that total less than 90 percent of the verified estimate of expenditure, the subdivider may petition the city council to reduce the amount of the bond, etc., to the amount of the contract. 
(f)  Bond, etc., reductions to the subdivider may be made upon the subdivider's written request following 50 percent completion of the improvements; provided, however, that stormwater control features, approved by the civil engineer, shall be serviceable, if not entirely completed. Reduced bond, etc., amounts will be based upon completed quantities and applicable unit costs as contained in the verified estimate of expenditure and will require a written recommendation by the civil engineer to the city council. Based upon the civil engineer's written recommendation, the city council may authorize a reduction of the bond, etc. A maximum of three requests for reduction will be considered. Sufficient surety shall be maintained by the city to cover all remaining construction costs with a minimum amount retained of 20 percent until final approval and acceptance of the subdivision. Reductions of bonds, etc., shall not be considered as acceptance of all or part of a subdivision. 
(g)  Public improvements shall be substantially completed in a satisfactory manner within a two-year period following the recording of the final plat with the county recorder and shall also be conditioned upon the subdivider fully complying with the provisions of the subdivision code. The subdivider, the subdivider's engineer and all public improvement contractors shall submit to the city a certificate of compliance stating that all public improvements being dedicated to the city comply with all applicable city requirements. The certificate shall further state that any deviation from the construction plans and specifications have received approval of the civil engineer. 
(h)  Upon completion and conditional approval of all subdivision improvements, the subdivider shall provide a one-year written maintenance agreement/guaranty of the improvements against structural failure. During this period, the subdivider shall provide financial surety as follows: 
(1)  If a surety bond is used, it shall provide the surety has agreed to maintain such improvements constructed under the bond for a period of one year for 100 percent of the estimated cost of the improvements. 
(2)  If the subdivider provides a cash bond or an irrevocable letter of credit, the bond or letter of credit shall be 20 percent of the amount of the estimated costs of the improvements. 
(i)  Final amounts retained shall be released to the subdivider, with accrued interest, if any, following subdivider's written request and written recommendation by the civil engineer for final approval and acceptance by the city council. 
(j)  No final plat of any subdivision shall be approved for recording if the subdivider or anyone working under or through the subdivider is in violation of any of the provisions of the subdivision code. Furthermore, the planning commission and city council have the right to refuse to consider any additional plat or plats covering any subdivision or subdivisions of said subdivider through reapplication procedure, or otherwise, until such time as such violation, or violations, cease and the subdivider is in full compliance with all of the provisions of this code. 
(k)  Each applicant for approval of a condominium subdivision shall pay a review fee of $20.00 per unit. This review fee will not be refundable, whether or not the condominium subdivision is approved. 
(l)  Fees shall be paid by the subdivider to the city for the review of final plats and construction plans and specifications in the amount of $25.00 per lot for the first ten lots in a final plat, $20.00 per lot for the next ten lots in a final plat, $17.50 per lot for the next 20 lots in a final plat and $12.50 per lot for each additional lot over 40 on the final plat. This fee shall be paid to the city clerk at the time of submittal of the final plat to the plat officer. 
(m)  The subdivider shall pay the cost of materials for street signs. The signs shall be installed by the city. 
(n)  The city council shall take formal action at a meeting to accept public improvements. 
(Code 2008, title 16, § 2-4; Ord. No. 02-04, § 2-4, 7-15-2002) 
Secs. 66-39-66-64. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FINAL PLAT 

Sec. 66-65. - Final plat. 
(a)  Within one year of approval of the preliminary plat by the city council, the subdivider may prepare and submit a final plat of the proposed subdivision, or a portion thereof, along with other supplementary information required. The final plat shall be in substantial conformance with the approved preliminary plat and shall comply with the construction standards and subdivision code requirements in effect at the time the preliminary plat was approved. The subdivider shall have an additional four-year period in which to prepare and submit a final plat of the proposed subdivision or portion thereof, along with other supplementary information required, but any such final plat must comply with those construction standards and subdivision code requirements in effect at the time of final plat subdivision. Following this five-year period, the subdivider may request an extension of the period the preliminary plat remains in effect by submission of an application for extension presented for city council action. 
(b)  Twelve copies of the final plat application, along with the construction plans and specifications and an estimate of expenditure, shall be submitted to the plat officer no later than 20 days before the regular meeting of the city council at which the approval of the subdivision final plat is sought. 
(c)  The final plat shall be a reproducible ink drawing at a scale of 200 feet equals one inch or larger. The drawing may be on more than one sheet with an index sheet, if required. 
(d)  For large subdivisions, the final plat may be submitted for approval progressively in contiguous sections satisfactory to the plat officer. 
(e)  The final plat shall contain, as a minimum, the following information: 
(1)  Primary control points and ties to such control points to which all dimensions and bearings and similar data shall be referred. At least one of the control points shall be an established section corner. 
(2)  Subdivision boundary lines, street right-of-way lines, easements and lot lines shall be shown with accurate dimensions and bearings. Radii arcs and central angles of all curves shall also be shown. The location and description of all monuments used to identify points shall be included. 
(3)  The name and right-of-way width of each street or other right-of-way. 
(4)  The location, dimensions and purpose of all easements, including easements provided for sump pump drains, gas lines, etc. 
(5)  The minimum building setback lines. 
(6)  A number to identify each lot or site. 
(7)  The purpose for which sites other than residential lots are dedicated. 
(8)  The names of recorded owners of adjoining unplatted land. 
(9)  Reference to recorded subdivision plats adjoining the site with recorded name, date and number. 
(10)  Identification of all flood hazard areas. 
(11)  Plat title, scale, north arrow and date. 
(f)  Final plats of sites located entirely within the city limits shall contain the following certificates: 
(1)  A certificate from a registered land surveyor acknowledged by the owner of the land or duly authorized attorney, as required by the plat act. 
(2)  A certificate to be signed by the plat officer stating that the plat conforms to this subdivision code. 
(3)  A certificate to be signed by the city clerk stating that the plat was approved by the city council. 
(4)  A certificate to be signed by the county clerk stating that the subdivision is not subject to delinquent real estate taxes or special assessments. 
(5)  A certificate containing a dedication by the owner of the property dedicating to the public in perpetuity the right-of-way for public streets, alleys and sanitary and storm sewers, and stating that easements are granted for the uses specified and that other lots are dedicated for public purposes as specified and applicable. 
(g)  Final plats of sites located outside the city but within 11/2 miles of the city's corporate limits shall contain the following certificates and statements in addition to all of those required for sites within the city limits: 
(1)  All certificates required by the county. 
(2)  A certificate to be signed by the appropriate township road commissioner. 
(3)  A certificate to be signed by the county highway superintendent. 
(h)  Final plats for subdivisions that are bounded by state right-of-way shall contain a certificate for use by the district engineer of the state department of transportation. 
(i)  Within 90 days after approval of the final plat by the city council, the subdivider shall record the final plat with the county recorder. If the plat is not so recorded, it shall have no validity and shall not be recorded without subsequent approval of the city council. The city council may extend the filing date an additional 90 days if the subdivider can demonstrate unique circumstances or conditions whereby the recording of the final plat cannot be accomplished. 
(j)  The subdivider shall execute, upon request by the city, a bill of sale conveying to the city personal property located in the rights-of-way and easements that are dedicated to the city. 
(Code 2008, title 16, § 3-1; Ord. No. 02-04, § 3-1, 7-15-2002) 
Sec. 66-66. - Construction plans, specifications and other requirements. 
(a)  At the time of final plat submittal, five copies of construction plans and specifications for all public improvements, including, but not limited to, streets, sanitary sewers, water mains, drainage plans, sump pump drain lines, storm sewers, stormwater controls and erosion controls shall be submitted. The construction plans and specifications shall be prepared, signed and sealed by a registered Illinois professional engineer. These plans and specifications shall conform to the subdivision code and design standards of the city and be reviewed and approved by the civil engineer. A copy of the final plat and construction plans and specifications for all public improvements shall also be submitted via electronic media in a format acceptable to the city. 
(b)  An estimate of expenditure covering the cost of public improvements shall be prepared and submitted to the plat officer with the construction plans and specifications. The estimate of expenditure shall be prepared and signed by a registered Illinois professional engineer. This estimate shall be verified by the civil engineer for accuracy and adequacy. 
(c)  Drainage plans, including the calculations for stormwater control, shall be submitted as a part of the construction plans and specifications. The drainage plan shall be recorded with the final plat. The drainage plan shall contain the following statement regarding drainage of surface waters signed by a registered professional engineer and the owner of the land or attorney duly authorized by the owner: "To the best of our knowledge and belief, the drainage of surface waters will not be changed by the construction of such subdivision or any part thereof, or if such surface water drainage will be changed, reasonable provision has been made for the collection and diversion of such surface waters into public areas or drains that the subdivider has the right to use, and such surface waters will be planned for in accordance with generally accepted engineering practices so as to reduce the likelihood of damage to the adjoining property because of the construction of the subdivision." 
(d)  Restrictive covenants (if any) in a form acceptable for recording, and other data, such as other certificates, affidavits, etc., as may be required by the plat officer to enforce the subdivision code, design standards or other regulations shall be submitted at this time. 
(e)  A pre-construction conference to be held with the city's civil engineer, subdivider, subdivider's engineer and subdivider's general contractor is encouraged to discuss the requirements for public improvements, including, but not limited to, construction specifications, bonding, scheduling and testing. 
(f)  In the case of commercial and industrial subdivisions and developments, a landscaping plan shall be submitted to and approved by the city. 
(Code 2008, title 16, § 3-2; Ord. No. 02-04, § 3-2, 7-15-2002; Ord. No. 14-10, § I, 10-6-2014) 
Sec. 66-67. - Easements. 
(a)  Except where alleys are provided for the purpose, utility easements shall be provided for use in erecting, constructing and maintaining water mains, poles, wires, conduits, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, surface drainage, gas mains, electrical lines, cable television facilities and other public utilities required for an urban structure. Said easement shall be centered on rear and/or side lot lines and along street rights-of-way to the greatest extent practicable, and shall have a minimum width of 15 feet. Easements for underground cable for street lighting shall be provided on the final plat. No building shall be erected on said easements. 
(b)  Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel, stream, stormwater or detention facility where the runoff from a base flood storm exceeds one cubic foot per second, a watercourse easement or drainageway easement shall be provided conforming substantially with the lines of the watercourse and/or detention facilities. The width of the easement shall be sufficient for the watercourse and future maintenance access to the drainageway. 
(c)  A planting screen easement of at least ten feet in width shall be provided along the lines of lots abutting a traffic artery adjoining reverse frontage lots. 
(Code 2008, title 16, § 3-3; Ord. No. 02-04, § 3-3, 7-15-2002; Ord. No. 14-10, § I, 10-6-2014) 
Sec. 66-68. - Construction inspections and deviations from the plans and specifications. 
(a)  The city or the designated representative of the city shall have access to the subdivision site at all times to observe the improvements during and after construction. 
(b)  The subdivider shall notify the city at least 24 hours in advance of any underground construction of improvements. 
(c)  The subdivider shall be responsible for the inspection of all improvements to insure that all construction is done in accordance with city and state codes and requirements. The subdivider shall provide sufficient engineering inspection so that the subdivider's engineer can certify that all construction was completed in accordance with the approved plans and specifications. 
(d)  No significant deviation from the approved construction plans and specifications shall be permitted without the written approval of the civil engineer. In the event of a discrepancy between sets of plans and the specifications for the subdivision, the official copy on file with the city shall take precedence. 
(e)  The subdivider shall certify that all improvements have been constructed in accordance with city and state codes and requirements and with the approved plans and specifications. This certification shall be required for each improvement made prior to the release by the city of the subdivision bond, cash deposit or any portion thereof. The engineer for the subdivider shall also certify that all improvements have been constructed in accordance with city and state codes and requirements and with the approved plans and specifications. This certification shall be required for each improvement made prior to the release by the city of the subdivision bond, etc., cash deposit or any portion thereof. 
(f)  The contractor or subcontractor responsible for installing each improvement shall also certify that all improvements have been constructed in accordance with city and state codes and requirements and with the approved plans and specifications. This certification shall be required for each improvement prior to the release by the city of the subdivision bond, etc., cash deposit or any portion thereof. 
(g)  One copy of as-built construction plans must be submitted to the city prior to the release of the subdivision bond, etc. 
(Code 2008, title 16, § 3-4; Ord. No. 02-04, § 3-4, 7-15-2002) 
Sec. 66-69. - Rules for excavation in public rights-of-way. 
(a)  A surety bond in the penal sum of $2,500.00 shall be provided to the city along with a certificate of liability insurance listing the city as an additional insured. A blanket bond may be provided annually in the above amount; however, each excavation shall require a separate license. 
(b)  Payment for a license to excavate on municipal right-of-way and approval of said license shall first be issued by the city prior to excavation. 
(c)  It shall be the responsibility of the contractor to place the appropriate J.U.L.I.E. notification prior to starting work and to provide any barricades or traffic control measures required to complete the project in a safe manner. 
(d)  All work shall be performed during normal work hours except for emergencies, in which case the city shall be notified immediately. 
(e)  No excavation shall commence after 2:00 p.m. on weekdays without prior approval by the city director of public works or his designee. 
(f)  All debris remaining from the excavation shall be removed from the right-of-way as soon as possible, otherwise debris will be removed by municipal forces without notice to the contractor, and the contractor will be billed in accordance with the city's rate structure for labor, equipment and materials. 
(g)  Costs associated with the repair of any utilities or real property damaged after being marked by the municipality shall be the responsibility of the contractor. Municipal rates shall be $40.00 per manhour to include hourly wages and benefits, and $50.00 per hour for the use of heavy equipment such as backhoe, dump truck, sewer equipment, street sweeper, etc. Prices are subject to change from time-to-time. 
(h)  Any excavation on municipal right-of-way shall be subject to inspection and approval by the director of public works or his designee before the excavation is back filled. 
(Code 2008, title 16, § 3-5; Ord. No. 02-04, § 3-5, 7-15-2002) 
Sec. 66-70. - Blocks and alleys. 
(a)  Blocks. 
(1)  The length, width and shape of blocks shall be determined with due regard to the following: 
a.  Zoning requirements as to lot size. 
b.  Limitations of topography. 
c.  Needs for convenient access, traffic movement, control and safety of street traffic. 
d.  Provisions of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of subdivision contemplated. 
(2)  Pedestrian crosswalk or walkways shall be required to provide circulation and access to schools and playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation and other community facilities. Walkways shall not be less than ten feet wide. 
(3)  All gas main trenches located below street surfaces, curbs and gutters and sidewalks shall be backfilled with selected granular backfill. 
(4)  Under ordinary circumstances, block lengths shall not be less than 250 feet nor more than 1,200 feet, with the following factors to be utilized in the determination of the lengths, widths and shapes of blocks and exceptions to the above block length requirements: 
a.  Provisions of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated. 
b.  Zoning requirements as to lot size and dimensions. 
c.  Needs for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street traffic. 
d.  Limitations and opportunities of topography. 
(5)  Paved pedestrian through walkways of not less than ten feet right-of-way shall be required in blocks exceeding 1,200 feet in length and placed as near the center of the block as possible. 
(6)  In residential areas, blocks shall be designed so that each lot within said block fronts on a paved residential or collector street. No lot shall front on a major thoroughfare, unless an access or frontage road is provided. 
(b)  Alleys. 
(1)  Alleys may be provided at the rear of all lots or tracts intended for commercial or industrial use but shall not be provided in tracts or blocks intended or zoned for residential use. 
(2)  The minimum right-of-way for alleys shall be 20 feet. 
(3)  Where alleys intersect with streets or other alleys, corners shall be cut off sufficiently to permit safe vehicular movements. 
(4)  Dead-end alleys shall be avoided where possible, but if unavoidable, shall be provided with adequate turn-around facilities, as determined by the city's authorized representative. 
(5)  Alley surfaces shall be constructed to the requirements of the city. 
(6)  No construction of any type shall be permitted on the right-of-way. 
(Code 2008, title 16, § 3-6; Ord. No. 02-04, § 3-6, 7-15-2002) 
Sec. 66-71. - Drainage plan. 
    A drainage plan meeting the requirements of section 58-26(1) shall be submitted along with the final plat for all subdivisions as defined herein. 
(Code 2008, title 16, § 3-7; Ord. No. 02-04, § 3-7, 7-15-2002; Ord. No. 14-10, § I, 10-6-2014) 
Sec. 66-72. - Lots. 
(a)  The area, width and depth of all lots shall not be less than required by the city zoning code. No outlet, remainder or remnant of land which is part of the tract being subdivided shall be created which, by reason of the lot width, depth, area, frontage, topography, or lack of access, or otherwise, cannot be used as a zoning lot, or be subject to further subdivision in accordance with the terms of this subdivision code. Any remaining parcel or outlet that cannot be made to comply with this code shall be eliminated by combining the area with one or more adjoining lots that do comply or by conveying it to a public body for an appropriate public use. 
(b)  All properties reserved or laid out for commercial and/or industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide off street service and parking. The area required for these uses shall be determined by the type of use and development contemplated and as required by the zoning code. 
(c)  If public sanitary sewers are not available and septic tank systems are to be used for sewage disposal, the minimum lot size shall be 20,000 square feet. 
(d)  If neither a public sanitary sewer nor a public water system is available, the minimum lot size shall be one acre, with a lot width at the setback line of 120 feet or more. 
(e)  Reverse frontage lots shall be avoided except where essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. 
(f)  Corner lots in residential subdivisions shall have extra width to permit building orientation to either street. 
(g)  Lots in residential subdivisions with pedestrian crosswalk easements shall have the minimum side yard dimensions increased in width equal to the projection into the easement on the lot. 
(h)  All residential lots shall conform to the following general standards, in addition to all other requirements of this article: 
(1)  All such residential lots shall have access and frontage on a public street. The planning commission may recommend this requirement be waived where, due to unique circumstances or topographical limitations, access to a public street must be provided by either a private drive or an ingress/egress easement. 
(2)  Flag lots will not be permitted except where such flag lots satisfy all of the following requirements: 
a.  Such lots contain a minimum area of one acre, excluding the area of the narrow strip of land connecting the main or principal use area, or the building area, to the public street. 
b.  Such lots provide for a minimum width at the public street of 30 feet, which minimum width shall be maintained from the public street to the main or principal use area, or building area, of such lot. 
(i)  Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street right-of-way. 
(j)  Building set back lines shall be established on all lots. The setback lines shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision and for the type of development and use contemplated. Minimum set back lines shall be established by the zoning code. 
(k)  All lot corners shall be marked with a monument that conforms to the requirements of the plat act, as amended. 
(Code 2008, title 16, § 3-8; Ord. No. 02-04, § 3-8, 7-15-2002) 
Sec. 66-73. - Water and sewer main extension policy. 
(a)  It has been, and continues to be, the policy of the city that land developers within the city or unincorporated area within 11/2 miles of the corporate limits are required to extend water, storm sewer and sanitary sewer mains to their developments at their own expense. 
(b)  In certain situations in which the corporate authorities deem it to be necessary or desirable to protect the public health, safety and welfare by insuring that adequate public facilities exist to serve new developments and to promote orderly development, the city may elect, in its sole discretion, to extend water, storm sewer or sanitary sewer mains at the city's expense to desirable areas and to recoup its expense by charging a connection fee to the owners/developers of the property benefited by said main extensions. 
(c)  In the event the city elects to extend mains at its own expense, it shall be done so by ordinance, and each such ordinance shall contain, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  An estimate of the cost to the city to extend the main. 
(2)  A designation of the area which the city reasonably believes will be benefited by the main extension. 
(3)  A formula or fee schedule setting forth the way in which the connection fee will be determined. 
(d)  Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit or limit the city from collecting the fees provided for elsewhere in this Code. 
(e)  Sanitary sewers connected to a public sewer system shall be installed to serve each lot in every subdivision under the planning jurisdiction of the city, whether within the city or outside of the city, except where a sanitary sewer is unavailable if it lies within 300 feet of any portion of the proposed subdivision. 
(Code 2008, title 16, § 3-9; Ord. No. 02-04, § 3-9, 7-15-2002) 
Sec. 66-74. - Power lines. 
    All power lines shall be installed underground. All main power lines shall be installed in a utility easement. 
(Code 2008, title 16, § 3-10; Ord. No. 02-04, § 3-10, 7-15-2002) 
Sec. 66-75. - Sanitary sewers and appurtenances. 
(a)  The size of sanitary sewers and appurtenances shall be determined by the civil engineer. The minimum size of sewer mains shall be eight inches, and the minimum size of sewer laterals shall be six inches. The type of material used for sewers greater than 18 inches in diameter or laid at depths exceeding 28 feet or at stream crossings and in unstable ground shall be approved by the civil engineer. 
(b)  Sanitary sewers and appurtenances shall be in accordance with city construction standards and state water and sewer main specifications. Connection of new sanitary sewers to the existing system shall not be made until approved by the civil engineer. 
(c)  Sanitary sewers and service lines shall be ductile iron or polyvinyl chloride (PVC). 
(d)  Ductile iron or PVC sewer joints shall be bell and spigot joints. 
(e)  Sanitary sewer manholes shall be pre-cast concrete components or monolith concrete as shown on the city construction standards. Bases shall be cast in place concrete or pre-cast concrete. Wherever possible, manholes shall be provided with a corbel section to reduce the inside diameter of the manhole to 24 inches. 
(f)  All sanitary sewers and service lines shall be laid with a minimum cover of three feet. 
(g)  All sanitary sewers shall be installed on granular cradle bedding. 
(h)  All sanitary sewer main and service line trenches located below street surfaces, curb and gutters shall be backfilled with selected granular backfill. 
(i)  All sanitary sewer trenches shall be compacted by mechanical compaction, jetting and water soaking or another means, as approved by the civil engineer. 
(j)  All new sanitary sewers and appurtenances shall be tested for leakage by air and/or ex-filtration under pressure or other methods approved by the civil engineer, tested for deflection, lamped for straightness and visually inspected. All tests shall be performed by the subdivider's engineer or an independent testing company or under the observation of the civil engineer and test results documented and submitted to the civil engineer for review. 
(Code 2008, title 16, § 3-11; Ord. No. 02-04, § 3-11, 7-15-2002) 
Sec. 66-76. - Sidewalks. 
    Sidewalks are required on two sides of all streets in accordance with the specifications herein. Except for frontage roads, fewer than two sidewalks will require a variance. Sidewalks shall be a minimum of four inches thick, six inches across driveways, of poured Portland cement concrete, four feet wide in residential areas and ten feet wide in commercial areas, and shall be located between one and two feet from the property line. The construction of sidewalks in industrial subdivisions shall be determined on an individual basis by the city council with advice from the civil engineer. A permit issued by the city and inspection by the city for the construction of sidewalks in existing subdivisions shall be provided. A bond shall be provided by the developer to ensure that all sidewalks are constructed in a timely manner and in accordance with this article. The developer shall install sidewalks on all lots pursuant to the specifications provided herein no later than the earlier of the following to occur: 
(1)  That date which is two years from the date of the final plat; or 
(2)  Upon issuance of building permits for 80 percent of the lots within the subdivision as shown on the final plat. 
(Code 2008, title 16, § 3-12; Ord. No. 02-04, § 3-12, 7-15-2002) 
Sec. 66-77. - Storm sewers and appurtenances. 
(a)  The size of storm sewers and appurtenances shall be as approved by the civil engineer. Minimum capacity of storm sewers shall be adequate to carry runoff from a 25-year storm. 
(b)  A sump pump lateral shall be provided to service all residential lots one acre or smaller in size. Connection of the sump pump lateral shall be made to storm sewer main lines, inlets, or manholes. Laterals shall be a minimum four inches in diameter. All connections of sump pump laterals to the existing system shall be inspected by the city prior to backfilling. 
(c)  Storm sewers, sump pump laterals, and appurtenances shall be installed in accordance with city construction standards and state water and sewer main specifications. Connection of new storm sewers to the existing system shall not be made until approved by the civil engineer. 
(d)  Pipe used in storm sewer construction shall be of concrete, polyvinyl chloride (PVC) or ductile iron of appropriate type and class. 
(e)  Storm sewer manholes and inlets shall be pre-cast concrete components or monolith concrete. Bases shall be cast in place concrete or pre-cast concrete. 
(f)  All storm sewers and sump pump laterals shall be installed on granular cradle bedding. 
(g)  All storm sewers, sump pump laterals, and appurtenances located below street surfaces, curbs and gutters shall be backfilled with selected granular backfill. 
(h)  All storm sewer trenches shall be compacted by mechanical compaction, jetting and water soaking or another means, as approved by the civil engineer. 
(i)  All sump pump lateral trenches in or adjacent to street rights-of-way shall be compacted by mechanical compaction, jetting and water soaking or another means, as approved by the civil engineer. 
(j)  All storm sewers and laterals shall be lamped for straightness and visually inspected. All tests shall be performed by the subdivider's engineer, an independent testing company or under the observation of the civil engineer, and test results documented and submitted to the civil engineer for review. 
(Code 2008, title 16, §§ 3-12, 3-13; Ord. No. 02-04, § 3-13, 7-15-2002; Ord. No. 14-10, § I, 10-6-2014) 
Sec. 66-78. - Streets. 
(a)  The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions or developments shall make provision for the continuance of existing streets in adjoining areas. Where adjoining areas are not subdivided, the arrangement of streets in new subdivisions or developments shall make provision for proper projection of dedicated streets to the boundaries of the subdivision or development. 
(b)  The arrangement, width, grade and location of all streets shall be considered in their relation to existing topographical conditions and safety. 
(c)  Principal streets shall conform to the comprehensive plan, and local streets shall be designed to discourage through traffic. 
(d)  When a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed major thoroughfare, the planning commission may require marginal access streets, reverse frontage lots with screen plantings, rear service alleys or such other treatment as may be necessary to provide separation of through and local traffic. 
(e)  Out lots or reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited except where their control is placed with the city under conditions approved by the planning commission. 
(f)  Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall be avoided. 
(g)  A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be introduced between reverse curves on major and secondary thoroughfares. 
(h)  Streets shall be laid to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles. No street shall intersect any other street at less than a 75-degree angle. 
(i)  When connecting street lines deflect from each other by more than ten degrees, they shall be connected by a curve with a radius adequate to insure a sight distance of not less than 100 feet along intersecting streets. Greater radii may be required for special cases by the planning commission. 
(j)  Property lines at street intersections shall be rounded with a 15-foot radius. The radius may be increased when deemed necessary by the planning commission. 
(k)  Surface grading at street intersections shall be such as to insure a sight distance of not less than 100 feet along intersecting streets. 
(l)  Minimum street right-of-way width shall be in accordance with typical sections provided herein. 
(m)  Dead end streets shall be provided with a turnaround cul-de-sac having an outside pavement diameter of at least 90 feet and a street right-of-way diameter of at least 110 feet. The length of a dead end street shall not exceed 600 feet, measured from the center point of the turnaround to the centerline of an intersecting street, except where unusual topography or other unique circumstances may allow greater length. 
(n)  Drainage gradient shall not be less than 0.35 percent. All changes in grade from major and secondary streets shall be connected by a vertical curve of a minimum length equal to 20 times the algebraic difference in the rates of grade. The length of curve for all other streets shall be not less than ten times the algebraic difference in the rates of grade. 
(o)  Street grades shall not exceed the following: 
(1)  Major thoroughfares: six percent. 
(2)  Collector streets: seven percent. 
(3)  Minor streets: eight percent. 
(p)  Access to state and county highways at intervals of less than 1,320 feet shall not be allowed except where impractical or impossible due to existing property divisions or topography. Streets within new subdivisions shall be arranged to permit access to adjacent future subdivisions to meet this requirement. 
(q)  Streets in residential subdivisions other than country estates subdivisions shall be a minimum of 32 feet wide from the face of curb to face of curb. The width of secondary thoroughfares and streets in industrial and commercial subdivisions shall be as determined by the civil engineer. All major thoroughfare street widths shall conform to the state road specifications. In residential subdivisions with country estates streets, streets shall be a minimum of 24 feet wide. 
(r)  All construction materials shall be governed by the State of Illinois Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, current edition, and supplemental specifications, unless otherwise directed by the city. 
(s)  All streets shall be constructed in conformance with the city subdivision standards and the State of Illinois Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, current edition, and supplemental specifications, unless otherwise directed by the city. 
(t)  The location of trees planted in parkways or street rights-of-way is subject to approval of the planning commission. Trees should be a minimum of two-inch caliper. The recommended types of trees are: Norway maple, red maple, Amour cork-tree, little leaf linden, Siberian elm, common hackberry, honey locust or American linden. 
(u)  Driveway entrances shall be constructed per the city's subdivision standards. No driveway shall exceed 24 feet in width, including flares. The driveway must be at least six inches deep for the first five feet of the approach. Reinforcement of any kind is prohibited within the approach. The maximum slope allowed is ten percent. Any damages to city curbs are the responsibility of the contractor and homeowner. The driveway cannot be higher than the pan of the curb. 
(v)  All underground utilities that lie or cross under the proposed pavement shall be constructed prior to any street construction. Trenches shall be backfilled with approved material and compacted by approved methods to a point five feet behind the curb. It is recommended that street surfaces in residential subdivisions should not be installed until the trenches for underground utilities have settled through a winter and spring season. 
(w)  Streets constructed outside the corporate limits of the city but within the mile and one-half extraterritorial jurisdiction shall, in addition to conforming to this subdivision code, also conform to the rules, specifications and regulations regarding location width grades and surface and drainage structures applicable to the township road system. The review, approval and acceptance of roads or streets in the township are performed by the township highway commissioner, in coordination with the city, and acceptance shall be filed with the county clerk and county superintendent of highways. 
(x)  The base course of streets shall be tested by compaction to not less than 95 percent of standard laboratory density and with not more than 120 percent of optimum moisture content a minimum of every 100 linear feet of roadway or increment thereof. Sub grade compaction shall be performed every 100 linear feet of roadway or increment thereof. The use of fill dirt or other unusual soil conditions may cause a need to increase the number of tests performed. 
(y)  Pavement shall have each lane of both the binder course and surface course tested. Each pavement course shall be tested every 100 linear feet for density by nuclear test methods indicating average density not less than 93 percent of minimum theoretical density. One test result shall be indicated by the average of five readings from a cross section of a lane. 
(z)  Concrete curbs and gutters shall have a slump test at least once a day and an air test every 100 linear feet. A compressive strength test shall be performed by sampling four beams or eight cylinders on the first day of construction and sampling two beams or four cylinders every day thereafter. 
(aa)  To provide for safe vehicular movement on minor residential streets, property lines at intersections shall be truncated by straight lines joining points of 15 feet back from the property line intersections as follows: 

A curved line, making a rounded property line may also be used. In cases involving major thoroughfares, angular intersections, abrupt changes in alignment, or other cases where more dedication is deemed necessary by the city's authorized representative, such dedication shall be required. 
(bb)  Surface grading at intersections shall be such as to permit unobstructed vision within the sight triangle formed by a line along the curb of one of the intersecting streets 60 feet distant from the right-of-way line of the other intersecting street and 60 feet distant along the same right-of-way line of the latter street as shown below: 

(Code 2008, title 16, § 3-15; Ord. No. 02-04, § 3-15, 7-15-2002; Ord. No. 11-09, 9-6-2011) 
Sec. 66-79. - Street names, signs and numbering. 
(a)  The subdivider shall provide all street names. No street name shall be used that will duplicate or be confused with the name of any existing street. All street names shall be approved by the plat officer. 
(b)  The city shall install all street signs. The subdivider shall pay the cost of all materials. 
(Code 2008, title 16, § 3-16; Ord. No. 02-04, § 3-16, 7-15-2002) 
Sec. 66-80. - Street lighting. 
    A lighting system shall be provided for each residential subdivision with either street lights or yard lights. If street lights are installed, they are required at each intersection and along straightaways at a minimum spacing of one every 500 feet. In lieu of street lights, the subdivider shall either make provisions for a yard light at each lot or impose and enforce a restrictive covenant requiring a yard light to be placed on each lot. Said yard light shall operate automatically from sunset to sunrise. Such restrictive covenant shall require all yard lights to be located in the yard ten feet from the front lot line and within three feet of the driveway. All wiring for street or yard lights shall be buried underground a minimum depth of 24 inches in accordance with the national electrical code. All poles, fixtures and wiring shall be approved by the electric utility servicing the city. Street lights are not required outside the city's corporate limits. 
(Code 2008, title 16, § 3-17; Ord. No. 02-04, § 3-17, 7-15-2002) 
Sec. 66-81. - Telephone and cable television lines. 
    All main telephone and cable television lines in subdivisions shall be installed along either the front or rear lot lines. All lines shall be installed underground. All main lines shall be installed in a utility easement. 
(Code 2008, title 16, § 3-19; Ord. No. 02-04, § 3-19, 7-15-2002) 
Sec. 66-82. - Water main and appurtenances. 
(a)  The size of water mains shall be as determined by the civil engineer. The minimum size for water mains shall be eight inches unless otherwise approved by the planning commission. 
(b)  Water mains shall be located between the proposed sidewalk and the proposed curb. A locating wire shall be installed with all water mains. For any subdivision located within the subdivision control of the city, each lot within the subdivision shall be provided with a connection to the public water supply. Such water service shall be extended to and a curb stop installed on city right-of-way and within one foot of the property line at a location in the approximate center of the lot. All connections to said public water mains shall comply with existing ordinances and shall be subject to approval and inspection by the director of public works or any other party assigned by the city council. If curb stops and/or service lines are located in the driveway or otherwise permanently covered the homeowner will bear the cost of excavation and restoration so that repairs may be carried out by the city. 
(c)  Water mains and appurtenances shall be installed in accordance with the city construction standards and with the most recent edition of Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction. Connection of new water mains to the existing system shall not be made until approved by the civil engineer. 
(d)  Water mains shall be ductile iron or polyvinyl chloride (PVC) C-900 DR 18 pipe as approved by the civil engineer. All fittings shall be ductile iron. Specialty valves and fittings shall be approved by the civil engineer. All service taps shall be a full circle Type 264 stainless steel single band clamp or a Smith-Blair Style Type 317 Double Strap Tap with CC Threads or equivalent. 
(e)  Water main pipe shall have pressure slip bell and spigot joints. All fittings shall have mechanical joints with retainers. 
(f)  Fire hydrants and appurtenances. 
(1)  Shall be installed at all intersections, with a maximum spacing of 600 feet and shall have a shut off valve installed between the water main and the hydrant. Water mains shall have shut off valves installed at 800 feet maximum spacing and on each line at all tees or crosses. 
(2)  Shall be furnished and installed by the subdivider. Hydrants shall be Mueller Model A423 51/4-inch diameter three-way hydrants. All hydrants shall be with valves, retainers, and blocked. 
(g)  All service lines shall be either copper water tube type or 160# test polyethylene buried a minimum of 4 feet deep. Y-stops and fittings used with copper tubing shall be brass. A locating wire shall be affixed to polyethylene service lines before back filling the excavation. 
(h)  Water mains. 
(1)  All water mains and service lines shall be laid with a minimum cover of four feet. 
(2)  All water main and service line trenches located below street surfaces, curbs and gutters shall be backfilled with selected granular backfill. 
(3)  All water main trenches shall be compacted by mechanical compaction, jetting and water soaking or another means, as approved by the civil engineer. 
(4)  All new water mains and appurtenances shall be visually inspected, pressure tested and leak tested. The testing shall be done by the subdivider's engineer or an independent testing company under the observation of the city inspector or superintendent of public works. 
(5)  All new water mains and appurtenances shall be disinfected and flushed and meet all state requirements prior to placing the new system in operation. 
(6)  Water mains shall be as shown on the comprehensive plan, but no main shall be less than eight inches in diameter unless otherwise approved by the planning commission. All water mains shall be looped. The subdivider shall construct all laterals and feeder mains in accordance with Illinois Environmental Protection Agency (IEPA) guidelines. Each lateral from main to curb box shall be copper and shall feed one lot only, and the curb box shall be located on city right-of-way and within one foot of the property line. 
(7)  Splicing of water mains under any street is strictly prohibited. 
(Code 2008, title 16, § 3-20; Ord. No. 02-04, § 3-20, 7-15-2002; Ord. No. 11-15, § I, 10-3-2011; Ord. No. 12-11, § I, 5-21-2012; Ord. No. 12-16, § I, 8-20-2012; Revised Ord. No. 12, 8-20-2012; Ord. No. 16-03, § I, 1-18-2016) 
Secs. 66-83-66-107. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PARK AND RECREATION LAND 

Sec. 66-108. - Dedication. 
    Each residential subdivision shall contain land dedicated to the city or in lieu thereof, a payment shall be made by the subdivider for the purpose of providing park and recreation land for the city. The amount of the land to be dedicated shall be based on the net area of the subdivision, defined as the total area of land to be subdivided after subtraction of land dedicated for streets and other public areas exclusive of easements. The following formula shall be used in determining the amount of land to be dedicated for park and recreation purposes: 
Net Density per Acre Percentage of Net Acreage to be Dedicated Up to 1 dwelling unit/acre 0.50% 1-3 dwelling units/acre 1.25% 3-6 dwelling units/acre 3.25% 6-8 dwelling units/acre 4.25% 8-20 dwelling units/acre 10.00% 20-30 dwelling units/acre 15.00%  
(Code 2008, title 16, § 4; Ord. No. 02-04, § 4, 7-15-2002) 
Sec. 66-109. - Payment in lieu. 
    In lieu of dedicating land, the subdivider shall make a cash payment to the city. Said payment shall be based on the fair market value of the land in the same general geographic area or the average sale price of an equivalent parcel in the same subdivision, whichever is greater. 
(Code 2008, title 16, § 4; Ord. No. 02-04, § 4, 7-15-2002) 
Sec. 66-110. - Minimum dedications. 
(a)  In no case shall less than two acres of land be dedicated. If the net density per acre is such that less than two acres is to be dedicated, payment shall be made to the city. 
(b)  Land dedicated pursuant to this section shall be located in relation to existing or planned roads and residences as to promote access to and maximum utilization of such land for park purposes. Dedicated land shall be in contiguous parcels. 
(Code 2008, title 16, § 4; Ord. No. 02-04, § 4, 7-15-2002) 
Sec. 66-111. - Combination of dedication and payment in lieu. 
(a)  The city council may allow a combination dedication and payment to be made if the minimum acreage requirement set forth herein is met. The council has the sole discretion in determining this combination and has the sole discretion of allowing payment to be made in the place of land if the amount of land to be dedicated is greater than two acres. 
(b)  When a subdivision contains land that has been designated as park and recreation land in the city's comprehensive plan or other similar document that designates land for park and recreation purposes, the subdivider shall dedicate that proportion of land as specified in this section. The city then has up to one year from the date of approval of the preliminary plat to purchase, at fair market value, the remainder of the land designated as park and recreation land. If the city fails to purchase said land, the subdivider may use that land as he sees fit, providing the use remains in conformance with the remainder of the subdivision. 
(Code 2008, title 16, § 4; Ord. No. 02-04, § 4, 7-15-2002) 
Secs. 66-112-66-135. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OTHER SUBDIVISIONS 

Sec. 66-136. - Subdivision outside the corporate limits within 11/2 miles. 
(a)  Subdivisions located outside the city's corporate limits, but within 11/2 miles of the corporate limits, shall meet all requirements of the city's subdivision code and standards, in addition to the requirements of the township and county. 
(b)  Storm sewers, sanitary sewers and water mains shall not be extended to users located outside the city's corporate limits except when the city council votes to allow such an extension after affected property owners file a petition for water or sewer service and sign an agreement to annex when requested. 
(c)  Streets constructed outside the corporate limits of the city but within the 11/2-mile extraterritorial jurisdiction must meet city requirements and shall also conform to the rules, specifications and regulations regarding location, width, grades and surface and drainage structures applicable to the township road system. The review, approval and acceptance of roads or streets in the township is performed by both the city and the township highway commissioner, with bonds, etc., for public improvements, including streets, assigned jointly to the city and county and held by the county. Final acceptance shall be filed with the county clerk and county superintendent of highways. Final plat acceptance does not convey acceptance of roads. 
(d)  The minimum lot size in subdivisions located outside the city's corporate limits but within 11/2 miles of the corporate limits shall be 2.5 acres unless said lot is served by public water and sewer. 
(e)  The minimum frontage of any lot located outside the city's corporate limits but within 11/2 miles of the corporate limits shall be 120 feet. 
(f)  Lots outside the corporate limits of the city but within 11/2 miles of the city may utilize the country estate form of street development rather than the application of curb and gutter, but must install a depressed curb a minimum of 18 inches in width with outlet to ditch sections, as needed, with maximum spacing of 200 feet. 
(g)  Sidewalks are not required in these subdivisions, but a defined path for pedestrian traffic shall be provided. 
(h)  Existing roads that border subdivisions in this section may remain the same as before the subdivision, but any roads constructed within the subdivision must meet the requirements of subsection (c) of this section. 
(Code 2008, title 16, § 5-1; Ord. No. 02-04, § 5-1, 7-15-2002) 
Sec. 66-137. - Condominium subdivision. 
(a)  In addition to all other requirements relating to new subdivisions, the requirements of this section shall apply to any subdivision or part of a subdivision intended to be developed by the construction of two-family or multifamily buildings and the sale of the building by selling individual condominium units rather than by selling the building to a person, firm, corporation or association that will act as landlord and rent the dwelling units to individual tenants. 
(b)  Each application for approval of a condominium subdivision shall contain, in addition to the information required by the city ordinances relating to new subdivisions, the following additional information: 
(1)  Plans and specifications indicating where each condominium is to be and what public areas are to be owned by the association of condominium owners. 
(2)  Proposed articles of incorporation and bylaws for the association of condominium owners who will manage the common areas. 
(3)  A detailed description of proposed financing to be available to purchasers of the condominium units. 
(4)  Information indicating financial responsibility and financial ability of the builders or developers to complete the project as proposed. 
(5)  A copy of all proposed covenants relating to the real estate. 
(6)  An agreement by the developer specifying the improvements to be completed by the developer, including recreational facilities, bicycle trails and other common areas. 
(7)  If the construction is to be financed in whole or in part by escrow funds provided by purchasers or if escrow funds of any kind are required from purchasers, then the following information shall be provided: 
a.  A description of the escrow arrangements. 
b.  A copy of all escrow documents. 
c.  Provision for the return of funds to purchasers if the matter is not completed by the date specified. 
d.  The name and address of the institution to hold the escrow. 
e.  Title information insuring all liens, easements and interests of record, including all ownership concerning the real estate. All mortgages and mechanics' liens and other financial liens of any kind shall be listed. 
f.  The forms to be used for agreements, promissory notes, deeds and other documents related to the sale of the condominium units will be furnished. 
(c)  There shall be provision for an association of the owners of the condominium units. This association shall conform to the requirements provided in this article relating to associations for owners of land in subdivisions having common areas, common recreational facilities or other common facilities. The subdivider of each condominium subdivision shall provide the services, bond and other matters required by ordinance to be furnished to the association. 
(Code 2008, title 16, § 5-2; Ord. No. 02-04, § 5-2, 7-15-2002) 
Sec. 66-138. - Common areas, buildings and facilities. 
    Common areas, common buildings or common facilities in a new subdivision, including condominium subdivisions, developments and residential subdivisions shall be operated and/or maintained by an association of owners. The association shall conform to all the requirements provided in this article. 
(Code 2008, title 16, § 5-3; Ord. No. 02-04, § 5-3, 7-15-2002) 
Secs. 66-139-66-159. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - MISCELLANEOUS 

Sec. 66-160. - Erosion control. 
(a)  Development should be related to the topography and soils of the site so as to create the least potential for erosion. Areas of steep slopes where high cuts and fills may be required should be avoided wherever possible, and natural contours should be followed as closely as possible. 
(b)  Natural vegetation should be retained and protected wherever possible. Areas immediately adjacent to natural watercourses should be left undisturbed wherever possible. 
(c)  The smallest practical area of land should be exposed for the shortest practical time during development. 
(d)  Sediment basins, debris basins, de-silting basins, or silt traps or filters should be installed and maintained to remove sediment from run-off waters from land undergoing development. 
(e)  The selection of erosion and sedimentation control measures should be based on assessment of the probable frequency of climatic and other events likely to contribute to erosion, and on evaluation of the risks, costs and benefits involved. 
(f)  In the design of erosion control facilities and practices, aesthetics and the requirements of continuing maintenance should be considered. 
(g)  Provision should be made to accommodate the increased run-off caused by changed soil and surface conditions during and after development. Drainage always should be designed so that the final gradients and the resultant velocities of discharges will not create additional erosion and sedimentation during development. 
(Code 2008, title 16, § 6-1; Ord. No. 02-04, § 6-1, 7-15-2002) 
Sec. 66-161. - Monuments. 
(a)  Two permanent reference monuments shall be placed at locations in each subdivision. These two monuments shall be of stone or reinforced concrete, three feet in length and a minimum of six inches thick with a suitable center point and set flush with the established finished grade in such a manner that they cannot be moved or tend to be moved by frost. 
(b)  A permanent metal marker shall be placed at all lot corners, intersections of streets and alleys within the platted boundaries and at all points on street, alley and boundary lines where there is a change in direction or curvature, where practicable. All such monuments and metal markers shall be set in the ground before the streets and alleys are accepted by the city. The placement of all monuments and markers shall be the responsibility of the subdivider. The permanent metal markers, such as pipes or rods, shall be a minimum of one-half-inch in diameter and 24 inches long. 
(Code 2008, title 16, § 6-2; Ord. No. 02-04, § 6-2, 7-15-2002) 
Sec. 66-162. - Resubdivision procedure. 
    For any change in an approved or recorded subdivision plat, if such change affects any street layout shown on such plat or area reserved thereon for public use or any lot line, or if it affects any plat legally recorded prior to the adoption of any regulations controlling subdivisions, such parcel shall be approved by the city council by the same procedure, rules and regulations as for a subdivision. 
(Code 2008, title 16, § 6-3; Ord. No. 02-04, § 6-3, 7-15-2002) 
Sec. 66-163. - Vacation of plats. 
(a)  Any plat or any part of any plat may be vacated by the owner of the premises at any time before the sale of any lot therein by a written instrument, to which a copy of such plat shall be attached, declaring the same to be vacated. 
(b)  Such an instrument shall be approved by the city council in like manner as plats of subdivisions. The city council may reject any such instrument which abridges or destroys any public rights in any of its public uses, improvements, streets or alleys. 
(c)  Such an instrument shall be executed, acknowledged or approved, and recorded or filed in like manner as plats of subdivisions; and being duly recorded or filed, shall operate to destroy the force and effect of the recording of the plat so vacated and to divest all public rights in the streets, alleys, public grounds and all dedications laid out or described in such plat. 
(d)  When lots have been sold, the plat may be vacated in the manner herein provided by all the owners of lots in such plat joining in the execution of such writing. 
(Code 2008, title 16, § 6-4; Ord. No. 02-04, § 6-4, 7-15-2002) 
Sec. 66-164. - Property description. 
    The subdivision of any plot or any parcel of land by the use of metes and bounds description for the purpose of sale, transfer or lease with result of circumventing these regulations shall not be permitted. All such described subdivisions shall be subject to all of the requirements contained in these regulations. 
(Code 2008, title 16, § 6-5; Ord. No. 02-04, § 6-5, 7-15-2002) 
Sec. 66-165. - Variances. 
(a)  General variances. Where the planning commission finds that extraordinary hardships other than purely financial hardships or practical difficulties may result from strict compliance with these regulations and/or the purposes of these regulations may be served to a greater extent by an alternative proposal, it may approve variances to these subdivision regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured, provided that such variance shall not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of these regulations. The city council shall not approve variances unless it shall make findings based upon the evidence presented to it in each specific case and all of the following criteria have been met: 
(1)  The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public safety, health, or welfare or injurious to other property. 
(2)  The conditions upon which the request for a variance is based are unique to the property for which the variance is sought and are not applicable generally to other property. 
(3)  Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical conditions of the specific property involved, a particular hardship to the owner would result as distinguished from a mere inconvenience if the strict letter of these regulations were carried out. 
(4)  The variances will not in any manner vary the provisions of the zoning ordinance. 
(b)  Conditions in approving variances. The city council may require such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements of these regulations. 
(c)  Procedures. A petition for any such variance shall be submitted in writing by the subdivider at the time when the preliminary plat is filed for the consideration of the planning commission. The petition shall state fully the grounds for the application and all of the facts relied upon by the petitioner. 
(Code 2008, title 16, § 6-6; Ord. No. 02-04, § 6-6, 7-15-2002) 
Sec. 66-166. - Sale. 
    No owner or agent of the owner of any parcel of land located in a proposed subdivision shall transfer or sell such parcel before a plat of said subdivision has been approved by the city council and filed with the county recorder of deeds. 
(Code 2008, title 16, § 6-7; Ord. No. 02-04, § 6-7, 7-15-2002) 
Secs. 66-167-66-185. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - CHECKLISTS, FORMS AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS 

Sec. 66-186. - Preliminary plat review checklist. 
PRELIMINARY PLAT REVIEW CHECKLIST 
CITY OF EUREKA, ILLINOIS SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE 
Name of subdivision: _____ 
Owner of subdivision: _____ 
Address of owner: _____ 
City: ____________ State: ____________ Zip Code: ____________ 
Telephone number: ( ____________ ) ____________ 
Name of person completing this checklist: _____ 
Address of person completing this checklist: _____ 
City: ____________ State: ____________ Zip Code: ____________ 
Telephone number: ( ____________ ) ____________ 
Date of submittal of Preliminary Plat to City of Eureka: _____ 
What is the Zoning Classification of this subdivision? _____ 
Do the proposed uses and lot sizes comply with the City's zoning ordinance? 
Circle one. Yes No 
If applicable, do the proposed uses and lot sizes comply with the Woodford County Zoning Ordinance? 
Circle one. Yes No 
If response to either or both of the above questions is negative, what actions are being taken toward compliance? _____ 
_____
_____
_____
_____
Complete the following checklist. Generally, items on the checklist will be checked under the "YES" or "N/A" (Not Applicable) column. Those items checked "YES" will be shown on the plat or on supporting documentation. For those items that are checked under the "NO" column, explain in a Letter of Request for Preliminary Plat Review why this plat should be approved without those items. 
YES NO N/A 1. Application for Subdivision with owner and developer identified. ____________ ____________ ____________ 2. 15 copies of Preliminary Plat. ____________ ____________ ____________ 3. Application submitted no later than 15th day of month prior to meeting of Planning Commission. ____________ ____________ ____________ 4. Legal description and area of subdivision. ____________ ____________ ____________ 5. Zoning on and adjacent to site, including identification of non-residential land uses. ____________ ____________ ____________ 6. Names of owners of adjacent, un-platted land. ____________ ____________ ____________ 7. Names of adjacent platted subdivisions. ____________ ____________ ____________ 8. Topography on and adjacent to site with 2' contours based upon state plane coordinates. ____________ ____________ ____________ 9. 100 Year Floodplain, Flood Hazard Areas, watercourses & wooded areas. ____________ ____________ ____________ 10. Lot lines & sizes, block & lot numbers and minimum building setback lines. ____________ ____________ ____________ 11. Easements on and adjacent to site with purpose, location & dimensions. ____________ ____________ ____________ 12. Streets and roads on and adjacent to the site, including location, name, rights-of-way width and pavement width. ____________ ____________ ____________ 13. Utilities on and adjacent to the site, including location and size of water, stormwater and sanitary sewers and location of gas, electric, telephone, cable TV and street lights. ____________ ____________ ____________ 14. Location of stormwater controls. ____________ ____________ ____________ 15. Registered Land Surveyor's certification. ____________ ____________ ____________ 16. Plat Officer's certificate. ____________ ____________ ____________ 17. City Clerk's certificate. ____________ ____________ ____________ 18. Scale not smaller than 100 feet per inch. ____________ ____________ ____________ 19. Title, North arrow and date. ____________ ____________ ____________ 20. Restrictive covenants, if any. ____________ ____________ ____________ 21. Certificate of Registration on file with City Clerk. ____________ ____________ ____________ 22. Certificate of Woodford County Plat Officer, if applicable. ____________ ____________ ____________ 23. Certificate of Woodford County Clerk, if applicable. ____________ ____________ ____________ 24. Certificate of Chairman, Woodford County Board of Supervisors, if applicable. ____________ ____________ ____________  
FOR CITY OF EUREKA USE ONLY: 
Reviewer: _____ 
Date of plat submittal: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ Date of review: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Date to go before Eureka Planning Commission: _____ 
Comments to Planning Commission: _____ 
_____
_____
_____
_____
Recommendations of Planning Commission: _____ 
_____
_____
_____
_____
Action of City Council: _____ 
_____
_____
_____
(Ord. No. 02-04, § 7, 7-15-2002) 
Sec. 66-187. - Final plat review checklist. 
FINAL PLAT REVIEW CHECKLIST 
CITY OF EUREKA, ILLINOIS SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE 
Name of subdivision: _____ 
Owner of subdivision: _____ 
Address of owner: _____ 
City: ____________ State: ____________ Zip Code: ____________ 
Telephone number: ( ____________ ) ____________ 
Name of person completing this checklist: _____ 
Address of person completing this checklist: _____ 
City: ____________ State: ____________ Zip Code: ____________ 
Telephone number: ( ____________ ) ____________ 
Date of submittal of Preliminary Plat to the City of Eureka: _____ 
Date of City Council approval of Preliminary Plat: _____ 
What is the zoning classification of this subdivision? _____ 
Do the proposed uses and lot sizes comply with the City's zoning ordinance? 
Circle one. Yes No 
If applicable, do the proposed uses and lot sizes comply with the Woodford County Zoning Ordinance? 
Circle one. Yes No 
If response to either or both the above questions is negative, what actions are being taken toward compliance? 
_____
_____
_____
_____
Complete the following checklist. Generally, items on the checklist will be checked under the "YES" or "N/A" (Not Applicable) column. Those items checked "YES" will be shown on the plat or on supporting documentation (construction plans, restrictive covenants, etc.), included with this submittal. For those items that are checked under the "NO" column, explain in a Letter of Request for Final Plat Review why this plat should be approved without those items. 
YES NO N/A 1. 15 copies of Final Plat. ____________ ____________ ____________ 2. Plat substantially conforms with the approved Preliminary Plat. ____________ ____________ ____________ 3. Submitted no later than 20 days before regular meeting of City Council. ____________ ____________ ____________ 4. Legal description and area of subdivision. ____________ ____________ ____________ 5. Subdivision boundary lines with bearings and dimensions to primary control points with location and descriptions of all monuments to identify points. ____________ ____________ ____________ 6. Easements on and adjacent to the site with purpose, location and dimensions. ____________ ____________ ____________ 7. Streets and roads on and adjacent to the site, including location, name, rights-of-way width and pavement width. ____________ ____________ ____________ 8. Lot lines and sizes, block and lot numbers, minimum building setback lines and any reserve strips. ____________ ____________ ____________ 9. Names of owners of adjacent unplatted land. ____________ ____________ ____________ 10. Names of adjacent platted subdivisions. ____________ ____________ ____________ 11. Flood hazard areas and the purpose for any nonresidential sites. ____________ ____________ ____________ 12. Owner's certificate included on Plat, signed and notarized, evidencing free and clear ownership without delinquent taxes, assessments or other encumbrances. ____________ ____________ ____________ 13. City Clerk's certificate. ____________ ____________ ____________ 14. Plat Officer's certificate. ____________ ____________ ____________ 15. Woodford County Clerk's certificate. ____________ ____________ ____________ 16. Woodford County Plat Officer's certificate. ____________ ____________ ____________ 17. IDOT District Engineer's certificate, if required. ____________ ____________ ____________ 18. Township Road Commissioner's certificate, if required. ____________ ____________ ____________ 19. County Highway Superintendent's certificate, if required. ____________ ____________ ____________ 20. Registered Land Surveyor's certificate. ____________ ____________ ____________ 21. Drainage Acknowledgement Certificate included on Plat or on Construction Plans. ____________ ____________ ____________ 22. IDOC endangered species consultation process completed with satisfactory clearance. ____________ ____________ ____________ 23. Construction Plans and Specifications, estimate of expenditure and drainage plans approved by Civil Engineer. ____________ ____________ ____________ 24. Scale not smaller than 200' per inch. ____________ ____________ ____________ 25. Title, North arrow and date. ____________ ____________ ____________ 26. Surety providing that public improvements will be completed satisfactorily. ____________ ____________ ____________ 27. Bill of Sale conveying public utilities. ____________ ____________ ____________ 28. Subdivision fees and development fees paid. ____________ ____________ ____________  
(Ord. No. 02-04, § 7, 7-15-2002) 
Sec. 66-188. - Final plat fees calculation worksheet. 
FINAL PLAT FEES CALCULATION WORKSHEET 
Subdivision Review Fee: For plat review, the fee schedule is as follows or as is amended from time-to-time: 
Lots 1-10 ____________ x $25.00 = ____________ 
Lots 11-20 ____________ x $20.00 = ____________ 
Lots 21-40 ____________ x $17.50 = ____________ 
Lots 41 & up ____________ x $12.50 = ____________ 
TOTAL SUBDIVISION FEE = ____________ 
FOR CITY OF EUREKA USE ONLY: 
Reviewer: _____ 
Date of Plat submittal: ____________ Date of review: ____________ 
Date to go before City Council: _____ 
Comments to City Council: _____ 
_____
_____
_____
Action taken by City Council: _____ 
_____
_____
_____
(Ord. No. 02-04, § 7, 7-15-2002) 
Sec. 66-189. - Certificate of registration, subdivision developers and contractors, public improvements. 
CITY OF EUREKA 
128 N. MAIN ST. PHONE 467-2113 
EUREKA, ILLINOIS 61530 
Certificate # ____________ 
CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION 
SUBDIVISION DEVELOPERS AND CONTRACTORS 
____________ 
TO DEVELOP AND/OR CONSTRUCT PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS THAT WILL BE DEDICATED TO THE CITY DURING A SUBDIVISION PROCESS 
THIS CERTIFICATE, ISSUED BY THE CITY CLERK, ENTITLES THIS PERSON OR BUSINESS TO DEVELOP AND/OR CONSTRUCT PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS IN ACCORDANCE WITH CONSTRUCTION PLANS APPROVED BY THE CITY OF EUREKA, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, STREETS, SIDEWALKS, SANITARY SEWERS, WATER MAINS, SUMP PUMP DRAIN LINES, STORM SEWERS AND CONTROLS AND EROSION CONTROLS. THIS REGISTRATION MUST BE FILED WITH THE CITY CLERK PRIOR TO A DEVELOPER'S SUBMISSION OF A PRELIMINARY PLAT OR A CONTRACTOR'S START OF CONSTRUCTION. 
BUSINESS NAME: _____ 
ADDRESS: _____ 
CITY/ZIP CODE: _____ 
CONTACT PERSON: _____ 
TELEPHONE: _____ 
SIGNATURE: _____ 
ISSUED BY THE CITY CLERK THIS ____________ DAY OF ____________ 20 ____________ . 
____________ 
Lynnette Ruder, City Clerk 
THIS CERTIFICATE SHALL NOT BE DENIED, SUSPENDED OR REVOKED EXCEPT BY THE EUREKA CITY COUNCIL. 
(Ord. No. 02-04, § 7, 7-15-2002) 
Sec. 66-190. - Certificate of occupancy. 
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY 
CITY OF EUREKA, ILLINOIS 
Building Permit No.: ____________ Date Issued: ____________ 
Property Owner Name and Address: _____ 
_____
_____
_____
Building Inspection Phase I Completed (Project layout) 
____________   ____________ 
Zoning Administrator; Date 
Building Inspection Phase II Completed (Footings) 
____________   ____________ 
Zoning Administrator; Date 
Building Inspection Phase III Completed (Utilities Hookup) 
____________   ____________ 
Zoning Administrator; Date 
Building Inspection Phase IV Completed (Framing) 
____________   ____________ 
Zoning Administrator; Date 
Building Inspection Phase V Completed (Final Inspection) 
____________   ____________ 
Zoning Administrator; Date 
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY IS HEREBY GRANTED-The Zoning Administrator shall, in writing, suspend or revoke a Certificate of Occupancy issued under the provisions of this code wherever the Certificate is issued in error, or on the basis of incorrect information supplied, or where it is determined that the building or structure or portion thereof is in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any of the provisions of this code. 
____________   ____________ 
Zoning Administrator; Date 
(Ord. No. 02-04, § 7, 7-15-2002) 
Sec. 66-191. - Street layout scheme. 

(Ord. No. 02-04, § 7, 7-15-2002) 
Sec. 66-192. - Typical sections. 






(Ord. No. 02-04, § 7, 7-15-2002) 
Sec. 66-193. - Property line, driveway, sidewalk, curb and gutter. 




(Ord. No. 02-04, § 7, 7-15-2002) 
Chapter 70 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 70-1. - Illinois Vehicle Code adopted. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq.), as passed, approved and amended, is hereby adopted by the city as if fully set out herein, and the provisions shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the city. 
Sec. 70-2. - Traffic direction authority designated. 
    Members of the police department, fire department, ambulance department, ESDA department, school crossing guards and others temporarily approved by the chief of police are authorized to direct, control or regulate all traffic in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, in emergencies as public safety or convenience may require, or for special events requiring, traffic direction. It is unlawful for any person to willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order, signal or direction of a police officer, firefighter, EMT, school crossing guard, ESDA member or others temporarily approved by the chief of police who are directing, controlling or regulating traffic for an authorized event or incident. Except in the case of emergency, it is unlawful for any person who is not authorized to direct or attempt to direct traffic. 
(Code 2008, § 10.04.010; Ord. No. 13-10, § I, 5-6-2013) 
Sec. 70-3. - Police authority in enchanted gardens mobile home park. 
    The city police department shall have the authority to enforce all parking and traffic codes of the state and the city, as per ILCS 5/11-209.1, within Enchanted Gardens Mobile Home Park. 
(Code 2008, § 10.20.010; Ord. No. 13-00, § 1, 2000) 
Sec. 70-4. - Speed restrictions. 
    The city shall post signs at all entrances to the municipality signifying a 25 miles per hour (mph) maximum applicable speed limit with an inscription as follows: "Speed limit 25 mph unless otherwise posted." The speed limit for alleys shall be 15 miles per hour. 
(Code 2008, § 10.20.020; Ord. No. 27-03, § 2, 2003) 
Secs. 70-5-70-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING 

Sec. 70-27. - Parking prohibited; various locations. 
(a)  That in order to promote the health, safety and welfare of its citizens, parking will be prohibited at the following locations: 
(1)  Both sides of Center Street (U.S. 24) between Myers and Main Streets. 
(2)  North side of Center Street (U.S. 24) from Main Street (IL 117) to 80 feet east. 
(3)  North side of Center Street (U.S. 24) between Major and Darst Streets. 
(4)  South side of Center Street (U.S. 24) between Main Street (IL 117) and the alley west of Darst Street. 
(5)  East side of Main Street (IL 117) from Center Street (U.S. 24) to 150 feet north. 
(6)  East side of Main Street (IL 117) from Center Street (U.S. 24) to 80 feet south. 
(7)  West side of Main Street (IL 117) from Center Street (U.S. 24) to 140 feet south. 
(8)  West side of Main Street and Route 117 from Center Street (U.S. Route 24) to 55 feet north. 
(b)  Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this section shall be fined $10.00 for each offense. 
(Code 2008, § 10.24.012; Ord. No. 12-00, §§ 1, 2, 2000) 
Sec. 70-28. - No parking places-Henry Street or East Eureka Avenue. 
(a)  It is unlawful to park any vehicle on the west side of Henry Street from Route 24 to East James Street at any time. It is unlawful to park on East Eureka Avenue between South Darst Street and Henry Street at any time. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section shall be fined, for each offense $10.00 and a new offense shall be deemed to have occurred after each 24-hour period has passed, subjecting the offender to a like penalty as aforesaid. 
(Code 2008, § 10.24.15; Ord. No. 9-02, § 1, 2002; Ord. No. 6-82, §§ 1, 2, 1982) 
Sec. 70-29. - No parking places-On portions of Bullock Street and Callender Street. 
(a)  It is unlawful to park any vehicle on Bullock Street between North Darst Street and Route 24 or the east side of North Callender Street between West Court Street and West Graham Street or the West side of North Callender Street between West Mill Street and West Graham Street at any time. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section shall be fined, for each offense, $10.00 and a new offense shall be deemed to have occurred after each 24-hour period has passed, subjecting the offender to a like penalty as aforesaid. 
(Code 2008, § 10.24.16; Ord. No. 4-83, §§ 1, 2, 1983; Ord. No. 1-85, § 1, 1985) 
Sec. 70-30. - No parking places-On portion of Route 24. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park on the north side of the roadway facility of U.S. Route 24 from a point 180 feet east of the centerline of Illinois Route 117 to the west city limits or on the south side of the roadway facility of U.S. Route 24 from a point 113 feet east of the centerline of Illinois Route 117 to the west city limits. 
(b)  Any person violating this section shall be fined $10.00 for each offense. 
(Code 2008, § 10.24.17; Ord. No. 2-84, §§ 1, 3, 1984) 
Sec. 70-31. - No parking places-On portions of Vennum Street. 
    It is unlawful to park any vehicle on the east side of Vennum Street between Reagan Drive and College Street. 
(Code 2008, § 10.24.18) 
Sec. 70-32. - No parking places-On portions of Hilldale Street and Maple Drive. 
(a)  It is unlawful to park any vehicle on the north side of Maple Drive between the entrance to the high school athletic field and the point where Hilldale Street proceeds in a southerly direction or on the east side of Hilldale Street between Maple Drive and Burton Street. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section shall be fined $10.00 and a new offense shall be deemed to have occurred after each 24-hour period has passed, subjecting the offender to a like penalty as provided in this section. 
(Code 2008, § 10.24.19; Ord. No. 7-87, § 1, 1987) 
Sec. 70-33. - Curb parking; angle, parallel. 
    No vehicle shall be parked with the left side of such vehicle next to the curb, and it is unlawful to stand or park any vehicle in a street other than parallel with the curb and with the two right wheels of the vehicle within 12 inches of the regularly established curbline, except that upon those streets that have been marked for angle parking, vehicles shall be parked at the angle to the curb indicated by such marks, and in no case shall angle parking be allowed on U.S. Highway No. 24 within the city limits. 
(Code 2008, § 10.24.20; Ord. No. 204, § 34, 1941; Ord. No. 2-60, § 1, 1960) 
Sec. 70-34. - Time restrictions between 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. 
    Parking within the city limits will be limited to two hours at any one time, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., weekdays only, wherever signs so indicating are placed or posted on any street in the city. 
(Code 2008, § 10.24.31; Ord. No. 9-97, 1997) 
Sec. 70-35. - Parking vehicles for sale. 
    It is unlawful to park any vehicle upon any street for the purpose of displaying it for sale without state license plates. 
(Code 2008, § 10.24.040; Ord. No. 204, § 36, 1941) 
Sec. 70-36. - Loading zones. 
    At the places specified in this section, it shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to stand or double park a passenger vehicle for a period of time longer than is necessary for loading or unloading of passengers, not to exceed three minutes, and for the driver to stand or double park any freight carrying vehicle for a period of time longer than is necessary to load, unload, or deliver materials, not to exceed five minutes. 
(1)  Route 24 (Center Street) between Major Street and Callender Street. 
(2)  On Court Street between Main Street and Callender Street. 
(3)  From Mill Street to the south city limits on said Main Street. 
(Code 2008, § 10.24.050; Ord. No. 204, § 37, 1941) 
Sec. 70-37. - Blocking alleys. 
    It is unlawful for the driver to stand a passenger car or of the driver to stand any freight-carrying vehicle at the entrance of any alley or in any manner so as to interfere with traffic entering or exiting from said alley. 
(Code 2008, § 10.24.060; Ord. No. 204, § 38, 1941) 
Sec. 70-38. - Dormitories on the Eureka College campus. 
    The city, through its police department, is authorized to issue no-parking tickets in the fire lanes located to the south of Founders Court Dormitory and, east of Alumni Court Dormitories on the Eureka College campus and in addition, these no-parking tickets will carry the full weight of law as if they had been issued in a public area within the city. 
(Code 2008, § 10.24.070; Ord. No. 5-80, § 1, 1980) 
Sec. 70-39. - Parking in nonpublic areas; Eureka High School grounds. 
(a)  The officials of Eureka High School will henceforth have the powers of regulating parking by use of city parking tickets upon all property which is designated as that owned by the Eureka High School. 
(b)  The officials of the Eureka High School are granted the power to designate any person to issue parking tickets and other traffic restrictions within and upon the Eureka High School property. 
(c)  Any parking or other traffic ticket given by the designated person will have the same force and effect as if issued by a city official regularly authorized to issue such tickets, including the levying of fines. 
(Code 2008, § 10.24.080; Ord. No. 6-79, §§ 1-3, 1979) 
Secs. 70-40-70-66. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - JUNK, INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES AND MOTOR VEHICLE PARTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Inoperable motor vehicles, 65 ILCS 5/11-40-3; abandoned, wrecked or discarded vehicles, 625 ILCS 5/4-200 et seq. 

Sec. 70-67. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Inoperable motor vehicle means any motor vehicle from which for a period of at least seven days, the engine, wheels, or other parts have been removed, or on which the engine, wheels, or other parts are incapable of being driven under its own motor power or any vehicle that does not display valid license plates. The term "inoperable motor vehicle" shall not include a motor vehicle which has been rendered temporarily incapable of being driven under its own motor power in order to perform ordinary service or repair operations. 
(Code 2008, § 10.08.010; Ord. No. 4-95(part), 1995) 
Sec. 70-68. - Parking and storing prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person to cause, permit or allow any inoperable motor vehicle to be parked or stored on public or private property in view of the general public unless it is necessary for the operation of a business enterprise lawfully conducted thereon. 
(Code 2008, § 10.08.020; Ord. No. 4-95(part), 1995) 
Sec. 70-69. - Motor vehicles parts. 
    It is unlawful for any person to cause, permit or allow any motor vehicle bodies, parts, equipment, motors or materials to be placed, stored or remain on public or private property in view of the general public for a period of more than 48 hours in any one calendar month unless necessary for the operation of a business enterprise lawfully conducted thereon. 
(Code 2008, § 10.08.030; Ord. No. 4-95(part), 1995) 
Sec. 70-70. - Nuisance. 
    Parking or storing of inoperable motor vehicles and the storing or allowing the same to remain in the open of motor vehicle bodies, parts, equipment, motors and materials, in violation of sections 70-68 and 70-69 is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance. 
(Code 2008, § 10.08.040; Ord. No. 4-95(part), 1995) 
Sec. 70-71. - Notice to abate. 
    The chief of police or a member of the city police department designated by the chief of police, is hereby authorized and empowered to notify the person in control of any private property to relocate any inoperable vehicles parked or stored in violation of section 70-68 to a completely enclosed location on the property or otherwise to remove the same from the premises. Said chief of police or a member of the city police department designated by the chief of police, is also hereby authorized and empowered to notify the person in control of any private property to relocate any motor vehicle bodies, parts, equipment, motors and materials stored, placed or allowed to remain in the open in violation of section 70-69 to a completely enclosed location on the property or otherwise to remove the same from the premises. Such notice shall be given by mail addressed to the residence or usual place of business of such person, or may be posted on the premises where the violation exists. 
(Code 2008, § 10.08.050; Ord. No. 4-95(part), 1995) 
Sec. 70-72. - Action of noncompliance. 
    Any person who fails, neglects or refuses to comply with the directions of the notice provided in section 70-71 after the expiration of seven days from the date of mailing or posting of such notice, the city, in its discretion, may cause the removal and disposal of such vehicles, bodies, parts, or materials. 
(Code 2008, § 10.08.060; Ord. No. 4-95(part), 1995) 
Sec. 70-73. - Liability for expense of disposal. 
    In the event the city is required to remove and dispose of the vehicles, bodies, parts, and the like, the person in control of the premises shall be liable to the city for the expenses incurred by the city. A statement shall be rendered to the person liable for the cost thereof and if not paid, suit shall be instituted. 
(Code 2008, § 10.08.070; Ord. No. 4-95(part), 1995) 
Secs. 70-74-70-104. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDING OF VEHICLES 

Sec. 70-105. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Controlled substance means any substance as defined and included in the schedule contained in article II of the Illinois Controlled Substance Act (720 ILCS 570/201 et seq.), as amended from time to time, and cannabis as defined in section 1 of the Cannabis Control Act (720 ILCS 550/1 et seq.), as amended from time to time. 
    Driving under the influence means any violation as defined in section 11-501 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/11-501), as amended from time to time. 
    Driving while license, permit or privilege to operate a motor vehicle is suspended or revoked means any violation as defined in section 6-303 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/6-303), as amended from time to time. 
    Drug paraphernalia means any equipment, product, and/or materials as defined in section 2 of the Drug Paraphernalia Act (720 ILCS 600/2), as amended from time to time. 
    Operation of a motor vehicle without a valid driver's license means a violation of section 6-101 and/or section 6-303 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, as amended from time to time (625 ILCS 5/6-101 and 625 ILCS 5/6-303), as amended from time to time, where the driver's license or driving privileges have been suspended, revoked, canceled, never obtained, or previously had been obtained and have been expired for not less than six months. 
    Owner of record means the record title holder to a motor vehicle. 
    Unlawful use of weapons means a violation of section 24-1 of the Criminal Code of 1961 (720 ILCS 5/24-1 et seq.), as amended from time to time. 
(Code 2008, § 10.010; Ord. No. 08-18, 12-1-2008; Ord. No. 14-16, § I, 12-15-2014) 
Sec. 70-106. - Vehicles subject to seizure and impounding. 
    A motor vehicle shall be subject to seizure and impoundment under this article where such motor vehicle is used in any of the following: 
(1)  The possession or delivery of a controlled substance or drug paraphernalia; driving under the influence; 
(2)  Driving while license, permit or privilege to operate a motor vehicle is suspended or revoked pursuant to 625 ILCS 5/6-303; except that vehicles shall not be subjected to seizure or impoundment if the suspension is for an unpaid citation (parking or moving) or due to failure to comply with emission testing; 
(3)  Operation of a motor vehicle with an expired driver's license, in violation of 625 ILCS 5/6-101, if the period of expiration is greater than one year; 
(4)  Operation or use of a motor vehicle without ever having been issued a driver's license or permit, in violation of 625 ILCS 5/6-101, or operating a motor vehicle without ever having been issued a driver's license or permit due to a person's age; 
(5)  Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the attempt to commit, an offense in violation of section 24-1, 24-1.5 or 24-3.1 of the Illinois Criminal Code. 
(6)  Aggravated fleeing or attempting to elude a peace officer in violation of section 11-204.1 of the Illinois Vehicle Code. 
(Code 2008, § 10.020; Ord. No. 08-18, 12-1-2008; Ord. No. 14-16, § I, 12-15-2014) 
Sec. 70-107. - Seizure and impounding of vehicles. 
    Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a vehicle is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this article, the police officer shall cause the motor vehicle to be towed to a facility controlled by the city or its agents. When the vehicle is towed, the police officer shall notify any person identifying himself as the owner of the vehicle or any person who is found to be in control of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation, if there is such a person, of the fact of the seizure and of the vehicle owner's right and procedures to retrieve the vehicle. 
(Code 2008, § 10.030; Ord. No. 08-18, 12-1-2008; Ord. No. 14-16, § I, 12-15-2014) 
Sec. 70-108. - Liability for penalty and costs. 
    The owner of record of a motor vehicle that is seized or impounded shall be liable to the city for a penalty of $400.00 in addition to any fees for the towing and storage of the motor vehicle. 
(1)  Fees for towing and storage are established by the towing company, and not by the city, except where the motor vehicle is stored on city property, in which case the storage cost will be $25.00 per day. A $400.00 retrieval/redemption fee shall be paid to the city. 
(2)  A vehicle impounded pursuant to this article shall remain impounded until the earlier of one of the following shall occur: 
a.  The penalty/redemption fee of $400.00 is paid to the city, and all towing and storage costs are paid to the towing company; 
b.  A bond in an amount equal to $400.00 as herein provided in section 70-109 is posted with the city and all applicable towing and storage costs are paid to the towing company; or 
c.  The vehicle is deemed abandoned, in which case the vehicle shall be disposed of in the manner provided by law for the disposition of abandoned or unclaimed vehicles. 
(3)  Except as otherwise specifically provided by law, no owner, lien holder, or any other person shall be legally entitled to take possession of a motor vehicle impounded under this article until the penalty and all towing and storage costs applicable under this article have been paid in full. 
(Code 2008, § 10.080; Ord. No. 08-18, 12-1-2008; Ord. No. 14-16, § I, 12-15-2014) 
Sec. 70-109. - Posting of bond. 
    If a bond in the amount of $400.00 is posted with the city, the impounded vehicle will be released to the owner of record, upon the payment by the owner of record of the towing and storage costs. If a penalty is imposed for a violation of this article, the bond will be forfeited to the city; provided, in the event that a violation of this article is not proven, the bond will be returned to the person posting the bond. All bond money posted pursuant to this article will be held by the city until the hearing officer issues a decision, or, if there is a judicial review, until the court issues its final decision. 
(Code 2008, § 10.040; Ord. No. 08-18, 12-1-2008; Ord. No. 14-16, § I, 12-15-2014) 
Sec. 70-110. - Preliminary hearing. 
    Where the owner of a motor vehicle seized under the provisions of this article requests a preliminary hearing within 12 hours after the seizure of the motor vehicle, a hearing officer of the city must conduct a preliminary hearing within 24 hours after the request for preliminary hearing is received by the city; provided that, if the date for the hearing falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the preliminary hearing will be held on the next business day following the Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. For purposes of this section, the following shall apply: 
(1)  All interested persons will be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard at the preliminary hearing. 
(2)  The formal rules of evidence will not apply at the hearing, and hearsay testimony will be allowed, and will be admissible. 
(3)  If, after the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer determines that there is probable cause to believe that the vehicle was used as hereinabove provided in section 70-106, the hearing officer shall order the continued impoundment of the vehicle, unless the owner of the vehicle posts a cash bond with the city in the amount of $400.00, plus the towing and storage costs. 
(4)  If the hearing officer determines that there is not probable cause to believe that the vehicle was used as hereinabove provided in section 70-106, the motor vehicle will be returned to the owner of record of the vehicle without any penalty or other costs. 
(Code 2008, § 10.050; Ord. No. 08-18, 12-1-2008; Ord. No. 14-16, § I, 12-15-2014) 
Sec. 70-111. - Final hearing. 
(a)  Notice of hearing. Within ten days after a vehicle is seized and impounded pursuant to this article, the city shall notify the owner of record of the motor vehicle of the date, time and location of a hearing. Such notice shall be mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner of record, as shown on the records of the Illinois secretary of state. However, no such notice of hearing need be sent to the owner of record if the owner is personally served with the notice of hearing within ten days after the vehicle is seized and impounded, and the owner acknowledges receipt of the notice of hearing in writing. The notice of hearing shall state the penalties that may be imposed at the final hearing, including that a vehicle not released by payment of the penalty and fees and remaining impounded may be sold or disposed of by the city in accordance with state law. 
(b)  Hearing. For purposes of this section, the following shall apply to the owner's hearing: 
(1)  Unless continued by order of the hearing officer, the hearing shall be held within 30 days after the motor vehicle was seized. 
(2)  All interested persons will be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard at the preliminary hearing. 
(3)  If, after the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer determines by a preponderance of the evidence that the vehicle was used as hereinabove provided in section 70-106, the hearing officer shall order the continued impoundment of the vehicle until the owner of the vehicle pays to the city a penalty in the amount of $400.00, plus the towing and storage costs. The penalty and costs shall be a debt due to the city. 
(4)  If the owner of record fails to appear at the hearing, the hearing officer shall enter an order of default in favor of the city, which order shall require the payment to the city of an administrative penalty of $400.00. 
(5)  If the hearing officer determines that the vehicle was not used as hereinabove provided in section 70-106, the motor vehicle will be returned to the owner of record of the vehicle without any penalty or other costs, or, if a cash bond had previously been posted, the cash bond shall be returned. 
(Code 2008, § 10.060; Ord. No. 08-18, 12-1-2008; Ord. No. 14-16, § I, 12-15-2014) 
Sec. 70-112. - Hearing officer. 
    Each hearing officer shall be appointed by the mayor and shall not be an employee or an associate doing business with the city. The hearing officers shall have all of the powers necessary to conduct a fair and impartial hearing. 
(Code 2008, § 10.100; Ord. No. 08-18, 12-1-2008; Ord. No. 14-16, § I, 12-15-2014) 
Sec. 70-113. - Conduct of hearings. 
    All administrative hearings held pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be conducted as follows: 
(1)  The parties to the administrative hearing shall be afforded an opportunity for a hearing before the hearing officer; 
(2)  An attorney who appears on behalf of any person shall file with the hearing officer a written appearance; 
(3)  In no event shall the case for the city be presented by the hearing officer; provided, however, that documentary evidence, including the notice of violation, which has been prepared by a department or agency of the city, may be presented at the hearing by the hearing officer; 
(4)  The hearing officer may grant continuances only upon a finding of good cause; 
(5)  All testimony shall be given under oath; 
(6)  The hearing officer may issue subpoenas to secure the attendance and testimony of relevant witnesses and the production of relevant documents. Issuance of subpoenas will be subject to the following restrictions: 
a.  The hearing officer may issue subpoenas only if the hearing officer determines that the testimony of the witnesses or the documents or items sought by the subpoena are necessary to present evidence that is: 
1.  Relevant to the case; and 
2.  Relates to a contested issue in the case. 
b.  A subpoena issued under this article shall identify the person to whom it is directed, the documents or other items sought by the subpoena, if any, the date of the appearance of the witnesses and the production of the documents or other items described in the subpoena, the time for the appearance of the witnesses and the production of documents or other items described in the subpoena, and the place for the appearance of the witnesses and the production of the documents or other items described in the subpoena. 
c.  In no event shall the date identified for the appearance of witnesses or the production of the documents or other items be less than seven days after service of the subpoena. 
d.  Within three business days of being served with a subpoena issued in accordance with this article, the recipient of the subpoena may appeal the order authorizing the issuance of the subpoena to the hearing officer. 
(7)  Subject to subsection (10) of this section, the hearing officer may permit witnesses to submit their testimony by affidavit or by telephone. 
(8)  The formal and technical rules of evidence shall not apply in the conduct of the hearing. Evidence, including hearsay, may be admitted only if it is of a type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs. 
(9)  No violation may be established except upon proof by a preponderance of the evidence; provided, however, that a notice of hearing or a notice of violation, issued and signed, shall be prima facie evidence of the correctness of the facts specified therein. 
(10)  Upon timely request of any party to the proceeding, any person who the hearing officer determines may reasonably be expected to provide testimony which is material and which does not constitute a needless presentation of cumulative evidence, shall be made available for cross examination prior to a final determination of liability. 
(11)  The record of all hearings before the hearing officer shall include the following: 
a.  A record of the testimony presented at the hearing, which may be made by tape recording or other appropriate means; 
b.  All documents presented at the hearing; 
c.  A copy of the notice of hearing or notice of violation; and 
d.  A copy of the findings and decision of the hearing officer. 
(12)  Upon conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer will issue a final determination of liability or no liability. Upon issuing a final determination of liability, the hearing officer may: 
a.  Impose penalties that are consistent with the applicable provision of this article; 
b.  Issue orders that are consistent with applicable provisions of this article; 
c.  Assess costs reasonably related to instituting the hearing process. 
(13)  In the issuance of a final determination of liability, the hearing officer shall inform the respondent of his right to seek judicial review of the final determination. 
(14)  If at the time of the hearing, the recipient of a notice of hearing or notice of violation, or his attorney of record, fails to appear, the hearing officer may find the recipient in default and proceed with the hearing and accept evidence relevant to the existence of a violation of this article and conclude with a finding, decision and order. A copy of the order of default must be served in the manner permitted for the service of the notice of hearing. 
(15)  The recipient of a notice of violation who is found to be in default may petition the hearing officer to set aside the order of default and set a new hearing date, as follows: 
a.  The hearing officer may set aside any order entered by default, and set a new hearing date, upon a petition filed within 21 days after the issuance of the order of default, if the hearing officer determines that the petitioner's failure to appear at the hearing was for good cause or, at any time, if the petitioner establishes that the petitioner was not provided with proper service of notice of the hearing. If the petition is granted, the hearing officer shall proceed with a new hearing on the underlying matter as soon as practical. 
b.  If any order is set aside under this subsection, the hearing officer has the authority to enter an order directing the city to refund any penalties and/or fines paid pursuant to the vacated order. 
(16)  Any final determination by the hearing officer under this article constitutes a final determination for purposes of judicial review and is subject to review under the state administrative review law. 
(Code 2008, § 10.090; Ord. No. 08-18, 12-1-2008; Ord. No. 14-16, § I, 12-15-2014) 
Sec. 70-114. - Unclaimed vehicles. 
    Any motor vehicle that is not claimed within 35 days after the expiration of the time in which the owner of record may seek judicial review of the action of the city under this article, or the time at which a final judgment is rendered in favor the city by a court, or the time at which a final administrative decision is rendered against an owner of record who is in default, may be disposed of as an abandoned or unclaimed vehicle, as otherwise provided by law. 
(Code 2008, § 10.070; Ord. No. 08-18, 12-1-2008; Ord. No. 14-16, § I, 12-15-2014) 
Secs. 70-115-70-141. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - VEHICLE STANDARDS 

Sec. 70-142. - Noise; amplifying system. 
    It is unlawful to operate any vehicle on the streets which vehicle makes unusually loud or unnecessary noise. It is further unlawful to operate upon the streets any vehicle in or on which there is a phonograph or reproducing mechanism of any kind or any amplifying system or mechanism from which is emitted unusually loud or unnecessary noise. 
(Code 2008, § 10.12.030; Ord. No. 168, § 11, 1935) 
Sec. 70-143. - Driving vehicle load over 10,000 pounds; prohibition; exception. 
    No person, firm or corporation shall drive or operate any motor vehicle which carries, pulls, tows or pushes any load exceeding 10,000 pounds in weight over or upon any street or streets within the corporate limits of the city, with the exception of Main Street (being State Route 117), and with the further exception of Center Street (being State Route 24). 
(Code 2008, § 10.28.010; Ord. No. 173, § 1, 1936) 
Sec. 70-144. - Permitting operation of vehicle load over 10,000 pounds; prohibition; exception. 
    No person, firm or corporation shall permit to be driven or operated any motor vehicle in which it owns an interest and which carries, pulls, tows or pushes any load exceeding 10,000 pounds in weight, over or upon any street or streets within the corporate limits of the city with the exception of Main Street (being State Route 117), and with the further exception of Route 24 (Center Street) (being State Route 24). 
(Code 2008, § 10.28.020; Ord. No. 173, § 2, 1936) 
Sec. 70-145. - Parking vehicle over weight of one ton between 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. 
    It is unlawful to park any truck, tractor, trailer or bus of which the rating or the weight thereof is over one ton on any street in the city for a time exceeding two hours from 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. 
(Code 2008, § 10.28.030; Ord. No. 5-70, § 1, 1970) 
Sec. 70-146. - Parking vehicle over weight of one ton between 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
    It is unlawful to park any truck, tractor, trailer or bus of which the rating or the weight thereof is over one ton on any street in the city exceeding the period of one hour from 6:00 p.m. in the evening to 6:00 a.m. in the morning. 
(Code 2008, § 10.28.040; Ord. No. 5-70, § 2, 1970) 
Sec. 70-147. - Parking vehicle over weight of 10,000 pounds; time limit. 
(a)  The term "second division vehicle" means vehicles which are designed or equipped or used for carrying freight, goods, wares, merchandise, or for use of living quarters. 
(b)  It is unlawful for anyone to park any vehicle which is licensed for more than 10,000 gross weight pounds on any street in the city for a period in excess of one hour at any time. 
(Code 2008, § 10.28.045; Ord. No. 2-80, §§ 1-3, 1980) 
Secs. 70-148-70-177. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SCHEDULES 

Sec. 70-178. - One-way streets designated. 
    It is unlawful to operate any motor vehicle on the following streets except in the direction indicated: 
(1)  On East Cruger Avenue between South Creamery Street and South Darst Street, all vehicles shall travel in a westerly direction; 
(2)  On E. Cruger Ave. between S. Main Street and S. Major Street, all vehicles shall travel in an easterly direction only. 
(Code 2008, § 10.20.090; Ord. No. 8-87, § 1, 1987; Ord. No. 1-85, § 3(part), 1985) 
Sec. 70-179. - Main Street at the intersection with Center Street; signs. 
    It shall be the duty of the street and alley committee to mark the intersection of Center Street and Main Street with such appropriate signs as will apprise the operators of vehicles about to cross Main Street of the fact that the same is a through traffic street and directing such operators of crossing vehicles to stop at such intersections before crossing. 
(Code 2008, § 10.36.020; Ord. No. 101, § 2, 1924) 
Sec. 70-180. - Main Street, Darst Street, Center Street. 
    The following streets and parts of streets constitute through streets: Main Street, Darst Street and Center Street. Every driver of a vehicle traversing any street intersecting with any through street shall stop such vehicle before entering upon the through street unless a go signal is given at such intersection by a traffic officer or a traffic sign. 
(Code 2008, § 10.36.040; Ord. No. 204, § 27, 1941) 
Secs. 70-181-70-198. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PEDESTRIANS 

Sec. 70-199. - Signals. 
    At intersections where traffic is directed by a police officer or by a stop-and-go signal, it is unlawful for any pedestrian to cross the roadway other than with released traffic, if such crossing interferes with the lawful movement of traffic. 
(Code 2008, § 10.40.030; Ord. No. 204, § 10, 1941) 
Secs. 70-200-70-221. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - SKATEBOARDS, ROLLER SKATES AND ROLLER BLADES 

Sec. 70-222. - Skateboard prohibited uses. 
    It is unlawful for any person to operate or ride on a skateboard: 
(1)  On the following streets in the city: 
a.  Illinois Route 117; 
b.  U.S. Route 24; 
c.  Lake Road; 
d.  South Darst Street from East Center Street to Leo Street; 
e.  Reagan Drive; 
f.  100 block of North Meek Street. 
(2)  On any street, sidewalk or public area within the area bounded by Mill Street, Major Street, Cruger Avenue and Liberty Street. 
(3)  On any public or private property where signs have been posted at the entrance or displayed prominently on the property prohibiting the use of either skateboards, roller skates, scooters, or roller blades. 
(4)  On any public or private property when given previous notice, either verbal or written, by a police officer or any owner, manager, or employee of the property. 
(5)  On any parking lots owned or leased by the city. 
(6)  On any place in the city in such a way as to be dangerous to persons or property. 
(7)  In such a manner as to obstruct or slow vehicle or pedestrian traffic on streets or sidewalks. 
(8)  Between sunset and sunrise. 
(Code 2008, § 10.46.010) 
Sec. 70-223. - Roller skates, scooters, and roller blades prohibited uses. 
    It is unlawful for any person to operate or ride on roller skates, roller blades, and scooters: 
(1)  On any of the following streets: 
a.  Illinois Route 117; 
b.  U.S. Route 24; 
c.  Lake Road; 
d.  Reagan Drive. 
(2)  On the following sidewalks in the city: 
a.  Main Street from Mill Street to Cruger Avenue; 
b.  Center Street from Major Street to Liberty Street. 
(3)  On any public or private property where signs have been posted at the entrance or displayed prominently on the property prohibiting the use of either skateboards, roller blades, roller skates, or scooters. 
(4)  On any public or private property when given previous notice, either verbal or written, by a police officer or any owner, manager, or employee of the property. 
(5)  On any parking lots owned or leased by the city. 
(6)  On any place in the city in such a way as to be dangerous to persons or property. 
(7)  In such a way as to obstruct or slow vehicle or pedestrian traffic on streets or sidewalks. 
(Code 2008, § 10.46.020) 
Sec. 70-224. - Certain self-propelled vehicles and machines prohibited uses. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or ride any machine that can be self-propelled by either a gas or electric motor that cannot be licensed by the state for operation on streets: 
(1)  On any street in the city. 
(2)  On the following sidewalks in the city: 
a.  Main Street from Mill Street to Cruger Avenue; 
b.  Center Street from Major Street to Liberty Street. 
(b)  Exemptions. The following vehicles and machines are exempt from this section: 
(1)  Motorized wheelchairs. 
(2)  Motorized carts (not golf carts) when used by subjects for medical reasons. 
(3)  Vehicles of husbandry. 
(4)  Construction (road or building) vehicles. 
(5)  Machines used for snow removal or lawn care if vehicle is being transported between properties for this purpose. 
(6)  Any vehicle owned by the city if the vehicle is being used in an official capacity. 
(c)  None of these machines or vehicles shall be operated in such a manner as to obstruct or slow vehicle or pedestrian traffic on streets or sidewalks. 
(Code 2008, § 10.46.030) 
Sec. 70-225. - Skateboards, roller skates and roller blades permitted use. 
(a)  It shall be lawful for any person to operate or ride on skateboards, roller skates and roller blades on the following paths and sidewalks within the city: 
(1)  From the Sunny Lane park entrance to the paved trail at the walking bridge, across the paved parking and driving area in the lower park to the skateboard park. 
(2)  From the Lake Road and Route 117 intersection sidewalk across the pedestrian bridge, along the sidewalk to the paved road and then north to the skateboard park. 
(3)  Access use only to and from the skate board park on the paved trail running east/west along Lake Road to the lower park paved road to the skateboard park. 
(b)  All other paved or nature trails, roads and parking areas within the park grounds shall be prohibited from use by persons operating or riding on skate boards, roller skates and roller blades. 
(c)  None of the persons operating skateboards, roller skates and roller blades shall be operated in such a manner as to obstruct or slow vehicle or pedestrian traffic on streets or sidewalks. 
(Code 2008, § 10.46.35) 
Chapter 74 - WATER AND SEWER 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 74-1. - Sewer system. 
    Anyone owning property not within the annexed territory of the city and on whose property has been officially declared to exist in a health hazard area shall be given the opportunity to hook onto the city sewer system. The property owner shall incur their proportionate share of all capital costs to include engineering, administrative, bond acquisition (funding), legal and construction costs. The property owner shall pay their fair share through a debt service charge computed to amortize the indebtedness of a special taxing district composed of property owner. This charge shall be in addition to the same user charge paid by the people within the city limits. 
(Code 2008, § 13.02.010; Ord. No. 8-78; Ord. of 7-23-1981(part)) 
Sec. 74-2. - Water system. 
    Anyone owning property not within the annexed territory of the city shall be given an opportunity to hook on to the city water system. The property owner shall incur their proportionate share of all capital costs to include engineering, administrative, bond acquisition (funding), legal and construction costs. The type, size and spacing of water mains, valves and fire hydrants shall be specified by the city engineers and the capital costs of the pipe, valves and fire hydrants shall also be incurred by the property owner. 
(Code 2008, § 13.02.020; Ord. of 7-23-1981(part)) 
Sec. 74-3. - Extensions subject to availability. 
    Any water or sewer extensions to areas outside the city limits shall be subject to availability of pipeline and treatment plant capacity to handle flows from such areas and shall be subject to all permitting and other requirements of the state and city. 
(Code 2008, § 13.02.030; Ord. of 7-23-1981(part)) 
Sec. 74-4. - Negotiation for deviations. 
    Deviation to the above conditions and restrictions may be negotiated by the property owner(s) when and if a petition for annexation is presented for the consideration of the city planning commission and the specific conditions and/or waivers are made a part of the annexation agreement. 
(Code 2008, § 13.02.040; Ord. of 7-23-1981(part)) 
Secs. 74-5-74-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - REGULATIONS FOR SEWER SERVICE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 74-27. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article and in article V of this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Administrator means the administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 
    Basic user charge means the basic assessment levied on all users of the public sewer system. 
    BOD (denoting biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Centigrade, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
    Building drain means that part of the lowest piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer or other approved point of discharge, beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
    Capital improvement charge means a charge levied on users to improve extend or reconstruct the sewage treatment works. 
    Combined sewer means a sewer which is designed and intended to receive wastewater, stormwater, surface water and groundwater drainage. 
    Commercial user means and includes transit lodging, retail and wholesale establishments or places engaged in selling merchandise or rendering services. 
    Control manhole means a structure located on a site from which industrial wastes are discharged. Where feasible, the manhole shall have an interior drop. The purpose of a control manhole is to provide access for the city representative to sample and/or measure discharges. 
    Debt service charge means the amount to be paid each billing period for payment of interest, principal and coverage of (loan, bond, etc.) outstanding. 
    Director means the director of the state environmental protection agency. 
    Easement means an acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others. 
    Effluent criteria are defined in any applicable NPDES permit. 
    Federal Act means the Federal Clean Water Act (33 USC 466 et seq.) as amended (Pub. L. 95-217). 
    Federal Grant II means the U.S. government participation in the financing of the construction of treatment works as provided for by Title II-Grants for Construction of Treatment Works of the Act and implementing regulations. 
    Floatable oil means oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection system. 
    Garbage means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of food. 
    Industrial users means and includes establishments engaged in manufacturing activities involving the mechanical or chemical transformation of materials of substance into products. 
    Industrial waste means any solid, liquid or gaseous substance discharged, permitted to flow or escaping from any industrial, manufacturing, commercial or business establishment or process or from the development, recovery or processing of any natural resource as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
    Institutional/governmental user means and includes schools, churches, penal institutions, and users associated with federal, state, and local governments. 
    Local capital cost charge means charges for costs other than the operation, maintenance and replacement costs, i.e. debt service and capital improvement costs. 
    Major contributing industry means an industrial user of the publicly owned treatment works that: 
(1)  Has a low of 50,000 gallons or more per average work day; 
(2)  Has a flow greater than the ten percent of the flow carried by the municipal system receiving the waste; 
(3)  Has in its waste, a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined in standards issued under section 307(a) of the Federal Act; or 
(4)  Is found by the permit issuance authority, in connection with the issuance of the NPDES permit to the publicly owned treatment works receiving the waste, to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on that treatment works or upon the quality of effluent from that treatment works. 
    Milligrams per liter means a unit of the concentration of water or wastewater constituent. It is 0.001g of the constituent in 1,000ml of water. It has replaced the unit formerly used commonly, parts per million, to which it is approximately equivalent, in reporting the results of water and wastewater analysis. 
    Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
    NPDES permit means any permit or equivalent document or requirements issued by the administrator, or where appropriated by the director, after enactment of the federal Clean Water Act to regulate the discharge of pollutants pursuant to section 402 of the Federal Act. 
    Person means any and all persons, natural or artificial including any individual, firm, company, municipal or private corporation, association, society, institution enterprise, governmental agency or other entity. 
    pH means the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion concentration expressed by one of the procedures outlined in the IEPA Division of Laboratories Manual of Laboratory Methods. 
    Population equivalent is a term used to evaluate the impact of industrial or other waste on a treatment works or stream. One population equivalent is 100 gallons of sewage per day, containing 0.17 pounds of BOD and 0.20 pounds of suspended solids. 
    ppm means parts per million by weight. 
    Pretreatment means the treatment of wastewaters from sources before introduction into the wastewater treatment works. 
    Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension. 
    Public sewer means a sewer provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of the city. It also includes sewers within or outside the city boundaries that serve one or more persons and ultimately discharge into the city sanitary sewer system, even though those sewers may not have been constructed with city funds. 
    Replacement means expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of the treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works were designed and constructed. The term "operation and maintenance" includes replacement. 
    Residential user means all dwelling units such as houses, mobile homes, apartments, permanent multifamily dwellings. 
    Sanitary sewer means a sewer that conveys sewage or industrial wastes or a combination of both, and into which stormwaters, surface waters and groundwaters or polluted industrial wastes are not intentionally admitted. 
    Sewage is used interchangeably with "wastewater." 
    Sewer means a pipe or conduit for conveying sewage or any other waste liquids, including stormwater, and groundwater drainage. 
    Sewerage means the system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection, transportation and pumping of sewage. 
    Sewerage fund means the principal accounting designation for all revenues received in the operation of the sewerage system. 
    Slug means any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of low exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration or flows during normal operation. 
    State Act means the Illinois Anti-Pollution Bond Act of 1970. 
    State grant means the state participation in the financing of the construction of treatment works as provided for by the Illinois Anti-Pollution Bond Act and for making such grants as filed with the Secretary of State of the State of Illinois. 
    Storm sewer means a sewer that carries stormwater, surface water and groundwater drainage but excludes sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted cooling water. 
    Stormwater runoff means that portion of the precipitation that is drained into the sewers. 
    Surcharge means the assessment in addition to the basic user charge and debt service charge which is levied on those persons whose wastes are greater in strength than the concentration values established in this chapter. 
    Suspended solids (SS) means solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, sewage or industrial waste, and which are removable by a laboratory filtration device. Quantitative determination of suspended solids shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in the IEPA Division of Laboratories Manual of Laboratory Methods. 
    Unpolluted water means water quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided. 
    Useful life means the estimated period during which the collection system and/or treatment works will be operated. 
    User charge means a charge levied on users of treatment works for the cost of operation, maintenance and replacement. 
    User class means the type of user residential institutional/governmental, commercial, or industrial as defined in this section. 
    Wastewater means the spent water of a community. From this standpoint of course, it may be a combination of the liquid and water carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may be present. 
    Wastewater facilities means the structures, equipment and processes required to collect carry away and treat domestic and industrial wastes and transport effluent to a watercourse. 
    Wastewater service charge means the charge per quarter or month levied on all users of the wastewater facilities. The service charge shall be computed as outlined in this article, and shall consist of the total or the basic user charge, the local capital cost and a surcharge, if applicable. 
    Wastewater treatment works means an arrangement of devices and structures for treating wastewater, industrial wastes and sludge. The term "wastewater treatment works" is sometimes used as synonymous with "waste treatment plant" or "wastewater treatment plant" or "pollution control plant." 
    Water quality standards are defined in the water pollution regulations of the state. 
    Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Code 2008, § 13.04.010; Ord. No. 11-83(part), 1983) 
Sec. 74-28. - Unsanitary deposit of garbage and wastes unlawful. 
    It is unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. 
(Code 2008, § 13.04.020; Ord. No. 11-83(part), 1983) 
Sec. 74-29. - Unlawful discharges into natural outlet unlawful. 
    It is unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of the ordinance codified herein. 
(Code 2008, § 13.04.030; Ord. No. 11-83(part), 1983) 
Sec. 74-30. - Discharging polluting substances into storm sewer drainage system unlawful. 
    It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to connect or cause to be connected any drain carrying or to carry any toilet, sink, basement, septic tank, cesspool, or industrial waste, or any other fixture or device discharging any form of polluting substance to the storm sewer drainage system in the city, including stormwater drains or combination stormwater drains along and near U.S. Highway No. 24. 
(Code 2008, §§ 13.04.060, 13.04.070; Ord. No. 273, §§ 1, 2, 1955; Ord. No. 3-60, §§ 1, 2, 1960) 
Sec. 74-31. - Discharges; compliance with state and federal standards. 
    All disposal by any person into the sewer system is unlawful except those discharges in compliance with federal standards promulgated pursuant to the Federal Act and more stringent state and local standards. 
(Code 2008, § 13.04.096; Ord. No. 11-83(part), 1983) 
Sec. 74-32. - Privies, septic tanks, cesspools. 
    Except as hereinafter provided, it is unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(Code 2008, § 13.04.040; Ord. No. 11-83(part), 1983) 
Sec. 74-33. - Tampering with or destruction of public sewage works equipment prohibited. 
    No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the sewage works. 
(Code 2008, § 13.04.260; Ord. No. 11-83(part), 1983) 
Sec. 74-34. - Powers and authority of inspectors. 
    The director of public works and other duly authorized employees of the city, the state environmental protection agency, bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of the ordinance codified herein. The city shall have no authority to inquire into any processes, including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterway or facilities for waste treatment. 
(Code 2008, § 13.04.270; Ord. No. 11-83(part), 1983) 
Sec. 74-35. - Inspectors to observe company safety rules. 
    While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in section 74-34, the director of public works or a duly authorized employees of the city, the state environmental protection agency, and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the city employees and the city shall indemnify the company against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operating, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain conditions as required in section 74-202. 
(Code 2008, § 13.04.280; Ord. No. 11-83(part), 1983) 
Sec. 74-36. - Inspectors entrance onto easements. 
    The duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the purpose of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within the easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on the easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(Code 2008, § 13.04.290; Ord. No. 11-83(part), 1983) 
Sec. 74-37. - Violation-Notification; permit revocation. 
    Any person found to be violating any provision of the ordinance codified herein except section 74-33 shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. The city may revoke any permit for sewage disposal as a result of any violation of any provision of the ordinance codified herein. 
(Code 2008, § 13.04.300; Ord. No. 11-83(part), 1983) 
Sec. 74-38. - Violation-Liability to the city. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of the ordinance codified herein shall become liable to the city by reasons of such violation. 
(Code 2008, § 13.04.320; Ord. No. 11-83(part), 1983) 
Secs. 74-39-74-64. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 74-65. - Toilet facilities; installation, connection to public sewers. 
    The owner of all the houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is not located or may in the future be located any public sanitary (or combined) sewer of the city, is hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within 90 days after date of official notice to do so, provided that the public sewer is within 300 feet of the property line. 
(Code 2008, § 13.04.050; Ord. No. 11-83(part), 1983) 
Sec. 74-66. - Exemption from connection through agreement with the city. 
    A request for exemption from connection to the public sewer may be made with the following agreement: 
An individual, corporation and/or an agent acting on behalf of an estate and or property owner may request an exemption from a required connection to a City public sewer if they are within 300 feet of a public sewer and required to connect. The City of Eureka may be allowed by way of Resolution to enter into an agreement with said owner to allow the owner to put in a septic system and not connect to the City Public Sewer using the following Resolutions and conditions set forth. The Eureka City Council reserves the right to modify the resolution of agreement from time to time as they deem necessary. 
An Agreement between the parties duly passed by the Eureka City Council at a regularly scheduled council shall authorize the City of Eureka to enter into an agreement with ____________ owners of the property at ____________ in the City of Eureka, Woodford County, State of Illinois to allow the property to maintain, repair, and or replace a private septic system within 300 feet of a public sewer. 
WHEREAS, ____________ has requested that their property located at ____________ in the City of Eureka Woodford County be allowed to maintain, repair, and or replace a sanitary sewer septic system; and 
WHEREAS, the property is located within 300 feet of a municipal sewer and is required to connect to the public sewer; and 
WHEREAS, the City of Eureka and the Woodford County Health Department has determined that it is in the best interest of the property owners due to cost, grade or other cause deemed reasonable that the property will be allowed to maintain, repair, and or replace the sanitary sewer septic system with the rules and regulations stipulated herein; and 
WHERAS, the owners of record agree to abide by the listed requirements for inspection, testing and submittal of records to the City of Eureka; and 
WHEREAS, the owners agree that if they fail to perform the inspections as required, submit records in a timely manner, or fail any of the minimum standards for discharge they will be required to connect to the City of Eureka public sewer within three months of and notification by the City to the current owner or their successors of their failure to meet the obligations of this agreement and will be subject to the fines imposed in this agreement; and 
WHEREAS, the owners agree to the following testing, record submittal, inspections, fines and collection procedure per this agreement: 
A. Testing and Records. 
1. Each privately owned septic system shall be tested and inspected at the time of installation and at least twice a year or more frequently if requested by the City of Eureka if it is determined the discharge was in excess of ____________ at any time. 
2. All inspections and testing shall be performed by a licensed and certified ____________ . 
3. All cost associated with the testing, inspections, records log and submittal of results to the City of Eureka shall be paid by the property owner. 
4. Property owner shall submit to the City of Eureka the test results and maintenance log no later than January 31 and July 31 of each year. Failure to submit required results by the due dates will result in a fine of $100.00 per day and each day shall constitute an addition violation and fine. The fine will be attached to the property owner's water/sewer monthly utility billing and shall be subject to collection per the Eureka Municipal Code Chapter 74, Water and Sewer. 
5. The City will not be responsible for notification of inspection deadlines and the responsibility for timely inspections and reporting shall be the sole responsibility of the property owner. 
6. A maintenance log shall be maintained by the owner and include: 
a. Date of each test. 
b. Name and of persons performing the test. 
c. Test results; 
d. Repairs or servicing required; 
e. Repairs and date completed; and 
f. Servicing performed and date completed. 
B. The City Superintendent of Streets and Alleys and other duly authorized employees of the City, the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing. 
WHEREAS, the owner agrees that the City of Eureka does not bear any responsibility for any cost associated with the maintenance, repair, and or replacement of the private septic system, inspections, maintenance of records. 
WHEREAS, The City of Eureka does not bear any responsibility for any cost associated with any construction cost associated with constructing a sewer main or the connection to the municipal sewer if required to do so, due to failure of the owner to meet the terms of this agreement as approved and agreed to by the property owner of record or requirement by the Environmental Protection Agency of the State of Illinois or any authorized agency having jurisdiction over septic system discharge or contamination by same. 
WHEREAS, Successors and Assigns. This Agreement shall be binding upon and inure to the benefit of the Parties hereto and their respective successors and permitted assigns. 
WHEREAS, Except as otherwise expressly provided herein, this Agreement supersedes all prior agreements, negotiations, and discussions relative to the subject matter hereof and is a full integration of the agreement of the parties. 
WHERAS, If any provision, covenant, or portion of this Agreement, or its application to any person, entity, or property is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the application or validity of any other provisions, covenants or portions of this Agreement (and, to that end, any provisions, covenants, agreements or portions of this Agreement are declared to be severable). 
WHEREAS, this agreement will be filed with the Woodford County Recorder with the property tax ID number ____________ shoeing the conditions and requirements of this agreement. 
THERFORE BE IT RESOLVED that (I) (We) as owners of record ____________ has/have read and agree to the terms of this Ordinance of agreement with the City of Eureka including the performance of the inspections as required, submittal of records in a timely manner to the City of Eureka, or if I fail any of the minimum standards for discharge will be subject to immediate connection to the City public sewer. The Agreement will be effective with the date of approval by the Eureka City Council and Mayor in and for the City of Eureka. The signed agreement will be filed and recorded with the attached plat identifying the property subject to the terms and requirements of this agreement and so approved with the owner's signature, Eureka, Illinois, Woodford County, Illinois. 
(Code 2008, § 13.04. 055; Ord. No. 11-05, § I, 4-18-2011) 
Secs. 74-67-74-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL 

Sec. 74-91. - Private sewage disposal; connection. 
    Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of section 74-65, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 2008, § 13.04.082; Ord. No. 11-83(part), 1983) 
Sec. 74-92. - Permit required; application; fee. 
    Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the administrator. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city, any plans, specifications and other information as deemed necessary by the administrator. A permit and inspection fee of $400.00 shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. 
(Code 2008, § 13.04.084; Ord. No. 11-83(part), 1983) 
Sec. 74-93. - Private sewage disposal-Permit; effectiveness. 
    A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the director of public works. He shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the city when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within 48 hours of the receipt of written notice by the city. 
(Code 2008, § 13.04.085; Ord. No. 11-83(part), 1983) 
Sec. 74-94. - Private sewage disposal-Compliance with state recommendations. 
    The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the state Private Sewage Disposal Licensing Act and Code and with the state environmental protection agency. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than 15,000 square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet. 
(Code 2008, § 13.04.086; Ord. No. 11-83(part), 1983) 
Sec. 74-95. - Private sewage disposal-Connection to public sewer when available. 
    At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system as provided in section 74-65, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material. 
(Code 2008, § 13.04.088; Ord. No. 11-83(part), 1983) 
Sec. 74-96. - Private sewage disposal-Maintenance; costs. 
    The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, and at no expense to the city. 
(Code 2008, § 13.04.090; Ord. No. 11-83(part), 1983) 
Sec. 74-97. - Private sewage disposal-Additional requirements. 
    No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the health officer. 
(Code 2008, § 13.04.092; Ord. No. 11-83(part), 1983) 
Sec. 74-98. - Private sewage disposal-Public sewer availability. 
    When a public sewer becomes available, the building sewer shall be connected to the sewer within 60 days and the private sewage disposal system shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with clean bank run gravel or dirt. 
(Code 2008, § 13.04.094; Ord. No. 11-83(part), 1983) 
Secs. 74-99-74-124. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PERMITS 

Sec. 74-125. - Constructions, tapping; permit, license, bond requirements. 
(a)  No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the city. 
(b)  Any individual or firm who taps the public sewer for the purpose of connecting a private building sewer thereon shall first obtain a permit from the city. 
(c)  Any individual or firm who as a contractor or builder contracts to build or construct a private sewer and to tap the public sewer for the purpose of connecting a private building sewer thereon shall first obtain a license from the city as such contractor, and, before the license is granted, furnish to the city a performance bond in the sum of $2,500.00 indemnifying the city and private property owner against any loss or damage resulting from the work of the license holder. 
(Code 2008, § 13.04.080; Ord. No. 260, § 401, 1952) 
Sec. 74-126. - Building sewers and connections; permit required. 
    No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with, or opening into; use; alter; or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining written permit from the city. 
(Code 2008, § 13.04.095; Ord. No. 11-83(part), 1983) 
Sec. 74-127. - Building sewer permits-Types; applications fees. 
    There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: 
(1)  For residential, wastewater service; and 
(2)  To commercial, institutional/governmental or industrial wastewater service. 
In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the city. A permit and inspection fee of $400.00 per residential living unit and for any commercial building. Sewer permits shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. The industry, as a condition of permit authorization, must provide information describing its wastewater constituents, characteristics and type of activity. 
(Code 2008, § 13.04.098; Ord. No. 11-83(part), 1983) 
Sec. 74-128. - Building sewer permits-Issuance. 
    A building sewer permit will only be issued and a sewer connection shall only be allowed if it can be demonstrated that the downstream sewerage facilities, including sewers, pump stations and wastewater treatment to sewer backups. 
(Code 2008, § 13.4.100; Ord. No. 11-83(part), 1983) 
Sec. 74-129. - Applications. 
    Applications for private sewage disposal and for residential or commercial sewers are on file in the public works department. 
Secs. 74-130-74-156. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - CONSTRUCTION 

Sec. 74-157. - Building sewer cost and expense. 
    All cost and expense incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer, included, but not limited to, sewer backups. 
(Code 2008, § 13.4.101) 
Sec. 74-158. - Separate and independent building sewers required. 
    A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building, except that where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley; court, yard or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer. 
(Code 2008, § 13.4.102; Ord. No. 11-83(part), 1983) 
Sec. 74-159. - Use of old building sewers. 
    Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the city, to meet all requirements of the ordinance codified in this division. 
(Code 2008, § 13.4.103; Ord. No. 11-83(part), 1983) 
Sec. 74-160. - Construction requirements. 
    The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the American Society of Testing Materials, Water Pollution Control Federation Manual of Practice No.9, and Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois shall apply. 
(Code 2008, § 13.4.104; Ord. No. 11-83(part), 1983) 
Sec. 74-161. - Elevation of building sewer. 
    When possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by a means which is approved in accordance with section 74-31 and discharged to the building sewer. 
(Code 2008, § 13.4.105; Ord. No. 11-83(part), 1983) 
Sec. 74-162. - Connections to roof downspouts, area way drains, etc. 
    No person(s) shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. 
(Code 2008, § 13.4.106; Ord. No. 11-83(part), 1983) 
Sec. 74-163. - Building sewer-Connection to public sewers. 
    The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the state plumbing code. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the city before installation. 
(Code 2008, § 13.4.107; Ord. No. 11-83(part), 1983) 
Sec. 74-164. - Building sewer-Notification when ready for inspection and connection. 
    The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the city when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the director of public works or his designee. 
(Code 2008, § 13.4.108; Ord. No. 11-83(part), 1983) 
Sec. 74-165. - Excavations to be guarded with barricades. 
    All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(Code 2008, § 13.4.109; Ord. No. 11-83(part), 1983) 
Sec. 74-166. - Construction materials-Sanitary sewer pipe. 
(a)  Specifications and standards for sanitary sewer pipe in the city sewer and water systems are as provided in this section. 
(b)  The sanitary sewer shall be extra strength and standard strength clay pipe, ASTM Designation C-700 with the following modifications: 
(1)  Vitrified clay sewer pipe joints shall conform to ASTM C-425. Plain end vitrified clay sewer pipe shall be jointed with PVC bell material conforming to ASTM C-1784 and flexible gasket meeting ASTM C-425 specifications. 
(2)  Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) sewer pipe joints shall conform to ASTM D-3034, Type PSM for sizes four inches to 15.1 inches and ASTM F-679 for sizes 18 inches to 27 inches. Standard dimensions ratio (SDR) shall be specified in the special provisions. Minimum acceptable SDR shall be 26. Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) sewer pipe joints shall be solvent welded joints per ASTM D-2855 or flexible electrometric seals per ASTM D-3212. 
(3)  Any sewer pipe or sewer pipe material not conforming to the above specifications shall not be used without prior permission from the city administrator of the city. 
(4)  All material and construction shall conform to the current edition of the "Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois." 
(Code 2008, § 13.4.110) 
Sec. 74-167. - Construction materials-Large size concrete sewer pipe. 
    Large size concrete sewer pipe shall meet the following standards and specifications: ASTM Designation C14, with the following modifications: 
(1)  Sewer pipe shall be subject to rejection because of: 
a.  Variations in any dimensions exceeding 50 percent of the permissible given in Table 1 of the designated; 
b.  Insecure attachments of branches on spurs; 
c.  Pipe lengths less than three feet; four feet or more is preferable. 
(2)  Crushing strength requirements by the three-edge bearing method of testing, as given in Table 1, shall be considered as minimum requirements. 
(3)  Maximum absorption shall not exceed six percent. 
(Code 2008, § 13.04.112; Ord. No. 10-79, § 3, 1979) 
Sec. 74-168. - Construction materials-Cast iron pipe centrifugally cast in metal molds for water or other liquids. 
    The following standards and specifications shall apply to cast iron pipe centrifugally cast in metal molds, for water or other liquids: ANSI 21.6, Class 150, and Cast Iron Pipe Centrifugally Cast in Sand Lined Molds, for Water or Other Liquids, ANSI 21.8, Class 150. 
(1)  Joints for cast iron pipe. Mechanical type or slip-on type as specified under Pipe, Cast Iron Pressure, Federal Specification WW-P-421b, Types 11 and Ill, joint assembly. Joints to be installed according to manufacturer's instructions; 
(2)  Corrugated metal pipe. Article in "Illinois Standard Highway Specifications," entitled Corrugated Metal Pipe. 
(Code 2008, § 13.04.114; Ord. No. 10-79, § 4, 1979) 
Sec. 74-169. - Construction materials-PVC plastic pipe, couplings and fittings. 
    The following standards and specifications shall apply to PVC plastic pipe, couplings and fittings to be used on all public properties and easements: Rigid PVC pressure pipe as described in this specification is designed to carry water at pressures up to the maximum class rating. Piping system shall be Certain-Teed Fluid-Tite, Johns-Manville PVC, or equal. 
(1)  Material used to the PVC pipe, couplings and fittings shall conform to ASTM specification D1784, Class 12454-B. 
(2)  The standard dimensional ratio for the pipe shall be as follows: SDR 18 (Class 150). 
(Code 2008, § 13.04.116; Ord. No. 10-79, § 5, 1979) 
Sec. 74-170. - Building drain; procedure when drainage by gravity not possible. 
    In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such drain shall be lifted by approved artificial means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(Code 2008, § 13.04.150; Ord. No. 260, § 409, 1952) 
Secs. 74-171-74-193. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - DISCHARGES, MAINTENANCE AND SAMPLING 

Sec. 74-194. - Use of the public sewers; prohibited discharges. 
    No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. 
(Code 2008, § 13.04.160; Ord. No. 11-83(part), 1983) 
Sec. 74-195. - Drainage waters; discharge into storm sewer, natural outlet required. 
    Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the city. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged on approval of the city, to a storm sewer, combined sewer, or natural outlet. 
(Code 2008, § 13.04.170; Ord. No. 11-83(part), 1983) 
Sec. 74-196. - Discharge of designated waters and wastes to public sewers prohibited. 
    No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers: 
(1)  Any gasoline; benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas. 
(2)  Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant. 
(3)  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works. 
(4)  Solid or viscous substances in quantity or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works, such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, un-ground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshing, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
(Code 2008, § 13.04.175; Ord. No. 11-83(part), 1983) 
Sec. 74-197. - Discharge of harmful substances prohibited. 
    No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the city that such wastes can harm either the sewers sewage treatment process or equipment; have an adverse effect on the receiving stream; or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or constitutes a nuisance. In forming this opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the administrator will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treat ability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and maximum limits established by regulatory agencies. The substances prohibited are: 
(1)  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius). 
(2)  Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous materials; or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 and 150 degrees Fahrenheit (0 and 65 degrees Celsius). 
(3)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the city. 
(4)  Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solution whether neutralized or not. 
(5)  Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, or similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established by the city for such materials. 
(6)  Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor-producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the city as necessary after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal, or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters. 
(7)  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the city in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(8)  Any wastes or waters having a pH in excess of 9.5. 
(9)  Any mercury or any of its compounds in excess of 0.0005 mg/l as Hg at any time except as permitted by the city in compliance with applicable state and federal regulations. 
(10)  Any cyanide in excess of 0.025 mg/l at any time except as permitted by the city in compliance with applicable state and federal regulations. 
(11)  Materials which exert or cause: 
a.  Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, Fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate); 
b.  Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions); 
c.  Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the average treatment works; 
d.  Unusual volume of flow or concentrations of wastes constituting slugs. 
(12)  Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(Code 2008, § 13.04.180; Ord. No. 11-83(part), 1983) 
Sec. 74-198. - Substances subject to review, preliminary treatment. 
    If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in section 74-197, and/or which are in violation of the standards for pretreatment provided in 40 CFR 403, June 26, 1978, and any amendments thereto, and which in the judgment of the city may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the city may: 
(1)  Reject the wastes; 
(2)  Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers; 
(3)  Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or; 
(4)  Require payment to cover the added costs of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges, under the provisions of section 74-204. 
If the city permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the city, and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws. 
(Code 2008, § 13.04.190; Ord. No. 11-83(part) 1983) 
Sec. 74-199. - Grease, oil and sand interceptors. 
    Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when; in the opinion of the city they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the city, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. 
(Code 2008, § 13.04.200; Ord. No. 11-83(part), 1983) 
Sec. 74-200. - Preliminary treatment or flow equalizing facilities; maintenance. 
    Where preliminary treatment or flow equalizing facilities are provided; they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. 
(Code 2008, § 13.04.205; Ord. No. 11-83(part), 1983) 
Sec. 74-201. - Manhole; requirement; maintenance. 
    Each industry shall be required to install a control manhole and, when required by the city, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the city. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(Code 2008, § 13.04.210; Ord. No. 11-83(part), 1983) 
Sec. 74-202. - Measurements of waters and wastes; required. 
    The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall provide laboratory measurements, test, and analysis of waters and wastes to illustrate compliance with the ordinance codified herein and any special conditions for discharge established by the city or regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the discharge. The number, type and frequency of laboratory analysis to be performed by the owner shall be as stipulated by the city, but no less than once per year the industry must supply a complete analysis of the constituents of the wastewater discharge to assure that compliance with the federal, state, and local standards are being met. The owner shall report the results of measurements and laboratory analysis to the city at such times and in such a manner as prescribed by the city. The owner shall bear the expense of all measurements, analysis and reporting required by the city. At such times as deemed necessary the city reserves the right to take measurements and samples for analysis by an outside laboratory service. 
(Code 2008, § 13.04.215; Ord. No. 11-83(part), 1983) 
Sec. 74-203. - Sampling; where taken from; methods. 
    All measurements, tests and analysis of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in the ordinance codified herein shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of IEPA Division of Laboratories Manual of Laboratory Methods, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at the control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb, and property. The particular analysis involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite of all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analysis are obtained from 24-hour composites of all outfalls, whereas pH's are determined from periodic grab samples. 
(Code 2008, § 13.04.220; Ord. No. 11-83(part), 1983) 
Sec. 74-204. - Provisions not to prevent special agreements. 
    No statement contained in this section and sections 74-194 through 74-203 shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor, in accordance with sections 74-418 through 74-426, by the industrial concern provided such payments are in accordance with federal and state guide lines for user charge system. 
(Code 2008, § 13.04.230; Ord. No. 11-83(part), 1983) 
Sec. 74-205. - Interceptors; maintenance responsibility. 
    Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner, at his expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times. 
(Code 2008, § 13.04.250; Ord. No. 260, § 505, 1952) 
Secs. 74-206-74-233. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - REGULATIONS FOR WATER SERVICE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 74-234-74-259. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 74-260. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    City water main means all waterlines that convey water to two or more properties within the corporate limits of the city. 
    Dwelling unit means one or more rooms constituting all or part of a dwelling which are used exclusively as living quarters for one family. 
    Private service line means the water supply line extending from the water main to the building served. 
    Private water main means any waterline that conveys water to two or more properties outside the corporate limits of the city. 
    Shutoff valve means a city main or service line with a valve box to be operated from above ground. 
(Code 2008, § 13.08.010; Ord. No. 1-87, § 1, 1987) 
Sec. 74-261. - Connecting water mains to city water systems. 
    Any person, firm or corporation connecting a water main to the city water system shall pay all the costs of the water main and service connections necessary to accomplish such connection from an existing city water main of sufficient size to support the additional demand unless explicitly authorized by the city council, and the same shall be done under the supervision of and subject to the approval of the city administrator or his designated representative. 
(Code 2008, § 13.08.020; Ord. No. 1-87, § 2, 1987) 
Sec. 74-262. - Connecting service lines to city water system. 
(a)  No connection to a city water main shall be made without a permit being issued and 48 hours' notice, consisting of two full working days, having been given to the city. All such connections shall be made and all such work done at the expense of the applicant who shall also furnish all materials necessary for such work. 
(b)  The water meter shall be purchased from the city and the city water main shall be tapped by the city. All such connections shall be made under the supervision of authorized city personnel and no connections shall be covered until the work has been inspected by a city designated representative. 
(c)  Applications for such connections must be made to the city. 
(d)  All service lines must be of copper or polyethylene 200 PSI with tracer wire attached, must be buried a minimum of four feet below ground level and must be equipped with a shut off valve that is operable. Any service line serving more than one dwelling-unit must be equipped with a shut off valve, accessible from outside the building, for each individual meter, and no service line for any building shall be permitted to cross any lot or building to serve an adjoining lot or building. 
(e)  Excavations to be guarded with barricades. All excavations for connections to water main shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(Code 2008, § 13.08.030; Ord. No. 1-87, § 3, 1987; Ord. No. 15-17, § I, 8-17-2015) 
Sec. 74-263. - Tapping. 
    All city water mains will be tapped by the city. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the private water main or private service line to excavate the city water main and provide sufficient working space, as determined by the director of public works or his designated representative, to make the tap. The city will then tap the city water main and install a shutoff valve on the private water main or private service line as close to the city water main as possible. Tapping fees are as follows: 
(1)  Three-quarter-inch: $400.00. 
(2)  One-inch through 11/4-inch: $400.00. 
(3)  11/2-inch through two-inch: $500.00. 
These fees cover all labor and materials for the work per formed by the city. 
(Code 2008, § 13.08.040; Ord. No. 1-87, § 5, 1987; Ord. No. 2-93, § 4, 1993) 
Sec. 74-264. - Hookup fee. 
    There will be a hookup fee of $250.00 for each new private service line connected to the city water main. This fee is separate from the tapping fee. No hookup fee will be charged on a new private service line which is replacing an old private service line. 
(Code 2008, § 13.08.050; Ord. No. 1-87, § 6, 1987) 
Sec. 74-265. - Property owner's responsibilities for paying. 
    Whenever a bill for water or sewer services remains unpaid for 45 days after it has been rendered, the administrative office staff shall send to the owner of record of the real estate: 
(1)  A copy of each delinquent notice sent to the person who is delinquent in paying the charges or rates or other notice sufficient to inform the owner of record of said real estate the charges or rates have become delinquent. 
(2)  If a real estate property is used for rental or lease and the water or sewer account is delinquent for three consecutive billing periods, the property owner of record will be notified that the metered water usage will become the responsibility of the property owner of record in 15 days of the date of written notice from the city to the property owner of record. The city will insure that the meter will be read on the effective date of the transfer of the account as specified in the written notification. Should the owner of the property become delinquent for water metered following the effective date of the transfer of the water account, a lien may be placed on the property. The property owner of record shall not be held responsible for prior water or sewer delinquent accounts incurred by occupants/tenants, unless otherwise assumed by the landlord (owner) through a waiver of deposit agreement. 
(3)  If a shut-off valve is inoperable or non-existent the administrative staff shall notify the city maintenance department to repair, replace or install a workable outside shutoff. If a property with one or more living units, the owner must provide an outside shut off for each living unit. The city will maintain and/or repair the shut off after its installation. 
(Code 2008, § 13.08.060; Ord. No. 1-87, § 4, 1987; Ord. No. 19-01, § 2, 2001) 
Sec. 74-266. - Repairs to private service lines and private water main meters. 
    All private service lines within the corporate limits of the city shall be repaired and maintained, from the shut off valve including the meter pit and meter to the property residence, user or building served. The city will maintain all one-half inch and three-fourths inch water meters at no charge and will provide for the maintenance of all meters larger than three-fourths inch for which the property owner will be charged an amount equivalent to the costs incurred by the city. 
(Code 2008, § 13.08.070; Ord. No. 1-87, § 6, 1987; Ord. No. 11-04, § I, 3-21-2011) 
Sec. 74-267. - Repairs to and metered connections of private water mains and private service lines. 
    All private water mains shall be repaired and maintained, from the city water main to their termination, by the users of the city water furnished thereby and the city shall have no responsibility for the repair and maintenance of any such private water mains or required meters or meter pits. 
(1)  All private water mains shall at the point of connection to the city water main have installed a meter pit with an approved meter and remote read register to record the usage on the private water main. 
(2)  Any private water main or service water line with a length greater than 150 feet from the city water main shall be metered and billed at the point of connection of the private water main or service line to the city water main. 
(3)  The remote read register on the pit meter shall be read each month at the same time as the home meter(s) connected by private service lines to the private water main. 
(4)  The total monthly usage shown on the pit meter shall be compared to the combined monthly usage of the homeowner connected to the private water main. 
(5)  All usage recorded on the pit meter in excess of the combined usage of the homeowner(s)connected to the private water main by a private service line shall be billed at the current water rate to each homeowner an equal share of the total usage recorded. 
(Code 2008, § 13.08.080; Ord. No. 11-04, § I, 3-21-2011) 
Sec. 74-268. - Abandoned private water mains and service lines. 
    Any person, firm or corporation who abandons a private water main or service line shall excavate such abandoned line at its juncture with the city water main, cut off the abandoned line and close the corporation stop on the city water main or, in the absence of a corporation stop, cap the abandoned line where it leaves the city water main. This work must be inspected and approved by the city director of public works or his designated representative. 
(Code 2008, § 13.08.090; Ord. No. 1-87, § 8, 1987) 
Sec. 74-269. - Application to turn water on. 
    Application to have water turned on shall be made at the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 2008, § 13.08.100; Ord. No. 1-87, § 10, 1987) 
Sec. 74-270. - Turning water on. 
    No water from the city water system shall be turned on for service into any premises by any person but the water plant operator in charge or his designated representative. All tapping fees, hookup fees, deposits and past due accounts of the user must be paid in full before the water is turned on. 
(Code 2008, § 13.08.110; Ord. No. 1-87, § 11, 1987) 
Sec. 74-271. - Resale and/or distribution. 
    No water shall be resold or distributed by the recipient thereof from the city supply to any premises other than that for which application has been made and the meter installed, nor after water is introduced into any building or upon any premises shall any person make or employ any other person to make any tap, or connection with the work upon the premises for alterations, repairs, extensions or attachments without a written permit therefor to be issued by the city council, except in case of an emergency. 
(Code 2008, § 13.08.120; Ord. No. 1-87, § 12, 1987) 
Sec. 74-272. - Tampering. 
    It is unlawful for any person not authorized by the city to tamper with, alter or injure any part of the city water works or supply system or any water meter. 
(Code 2008, § 13.08.130; Ord. No. 1-87, § 13, 1987) 
Sec. 74-273. - Connections outside the city. 
    It is illegal to connect any private or other water system to the city water system, either directly or indirectly, or to connect the same to the water lines in or on any person's or corporation's property, if such lines are connected to the city water distribution system. 
(Code 2008, § 13.08.140; Ord. No. 1-87, § 14, 1987) 
Secs. 74-274-74-294. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RULES AND REGULATIONS 

Sec. 74-295. - Unpaid bills to become a lien; notice. 
    Pursuant to section 74-265, all unpaid account balances that remain unpaid 45 days after it is rendered, the city administrative staff shall send to the owner or owners of record a notice of delinquency. If the bill for water or sewer service remains unpaid 15 days after such notice has been delivered, the city administrative staff shall file with the county recorder of deeds a sworn statement of lien claim. A lien notification will be sent under the described following conditions: 
(1)  The legal description of the premises served; 
(2)  The total dollar amount of the amount billed, including any additional amounts incurred by the city as a result of the lien, including attorney fees and recording costs; 
(3)  The date when the amount became delinquent; and 
(4)  A notice that the city claims a lien for the amount as well as for all charges subsequent to the period covered by the bill. 
(Code 2008, § 13.08.160; Ord. No. 19-01, § 3, 2001) 
Sec. 74-296. - Foreclosure of lien. 
    Any lien filed pursuant to sections 74-265 and 74-295 may be foreclosed by the city in accordance with the law. The proceeds of the sale shall be applied to pay the charges together with any other costs, including attorney's fees incurred by the city, made by such foreclosure. The city attorney is authorized and directed to institute such proceedings in the name of the city in any court having jurisdiction over such matters against any property for which the bill has remained unpaid 60 days after it has been rendered. 
(Code 2008, § 13.08.170; Ord. No. 19-01, § 3, 2001) 
Sec. 74-297. - Control and supervision of water systems. 
    There is established an executive department of the city to be known as the "water department." The city council authorized the establishment by ordinance of an enterprise committee to have general control and supervision of the water department. The city council is authorized to appoint a superintendent of the water and have the general management and control of the waterworks system subject, however to the supervision of the city council. 
(Code 2008, § 13.08.200) 
Sec. 74-298. - Unlawful obstructions. 
(a)  No person shall in any manner obstruct the access to any stopcock, hydrant or valve, or any public faucet or opening for taking water in any street, alley, public ground or place connected with or part of the water system, nor pile or place any lumber, brick or building material or other article, thing or hindrance whatsoever within 12 feet of the same, or so as to in any manner hinder, delay or obstruct the members of the fire department in reaching the same. It is unlawful for any person in any manner to interfere with or obstruct the flow, retention, storage or authorized use of water in the water system, reservoir, or plant, or any part thereof, or to injure, deface, remove or displace any water main, hydrant, service pipe, shutoff box, public fountain, valve, engine or building connected with the water system, or plant, or to cause, suffer or permit any of such things to be done. 
(b)  Any person who shall perform any act in violation of this section shall upon conviction thereof be fined in accordance with section 1-8 for each offense, and shall in addition be liable for the actual damage done or caused. 
(Code 2008, § 13.08.210; Ord. No. 200, § 3, 1940) 
Sec. 74-299. - Unauthorized use of water from fire hydrant or service codecock. 
    No person not duly authorized shall turn the water on at any fire hydrant or service cock, or use water there from when so turned on, and the person so using or wasting water in such unlawful manner shall be liable to pay for the same. 
(Code 2008, § 13.08.220; Ord. No. 200, § 4, 1941) 
Sec. 74-300. - City not liable for damages or injury. 
    All connections and water applied for under this chapter, and all the water used hereunder, shall be upon the express condition that the city shall not be liable, nor shall any claim be made against it for damages or injury caused by reason of the breaking of any main, branches, service pipes, apparatus or appurtenances connected with the system or plant, or any part or portion of the plant, or for any interruption of the supply by reason of the breakage of machinery, or by reason of stoppage, alterations, extensions or renewals. 
(Code 2008, § 13.08.230; Ord. No. 200, § 5, 1941) 
Sec. 74-301. - Right of city of shut off water. 
    The city reserves the right to shut off water at any time in the mains for the purpose of repairing, cleaning, making connections with or extensions to same, or for the concentrating of water in any part of the city in case of fire; and for restricting the use of the water in case of deficiency in supply. No claim shall be made against the city by reason of the breaking of any service pipe or service cock, or damage arising from shutting off of water for repairing, laying or relaying mains, hydrants or other connections or repairing any part of the water system, or from failure of the water supply, or by increasing the water pressure at any time, or from concentration or restricted use of water as above. 
(Code 2008, § 13.08.270; Ord. No. 200, § 9(3), 1941) 
Sec. 74-302. - Violation of rules and nonpayment of bills; turning off water. 
    For violation of any of the rules set forth in section 74-301, the city reserves the right to turn off the water, upon five days' notice and to forfeit any payments made, and after the water has been turned off from any service pipe on account of nonpayment of water bills, or violation of rules, the same will not be turned on until all delinquent bills and penalties are paid, together with expense of turning off and on such water, as set out in article IV of this chapter. 
(Code 2008, § 13.08.280; Ord. No. 10-85(part), 1985; Ord. No. 200, § 10, 1941) 
Sec. 74-303. - Suspension of service for fountains and sprinkling. 
    The right is reserved to suspend the use of lawn fountains and hose for sprinkling lawns and gardens whenever in the opinion of the city council public emergency require it. 
(Code 2008, § 13.08.310; Ord. No. 200, § 12, 1941) 
Secs. 74-304-74-324. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - USE OF PUBLIC AND PRIVATE WATER SUPPLIES 

Sec. 74-325. - Use of publicly regulated water system required. 
    No person owning or occupying any property within the city shall utilize any source of water for human consumption or for household, commercial or industrial purposes other than an available publicly regulated water system, except for purposes of irrigation. For purposes of this section, the term "available publicly regulated water system" means, with respect to a given parcel, any water main located within 200 feet of any property line describing a lot or tract, which water main delivers water supplied by the municipal water system operated by the city, water supplied by any public water district, or water supplied by any community well existing as of March 1, 2004, which well is both subject to the jurisdiction of the environmental protection agency and operated in accordance with the rules and regulations promulgated or enforced by the state environmental protection agency. 
(Code 2008, § 13.08.320; Ord. No. 7-04, § 2(part), 2004) 
Sec. 74-326. - Limitations on construction of private water wells. 
    Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall drill, dig, drive, or otherwise construct any private water well of any nature whatsoever in that area within the corporate limits of the city which is serviced by the municipal water system operated by the city. For purposes of this section, the term "private water well" means any water well constructed by any person or entity other than the city. 
(Code 2008, § 13.08.330; Ord. No. 7-04, § 2(part), 2004) 
Sec. 74-327. - Variances authorizing the construction of private water wells. 
    Where no available publicly regulated water system exists, the city council may, by resolution, authorize the construction of private water well, but only if all of the following conditions have been met: 
(1)  The site of the private water well does not lie within 1,000 feet of any potential source of contamination by any hazardous or special waste; and 
(2)  The private water well is constructed in accordance with all applicable laws or regulations, including, without limitation, the following, as they now exist or may from time to time be amended: 
a.  The Illinois Water Well Construction Code, Illinois Laws and Compiled Statutes, chapter 415, section 30 (415 ILCS 30 et seq.); 
b.  The Illinois Water Well Pump Installation Code, Illinois Laws and Compiled Statutes, chapter 415, section 35 (415 ILCS 35 et seq.); 
c.  The Illinois Water Well and Pump Installation Contractor's License Act, Illinois Laws and Compiled Statutes, chapter 225, section 345 (225 ILCS 345 et seq.); 
d.  Environmental Protection Act, Illinois Laws and Compiled Statutes, chapter 415, section 5 (415 ILCS et seq.); and 
e.  Illinois Water Well Construction Code, 77 Ill. Admin. Code 920.10 et seq.) and Illinois Water Well Pump Installation Code, 77 Ill. Admin. Code 925.10 et seq.). 
(Code 2008, § 13.08.340; Ord. No. 7-04, § 2(part), 2004) 
Sec. 74-328. - Potable water supply by the installation or use of potable water. 
(a)  The use of groundwater as a potable water supply is prohibited. The use or attempt to use as a potable water supply groundwater from within Lots 1, 2, 3, and 4 in Block 13 of the city by the installation or drilling of wells or by any other method is hereby prohibited. This prohibition applies to the current common addresses of 104, 106, 112, 114, 116, 118, and 120 South Main Street, Eureka, Illinois. The permanent index numbers for the affected properties are as follows: 
(1)  13-12-436-004. 
(2)  13-12-436-005. 
(3)  13-12-436-006. 
(4)  13-12-436-007. 
(5)  13-12-436-008. 
(6)  13-12-436-009. 
(b)  Penalties. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine of $750.00 for each violation. 
(c)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Person means any individual, city, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, limited liability company, corporation, association, joint stock company; trust, estate, political subdivision, or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns; company; trust, estate, political subdivision, or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. 
    Potable water means any water used for human or domestic consumption, including, but not limited to, water used for drinking, bathing, swimming, washing dishes, or preparing foods. 
(Code 2008, § 13.08.350) 
Secs. 74-329-74-359. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BILLING 

Sec. 74-360. - Schedule. 
    All water and sewer customers will be billed for usage on a monthly basis. 
(Code 2008, § 13.10.010; Ord. No. 10-85, § 1, 1985) 
Sec. 74-361. - Date sent out. 
    Water and sewer bills will be sent out by the city on the first working day of the month succeeding the period for which the usage is billed. 
(Code 2008, § 13.10.020; Ord. No. 10-85, § 2, 1985) 
Sec. 74-362. - Payment due date; late penalty. 
    All water and sewer bills are due and payable on or before the last day of the month in which the bills were sent out. A $5.00 penalty shall be added to all bills not paid by this date. 
(Code 2008, § 13.10.030; Ord. No. 10-85, § 3, 1985) 
Sec. 74-363. - Delinquent bills; service discontinuance. 
    Current billing not paid by the last day of the month will be billed with a $5.00 penalty and a shutoff notice on the first of the following month. All delinquent accounts not paid by the 15th of that month will be shut off on the 16th. Once an account is shut off for nonpayment it will not be turned back on until the account is paid in full and a $25.00 turn-on fee has been paid. Water that has been shut off for nonpayment will only be turned back on between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, excluding holidays observed by the city. 
(Code 2008, § 13.10.040; Ord. No. 2-93, § 5, 1993; Ord. No. 10-85, § 4, 1985) 
Sec. 74-364. - Turn-on fee. 
    A turn-on fee shall be charged to reinstate water service only after that service has been discontinued for nonpayment. The turn-on fee shall be $25.00 if the service is reinstated during regular working hours of the city. The turn-on fee shall be $50.00 if the service is to be reinstated on a Saturday, Sunday, city-observed holiday or between the hours of 3:30 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(Code 2008, § 13.10.050; Ord. No. 10-85, § 5, 1985) 
Secs. 74-365-74-386. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RATES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 74-387. - Rate fee structure, permit and inspection fees. 
(a)  Water permit fees shall be $225.00. 
(b)  Sewer permit fees shall be $400.00. 
(c)  Water tap fees. 
(1)  Tapping fees for the city to make water taps on water mains shall be as follows: 
a.  Three-quarter-inch: Market price plus 20 percent. 
b.  One-inch: Market price plus 20 percent. 
c.  11/2-inch to two-inch: Market price plus 20 percent. 
(2)  It is the responsibility of the builder-developer to undertake two inches plus size taps. A ten percent inventory/handling fee shall be added to all materials provided by the city. 
(Code 2008, § 17.1440(C)-(E); Ord. No. 09-06, § I, 5-4-2009; Ord. No. 09-08, § I, 11-16-2009; Ord. No. 11-02, § I, 2-21-2011; Ord. No. 12-12, § I, 7-2-2012; Ord. No. 12-21, § I, 11-5-2012; Ord. No. 15-01, § I, 1-5-2015) 
Secs. 74-388-74-417. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGES 

Sec. 74-418. - Basis for wastewater service charges. 
    The basic user charge shall be based on water usage as recorded by water meters and/or sewage meters for wastes having the following normal domestic concentrations: 
(1)  A five-day, 20-degree Centigrade biochemical oxygen demand (BOD of 226 mg/l). 
(2)  A suspended solids (SS) content of 275 mg/l. 
(3)  Compute costs per 1,000 gallons for normal sewage strength. Compute surcharge costs per pound per 1,000 gallons. 
a.  A surcharge will be levied to all users whose waters exceed the normal domestic concentrations of BOD (225 mg/l) and SS (275 mg/1). The surcharge will be based on water usage as recorded by water meters and/or sewage meters for all wastes which exceed the 225 mg/l and 275 mg/l concentration for BOD and SS respectively. Section 74-424 specifies the procedure to compute a surcharge. 
b.  The adequacy of the wastewater service charge shall be reviewed, not less often than annually, by certified public accountants for the city in their annual audit report. The wastewater service charge shall be revised periodically to reflect a change in local capital costs or a change in operation and maintenance costs including replacement costs. 
c.  The users of wastewater treatment services will be notified annually, in conjunction with a regular bill, of the rate and that portion of the user charges which are attributable to the wastewater treatment operation, maintenance and replacement. 
(Code 2008, § 13.11.005; Ord. No. 11-83(part), 1983) 
Sec. 74-419. - Measurement of flow. 
    The volume of flow used for computing basic user charges and surcharges shall be the metered water consumption read to the lowest even increments of 100 gallons. 
(1)  If the person discharging wastes into the public sewers procures any part, or all, of his water from sources other than the public waterworks system, all or a part of which is discharged into the public sewers, the person shall install and maintain, at his expense, water meters of a type approved by the city for the purpose of determining the volume of water obtained from these other sources. 
(2)  Devices for measuring the volume of waste discharged may be required by the city if these volumes cannot otherwise be determined for the metered water consumption records. 
(3)  Metering devices for determining the volume of waste shall be installed, owned and maintained by the person. Following approval and installation, such meters may not be removed, unless service is cancelled, without the consent of the city. 
(Code 2008, § 13.11.010; Ord. No. 11-83(part), 1983) 
Sec. 74-420. - Local capital cost charge. 
(a)  Debt service charge. A debt service charged may be determined by the city council in an amount per 1,000 gallons, to be charged each user of wastewater facility of the city. This is in addition to the basic user rate established by ordinance. 
(b)  Capital improvement charge. A capital improvement charge may be determined and levied on all users by the city council in an amount per 1,000 gallons, to provide funds for extensions, improvement or reconstruction of the sewage treatment works. This amount is in addition to the basic user rate established by ordinance. 
(c)  Basic water user rate. 
(1)  There shall be a rate as determined by the city council for a debt service to be billed monthly at a rate per 1,000 gallons with a minimum monthly billing for 2,000 gallons. 
(2)  The rate for debt service as determined by the city council shall be billed double for those accounts outside the city limits. 
(Code 2008, § 13.11.015; Ord. No. 11-83(part), 1983) 
Sec. 74-421. - Basic user rate. 
    Rates for sewer supplied shall be effective and billed May 1 and shall be by the city presently in effect are: 
(1)  $4.12 per 1,000 gallons of usage within the corporate limits of the city each month. 
(2)  $6.18 per 1,000 gallons of usage outside the corporate limits of the city each month. 
(3)  On May 1, 2017; May 1, 2018; and May 1, 2019, the billing clerk shall adjust the monthly rate by adding an amount equal to ten percent of the respective rate in effect on the date of each adjustment. On May 1, 2020, and May 1, 2021, the billing clerk shall adjust the monthly rate by adding an amount equal to five percent of the respective rate in effect on the date of each adjustment. The city may, in its discretion, waive or reduce any such adjustment. On May 1, 2022, and on each May 1 thereafter, the rate for use of the city's water system may be adjusted by ordinance to reflect any changes necessary to pay the cost of operation and maintenance of the sewer system, provide an adequate depreciation fund, and pay the principal and interest upon all revenue bonds issued under the Illinois Municipal Code. 
(4)  The utility rate for a meter installed to register the use of water not discharged into the sanitary sewer shall be billed at the current rate charged for water only. The water consumption billed at the sewer rate for a monthly utility billing will not be applied. All of the following conditions must be met to qualify for the billing to reflect a water only charge. 
a.  A separate water meter must be installed to measure the water used and not discharged into the sanitary sewer system. 
b.  The meter must be installed prior to the existing home meter on a separate water line with a shut-off valve prior to the meter installed. 
c.  The meter must be connected to an outdoor faucet, whereby access for its use is only accessible from the outside of the residence. Faucets or any other apparatus for connecting to this water service in a garage or outbuilding is prohibited. 
d.  The homeowner will be billed monthly for gallons used with a minimum billing for 2,000 gallons of water or less. 
e.  The only exception to the minimum monthly billing is notification to the City of Eureka water billing department that the meter has been turned off and there is zero usage. Owners will be allowed only one turn-on and one shut-off each year. 
f.  The meter reflecting any usage will be billed a minimum for that month. 
g.  Failure to notify the city the meter has been turned on and usage appears full billing for water and sewer will be applied. 
h.  The homeowner shall be responsible for the full cost of the meter and installation. 
i.  The homeowner shall notify the city upon completion of the installation of the meter and the required connections. All piping must be exposed for the inspection to take place. 
j.  Failure of the homeowner to call for the inspection will void the billing exemption from the sewer rate charge. 
(Code 2008, § 13.11.020; Ord. No. 12-14, § 1, 7-16-2012; Ord. No. 17-04, § 3, 4-3-2017) 
Sec. 74-422. - Minimum charge. 
(a)  The minimum usage charged per month for both water and sewer, shall be for 2,000 gallons. 
(b)  Utility customers considered "vacation accounts" will be billed and charged a minimum usage of 1,000 gallons per month for both water and sewer until reclassified active and then water and sewer basic user rate will apply. 
(Code 2008, § 13.11.025; Ord. No. 11-83(part), 1983; Ord. No. 04-13, 12-6-2004) 
Sec. 74-423. - Charges outside city limits. 
    All users outside the city limits shall pay double the charges listed in sections 74-420 through 74-422. 
(Code 2008, § 13.11.030; Ord. No. 11-83(part), 1983) 
Sec. 74-424. - Surcharge rate. 
(a)  The rates of surcharges for BOD 5 and SS shall be as follows: 
(1)  Per pound of BOD: $0.1488. 
(2)  Per pound of SS: $0.1222. 
(b)  The city council reserves the right to change and adjust the rate as needed to process and disposal of waste. 
(Code 2008, § 13.11.035) 
Sec. 74-425. - Computation of surcharge. 
    The concentration of wastes used for computing surcharges shall be established by waste sampling. Waste sampling shall be performed as often as may be deemed necessary by the city and shall be binding as a basis for surcharges. 
(Code 2008, § 13.11.040; Ord. No. 11-83(part), 1983) 
Sec. 74-426. - Computation of wastewater service charge. 
    The wastewater service charge shall be computed by the following formula and the establishment of each charge that can be imposed on the sewer rate. The rates for each of the following shall be established and determined by the city council. The city reserves the right to establish a rate for each and the rate shall be calculated follows: 
CW = CD + CC + CU x VU + CS 
Where per: 
CW = Amount of waste service charge dollar amount billing period 
CD = Debt service charges 
CC = Capital improvement charge 
Vu = Wastewater volume for the billing period, minimum 2,000 gallons 
(Code 2008, § 13.11.045) 
Sec. 74-427. - Payment of bills. 
(a)  The rates or charges for service shall be payable monthly for which bills are rendered. The owner of the premises, the occupant thereof and the user of the service shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for the service to such premises and the service is furnished to the premises by the city only upon the condition that the owner of the premises, occupant and user of the services are jointly and severally liable therefor to the city. 
(b)  Bills for sewer service shall be sent out by the city on the first day of the month succeeding the period for which the service is billed. 
(c)  All sewer bills are due and payable within 30 days of billing. A penalty of $5.00 shall be added to all bills not paid within the 30-day grace period. 
(Code 2008, § 13.11.050; Ord. No.11-83(part), 1983) 
Sec. 74-428. - Unpaid bills to become a lien; notice. 
(a)  Whenever a bill for sewer service remains unpaid for 60 days after it has been rendered, the city shall file with the county recorder of deeds a statement of lien claim. This statement shall contain the legal description of the premises served, the amount of the unpaid bill, and a notice that the city claims a lien for this amount as well as for all charges subsequent to the period covered by the bill. 
(b)  If the user whose bill is unpaid is not the owner of the premises and the city has notice of this; notices shall be mailed to the owner of the premises if his address is known to the city, whenever such bill remains unpaid for the period of 45 days after it has been rendered. 
(c)  The failure of the city to record such lien or to mail such notice or the failure of the owner to receive such notice shall not affect the right to foreclose the lien for unpaid bills as mentioned in the foregoing section. 
(Code 2008, § 13.11.060; Ord. No. 11-83(part), 1983) 
Sec. 74-429. - Foreclosure of lien. 
    Property subject to a lien for unpaid charges may be sold for nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds of the sale shall be applied to pay the charges, after deducting costs, as is the case in the foreclosure of statutory liens. Such foreclosure shall be by bill in equity in the name of the city. The city attorney is authorized and directed to institute such proceedings in the name of the city in any court having jurisdiction over such matters against any property for which the bill has remained unpaid 60 days after it has been rendered. 
(Code 2008, § 13.11.065; Ord. No. 11-83(part), 1983) 
Sec. 74-430. - Accounts; recordkeeping; audits. 
(a)  The city treasurer shall establish a proper system of accounts and shall keep proper books, records, and accounts in which complete and correct entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the sewerage system. 
(b)  In addition to the customary operating statements, the annual audit report shall also reflect the revenues and operating expenses of the wastewater facilities, including a replacement cost, to indicate that sewer service charges under the waste cost recovery system and capital amounts required to be recovered under the industrial cost recovery system do in fact meet these regulations. In this regard, the financial information to be shown in the audit report shall include the following: 
(1)  Flow data showing total gallons received at the wastewater plant for the current fiscal year; 
(2)  Billing data to show total number of gallons billed per fiscal year; 
(3)  Debt service for the next succeeding fiscal year; 
(4)  Number of users connected to the system; 
(5)  Number of non-metered users; 
(6)  A list of users discharging non-domestic and industrial wastes and volume of waste discharged. 
(Code 2008, § 13.11.075; Ord. No. 11-83(part), 1983) 
Sec. 74-431. - Notice of rates. 
    Each user will be notified by the city in conjunction with a regular bill, of the rate and that portion of the user charges or ad valorem taxes which are attributable to wastewater treatment services. 
(Code 2008, § 13.11.080; Ord. No. 11-83(part), 1983) 
Sec. 74-432. - Effective date of rates. 
    The rates and service charges established for user charges in sections 74-420 through 74-426 shall be effective as of the next fiscal year beginning May 1 of each year and bill to be rendered the month being May 1 of each year. 
(Code 2008, § 13.11.090; Ord. No. 11-83(part), 1983) 
Secs. 74-433-74-462. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - WATER 

Sec. 74-463. - Rates. 
    Rates for water supplied shall be effective and billed May 1 and shall be by the city presently in effect are: 
(1)  $6.12 per 1,000 gallons of usage within the corporate limits of the city each month. 
(2)  $12.24 per 1,000 gallons of usage outside the corporate limits of the city each month. 
(3)  On May 1, 2017, May 1, 2018, and May 1, 2019, the billing clerk shall adjust the monthly rate by adding an amount equal to ten percent of the respective rate in effect on the date of each adjustment. On May 1, 2020, and May 1, 2021, the billing clerk shall adjust the monthly rate by adding an amount equal to five percent of the respective rate in effect on the date of each adjustment. The city may, in its discretion, waive or reduce any such adjustment. On May 1, 2022, and on each May 1 thereafter, the rate for use of the city's water system may be adjusted by ordinance to reflect any changes necessary to pay the cost of operation and maintenance of the water system, provide an adequate depreciation fund, and pay the principal and interest upon all revenue bonds issued under the Illinois Municipal Code. 
(Code 2008, § 13.11.100; Ord. No. 17-04, § 2, 4-3-2017) 
Sec. 74-464. - General regulations. 
(a)  All bills sent to water users will be due on the last day of each month following the billing. 
(b)  There will be a minimum charge billed at the rate determined by the city council to all water users who have used less than 2,000 gallons for that month. 
(c)  When multifamily residences or combination business/apartment buildings are serviced by a single water meter, the owners or their appointed representative shall be solely responsible for all water or water service charges billed to such buildings and will be subject to shut off just as individual homeowners are. 
(d)  The utility rate for a meter installed to register the use of water not discharged into the sanitary sewer shall be billed at the current rate charged for water only. The water consumption billed at the sewer rate for a monthly utility billing will not be applied. All of the following conditions must be met to qualify for the billing to reflect a water only charge: 
(1)  A separate water meter must be installed to measure the water used and not discharged into the sanitary sewer system. 
(2)  The meter must be installed prior to the existing home meter on a separate water line with a shutoff valve prior to the meter installed. 
(3)  The meter must be connected to an outdoor faucet, whereby access for its use is only accessible from the outside of the residence. Faucets or any other apparatus for connecting to this water service in a garage or outbuilding is prohibited. 
(4)  The homeowner will be billed monthly for gallons used with a minimum billing for 2,000 gallons of water or less. 
(5)  The only exception to the minimum monthly billing is notification to the city water billing department that the meter has been turned off and there is zero usage. Owners will be allowed only one turn-on and one shutoff each year. 
(6)  The meter reflecting any usage will be billed a minimum for that month. 
(7)  Failure to notify the city the meter has been turned on and usage appears full billing for water and sewer will be applied. 
(8)  The homeowner shall be responsible for the full cost of the meter and installation. 
(9)  The homeowner shall notify the city upon completion of the installation of the meter and the required connections. All piping must be exposed for the inspection to take place. 
(10)  Failure of the homeowner to call for the inspection will void the billing exemption from the sewer rate charge. 
(Code 2008, § 13.11.110; Ord. No. 12-14, § 2, 7-16-2012) 
Sec. 74-465. - Minimum usage. 
    The minimum usage charged per month, for both water and sewer, shall be for 2,000 gallons each. 
(Code 2008, § 13.11.120; Ord. No. 2-93, § 3, 1993) 
Secs. 74-466-74-483. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - CROSS-CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 74-484. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is: 
(1)  To protect the public water supply system from contamination or pollution by isolating within the customer's water system contaminants or pollutants which could backflow through the service connection into the public water supply systems; 
(2)  To promote the elimination or control of existing cross-connections, actual or potential, between the public or consumer's potable water system and non-potable water systems, plumbing fixtures and sources or systems containing substances of unknown or questionable safety; 
(3)  To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross-connection control which will prevent the contamination or pollution of the public and consumer's potable water systems. 
(Code 2008, § 13.12.010; Ord. No. 8-91, § 1(part), 1991) 
Sec. 74-485. - Article application. 
    This article shall apply to all premises served by the public potable water supply system of the city. 
(Code 2008, § 13.12.020; Ord. No. 8-91, § 1(part), 1991) 
Sec. 74-486. - Protection of public water supply; responsibility. 
    The owner or official custodian shall be responsible for protection of the public water supply system from contamination due to backflow or back-siphon age of contaminants through the customer's water service connection. If, in the judgment of the superintendent of water or his authorized representative, an approved backflow prevention device is necessary for the safety of the public water supply system, the superintendent of water shall give notice to the consumer to install such approved backflow prevention device at each service connection to the premises. The consumer shall immediately install such approved device or devices at his own expense; failure, refusal or inability on the part of the consumer to install such device or devices immediately shall constitute grounds for discontinuing water service to the premises until such device or devices have been installed. The consumer shall retain records of installation, maintenance, testing and repair as required in section 74-490(d)(4) for a period of at least five years. The superintendent of water may require the consumer to submit a cross-connection inspection report to the city to assist in determining whether or not service line protection will be required. All cross-connection inspections shall be conducted by a cross connection control device inspector certified by the state environmental protection agency. 
(Code 2008, § 13.12.030; Ord. No. 8-91, § 1(part), 1991) 
Sec. 74-487. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Agency means Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. 
    Approved means backflow prevention devices or methods approved by the American Water Works Association, American National Standards Institute. 
    Auxiliary water system means any water source or system on or available to the premises other than the public water supply system and includes the water supplied by the system. These auxiliary waters may include water from another purveyor's public water supply system; or water from a source such as wells, lakes or streams, or process fluids; or used water. These waters may be polluted or contaminated or objectionable or constitute a water source or system over which the water purveyor does not have control. 
    Backflow means the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures, or substances into the distribution pipes of a potable water system from any source other than the intended source of the potable water supply. 
    Backflow prevention device means any device, method or type of construction intended to prevent backflow into a potable water system. All devices used for backflow prevention in the state must meet the standards of the state plumbing code and the state environmental protection agency. 
    Consumer or customer means the owner, official custodian or person in control of any premises supplied by or in any manner connected to a public water system. 
    Consumer's water system means any water system located on the customer's premises. A building plumbing system is considered to be a customer's water system. 
    Contamination means an impairment of the quality of the water by entrance of any substance to a degree which could create a health hazard. 
    Cross-connection means any physical connection or arrangement between two otherwise separate piping systems, one of which contains potable water and the other a substance of unknown or questionable safety or quality, whereby there may be a flow from one system into the other. 
    Direct cross-connection means a cross-connection formed when a water system is physically joined to a source of unknown or unsafe substance. 
    Indirect cross-connection means a cross-connection through which an unknown substance can be forced, drawn by vacuum or otherwise introduced into a safe potable water system. 
    Double-check valve assembly means an assembly composed of single, independently acting check valves approved under ASSE Standard 1015. A double check valve assembly must include tight shutoff valves located at each end of the assembly and suitable connections for testing the water-tightness of each check valve. 
    Fixed proper air gap means the unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the water discharge point and the flood level rim of the receptacle. 
    Health hazard means any condition, device or practice in a water system or its operation resulting from a real or potential danger to the health and well-being of consumers. The term "severe" as used to qualify "health hazard" means a hazard to the health of the user that could be expected to result in death or significant reduction in the quality of life. 
    Inspection means a plumbing inspection to examine carefully and critically all materials, fixtures, piping and appurtenances, appliances and installations of a plumbing system for compliance with requirements of the state plumbing code, 77 Ill. Admin. Code 890. 
    Non-potable water means water not safe for drinking, personal or culinary use as determined by the requirements of 35 Ill. Admin. Code 604. 
    Plumbing means the actual installation, repair, maintenance, alteration or extension of a plumbing system by any person. The term "plumbing" includes: 
(1)  All piping, fixtures, appurtenances and appliances for a supply of water for all purposes, including, without limitation, lawn sprinkler systems, from the source of a private water supply on the premises or from the main in the street, alley or at the curb to, within and about any building or buildings where a person or persons live, work or assemble. 
(2)  All piping, from discharge of pumping units to and including pressure tanks in water supply systems. 
(3)  All piping, fixtures, appurtenances and appliances for a building drain and a sanitary drainage and related ventilation system of any building or buildings where a person or persons live, work or assemble from the point of connection of such building drain to the building sewer or private sewage disposal system five feet beyond the foundation walls. 
    Pollution means the presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic, radiological or biological) in water that tends to degrade its quality so as to constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness of the water. 
    Potable water means water which meets the requirements of 35 Ill. Admin. Code 604 for drinking, culinary and domestic purposes. 
    Potential cross-connection means a fixture or appurtenance with threaded hose connection, tapered spout or other connection which would facilitate extension of the water supply line beyond its legal termination point. 
    Process fluid means any fluid or solution which may be chemically, biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration such as would constitute a health, pollution or system hazard if introduced into the public or a consumer's potable water system. This includes, but is not limited to: 
(1)  Polluted or contaminated waters; 
(2)  Process waters; 
(3)  Used waters originating from the public water supply system which may have deteriorated in sanitary quality; 
(4)  Cooling waters; 
(5)  Questionable or contaminated natural waters taken from wells, lakes, streams or irrigation systems; 
(6)  Chemicals in solution or suspension; 
(7)  Oils, gases, acids, alkalis and other liquid and gaseous fluids used in industrial or other processes, or for firefighting purposes. 
    Public water supply means all mains, pipes and structures through which water is obtained and distributed to the public, including wells and well structures, intakes and cribs, pumping stations, treatment plants, reservoirs, storage tanks and appurtenances, collectively or severally, actually used or intended for use for the purpose of furnishing water for drinking or general domestic use and which serve at least 15 service connections or which regularly serve at least 25 persons at least 60 days per year. A public water supply is either a "community water supply" or a "non-community water supply." 
    Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device means a device containing a minimum of two independently acting check valves together with an automatically operated pressure differential relief valve located between the two check valves and approved under ASSE Standard 1013. During normal flow and at the cessation of normal flow, the pressure between these two checks shall be less than the supply pressure. In case of leakage of either check valve, the differential relief valve, by discharging to the atmosphere, shall operate to maintain the pressure between the check valves at less than the supply pressure. The unit must include tightly closing shutoff valves located at each end of the device, and each device shall be fitted with properly located test cocks. 
    Service connection means the opening, including all fittings and appurtenances, at the water main through which water is supplied to the user. 
    Survey means the collection of information pertaining to a customer's piping system regarding the location of all connections to the public water supply system and must include the location, type and most recent inspection and testing date of all cross-connection control devices and methods located within that customer's piping system. The survey must be in written form, and should not be an actual plumbing inspection. 
    System hazard means a condition through which an aesthetically objectionable or degrading material not dangerous to health may enter the public water supply system or a consumer's potable water system. 
    Used water means any water supplied by a public water supply system to a consumer's water system after it has passed through the service connection and is no longer under the control of the water supply official custodian. 
    Water purveyor means the owner or official custodian of a public water system. 
(Code 2008, § 13.12.040; Ord. No. 8-91, § 2, 1991) 
Sec. 74-488. - Water system designated. 
(a)  The water system shall be considered as made up of two parts: the public water supply system and the consumer's water system. 
(b)  The public water supply system shall consist of the source facilities and the distribution system, and shall include all those facilities of the potable water system under the control of the superintendent of water up to the point where the consumer's water system begins. 
(c)  The source shall include all components of the facilities utilized in the production, treatment, storage, and delivery of water to the public water supply distribution system. 
(d)  The public water supply distribution system shall include the network of conduits used to deliver water from the source to the consumer's water system. 
(e)  The consumer's water system shall include all parts of the facilities beyond the service connection used to convey water from the public water supply distribution system to points of use. 
(Code 2008, § 13.12.050; Ord. No. 8-91, § 3, 1991) 
Sec. 74-489. - Cross-connection prohibited. 
    Connections between potable water systems and other systems or equipment containing water or other substances of unknown or questionable quality are prohibited except when and where approved cross-connection control devices or methods are installed, tested and maintained to insure proper operation on a continuing basis. 
(1)  No physical connection shall be permitted between the potable portion of a supply and any other water supply not of equal or better bacteriological and chemical quality as determined by inspection and analysis by the agency. 
(2)  There shall be no arrangement or connection by which an unsafe substance may enter a supply. 
(Code 2008, § 13.12.060; Ord. No. 8-91, § 4, 1991) 
Sec. 74-490. - Survey and investigations. 
(a)  The consumer's premises shall be open at all reasonable times to the approved cross-connection control device inspector for the inspection of the presence or absence of cross connections within the consumer's premises, and testing, repair and maintenance of cross-connection control devices within the consumer's premises. 
(b)  On request by the superintendent of water, or his authorized representative, the consumer shall furnish information regarding the piping system or water use within the customer's premises. The consumer's premises shall be open at all reasonable times to the superintendent of water for the verification of information submitted by the inspection consumer to the public water supply custodian regarding cross-connection inspection results. 
(c)  It shall be the responsibility of the water consumer to arrange periodic surveys of water use practices on his premises to determine whether there are actual or potential cross-connections to his water system through which contaminants or pollutants could backflow into his or the public potable water system. All cross-connection control or other plumbing inspections must be conducted in accordance with Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, chapter 111, par. 1103(1). 
(d)  It is the responsibility of the water consumer to prevent backflow into the public water system by ensuring that: 
(1)  All cross-connections are removed; or approved cross-connection control devices are installed for control of backflow and back-siphonage. 
(2)  Cross-connection control devices shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. 
(3)  Cross-connection control devices shall be inspected at the time of installation and at least annually by a person approved by the agency as a cross-connection control device inspector (CCCDI). The inspection of mechanical devices shall include physical testing in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. 
(4)  Testing and records. 
a.  Each device shall be tested at the time of installation and at least annually or more frequently if recommended by the manufacturer. 
b.  Records submitted to the community public water supply shall be available for inspection by agency personnel in accordance with Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, chapter 1111/2, par. 1004 (e). 
c.  Each device shall have a tag attached listing the date of most recent test, name of CCCDI, and type and date of repairs. 
d.  A maintenance log shall be maintained and include: 
1.  Date of each test; 
2.  Name and approval number of persons performing the test; 
3.  Test results; 
4.  Repairs or servicing required; 
5.  Repairs and date completed; and 
6.  Servicing performed and date completed. 
(Code 2008, § 13.12.070) 
Sec. 74-491. - Protection required when. 
(a)  An approved backflow device shall be installed on all connections to the public water supply as described in the plumbing code, 77 Ill. Admin. Code 890, and the agency's regulations 35 Ill. Admin. Code 653. In addition, an approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each service line to a consumer's water system serving premises, where in the judgment of the superintendent of water, actual or potential hazards to the public water supply system exist. 
(b)  An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each service line to a consumer's water system serving premises where the following conditions exist: 
(1)  Premises having an auxiliary water supply, unless such auxiliary supply is accepted as an additional source by the superintendent of water and the source is approved by the state environmental protection agency; 
(2)  Premises on which any substance is handled which can create an actual or potential hazard to the public water supply system. This shall include premises having sources or systems containing process fluids or waters originating from the public water supply system which are no longer under the sanitary control of the superintendent of water; 
(3)  Premises having internal cross-connections that, in the judgment of the superintendent of water and/or the cross-connection control device inspector, are not correctable or intricate plumbing arrangements which make it impractical to determine whether or not cross connections exist; 
(4)  Premises where, because of security requirements or other prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a complete cross-connection survey; 
(5)  Premises having a repeated history of cross connections being established or reestablished. 
(c)  An approved backflow device shall be installed on all connections to the public water supply as described in the Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Admin. Code 890 and the agency's regulations 35 Ill. Admin. Code 653. In addition, an approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each service line to a consumer's water system serving, but not necessarily limited to, the following types of facilities unless the superintendent of water determines that no actual or potential hazard to the public water supply system exists: 
(1)  Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics, nursing homes; 
(2)  Laboratories; 
(3)  Piers, docks, waterfront facilities; 
(4)  Sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations or stormwater pumping stations; 
(5)  Food or beverage processing plants; 
(6)  Chemical plants; 
(7)  Metal plating industries; 
(8)  Petroleum processing or storage plants; 
(9)  Radioactive material processing plants or nuclear reactors; 
(10)  Car washes; 
(11)  Pesticide, or herbicide or extermination plants and trucks; 
(12)  Farm service and fertilizer plants and trucks. 
(Code 2008, § 13.12.080; Ord. No. 8-91, § 6, 1991) 
Sec. 74-492. - Type of protection required. 
(a)  The type of protection required under section 74-491 shall depend on the degree of hazard which exists as follows: 
(1)  An approved fixed proper air gap separation shall be installed where the public water supply system may be contaminated with substances that could cause a severe health hazard. 
(2)  An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly shall be installed where the public water supply system may be contaminated with a substance that could cause a system or health hazard. 
(3)  An approved fixed proper air gap separation or approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly or a double-check valve assembly shall be installed where the public water supply system may be polluted with substances that could cause a pollution hazard not dangerous to health. 
(b)  The type of protection required under section 74-491 shall be an approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device. 
(c)  Where a public water supply or an auxiliary water supply is used for a fire protection system, reduced pressure principle backflow preventers shall be installed on fire safety systems connected to the public water supply when: 
(1)  The fire safety system contains antifreeze, fire retardant or other chemicals; 
(2)  Water is pumped into the system from another source; 
(3)  Water flows by gravity from a non-potable source; or water can be pumped into the fire safety system from any other source; or 
(4)  There is a connection whereby another source can be introduced into the fire safety system. 
(d)  All other fire safety systems connected to the potable water supply shall be protected by a double-check valve assembly on metered service lines and a double detector check valve assembly on un-metered service lines. 
(Code 2008, § 13.12.090; Ord. No. 8-91, § 7, 1991) 
Sec. 74-493. - Backflow prevention devices. 
(a)  All backflow prevention devices or methods required by these rules and regulations shall be approved by the American Society of Sanitary Engineering, or American National Standards Institute. 
(b)  Installation of approved devices shall be made in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. Maintenance as recommended by the manufacturer of the device shall be performed. Manufacturer's maintenance manual shall be available onsite. 
(Code 2008, § 13.12.100; Ord. No. 8-91, § 8, 1991) 
Sec. 74-494. - Inspection and maintenance. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the consumer at any premises on which backflow prevention devices required by these regulations are installed to have inspection, tests, maintenance and repair made in accordance with the following schedule or more often where inspections indicate a need or are specified in manufacturer's instructions. 
(1)  Fixed proper air gap separations shall be inspected to document that a proper vertical distance is maintained between the discharge point of the service line and the flood level rim of the receptacle at the time of installation and at least annually thereafter. Corrections to improper or by passed air gaps shall be made within 24 hours. 
(2)  Double-check and valve assemblies shall be inspected and tested at the time of installation and at least annually thereafter, and required service performed within five days. 
(3)  Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies shall be tested at the time of installation and at least annually or more frequently if recommended by the manufacturer, and required service performed within five days. 
(b)  Testing shall be performed by a person who has been approved by the agency as competent to service the device. Proof of approval shall be in writing. 
(c)  Each device shall have a tag attached listing the date of most recent test or visual inspection, name of tester and type and date of repairs. 
(d)  A maintenance log shall be maintained and include: 
(1)  Date of each test or visual inspection; 
(2)  Name and approval number of person performing the test or visual inspection; 
(3)  Test results; 
(4)  Repairs or servicing required; 
(5)  Repairs and date completed; and 
(6)  Servicing performed and date completed. 
(e)  Whenever backflow prevention devices required by devices required by these regulations are found to be defective, they shall be repaired or replaced at the expense of the consumer without delay as required by subsection (a) of this section. 
(f)  Backflow prevention devices shall not be bypassed made inoperative, removed or otherwise made ineffective without specific authorization by the superintendent of water. 
(Code 2008, § 13.12.110; Ord. No. 8-91, 1991) 
Sec. 74-495. - Booster pumps. 
(a)  Where a booster pump has been installed on the service line to or within any premises, such pump shall be equipped with a low pressure cut-off device designed to shut off the booster pump when the pressure in the service line on the suction side of the pump drops to 20 psi or less. 
(b)  It is the duty of the water consumer to maintain the low pressure cut-off device in proper working order and to certify to the superintendent of water, at least once a year that the device is operable. 
(Code 2008, § 13.12.120; Ord. No. 8-91, § 10, 1991) 
Sec. 74-496. - Violations; penalty. 
(a)  The superintendent of water shall deny or discontinue, after reasonable notice thereof, the water service to any premises wherein any backflow prevention device required by these regulations is not installed, tested, maintained and repaired in a manner acceptable to the superintendent of water, or if it is found that the backflow prevention device has been removed or bypassed, or if an unprotected cross-connection exists on the premises, or if a low pressure cut-off required by these regulations is not installed and maintained in working order. 
(b)  Water service to such premises shall not be restored until the consumer has corrected or eliminated such conditions or defects in conformance with these regulations and to the satisfaction of the superintendent of water, and the required reconnection fee of $25.00 is paid. 
(c)  Neither the city, the superintendent of water, or its agents or assigns shall be liable to any customers of the city for any injury, damages or lost revenues which may result from termination of the customer's water supply in accordance with the terms of this article, whether or not said termination of the water supply was with or without notice. 
(d)  The consumer responsible for back-siphoned material or contamination through backflow, if contamination of the potable water supply system occurs through an illegal cross-connection or an improperly installed, maintained or repaired device, or a device which has been bypassed, must bear the cost of cleanup of the potable water supply system. 
(e)  Any person found to be violating any provision of this article shall be served with written notice stating the notice of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violation. 
(f)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by the city by reason of such violation, whether the same was caused before or after notice. 
(Code 2008, § 13.12.130; Ord. No. 8-91, § 11, 1991) 
Secs. 74-497-74-515. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - MINIMUM AND MAXIMUM SETBACK ZONE FOR CITY WELLS LOCATED OUTSIDE OF CITY LIMITS 

Sec. 74-516. - Purpose. 
    Pursuant to the authority conferred by 65 ILCS 5/11-125-4, 415 ILCS 5/14.2, and 5/14.3, 65 ILCS 5/7-4-2, and in the interest of securing the public health, safety and welfare; to preserve the quality and quantity of groundwater resources in order to assure a safe and adequate water supply for present and future generations; and to preserve groundwater resources currently in use and those aquifers having a potential for future use as a public water supply, the provisions of this article shall apply to all properties located within the minimum setback zone established under section 14.2 of the Environmental Protection Act ("Act")(415 ILCS 5/14.3) and this chapter. 
(Code 2008, § 13.14.010; Ord. No. 1-95(part), 1995) 
Sec. 74-517. - Definitions. 
    Except as stated in this article, and unless a different meaning of a word or term is clear from the context, the definition of words or terms in this article shall be the same as those used in the Act and the Illinois Groundwater Protection Act (415 ILCS 55/1 et seq.): 
    Act means the Environmental Protection Act (415 ILCS 5/1 et seq.). 
    Agency means the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. 
    Board means the Illinois Pollution Control Board. 
    Maximum setback zone means the area around a community water supply well established under section 14.3 of the Act, this article and in the map attached to the ordinance codified in this article. 
    Minimum setback zone means the area around a community water supply well established under section 14.2 of the Act, this article and in the map attached to the ordinance codified in this article. 
(Code 2008, § 13.14.020; Ord. No. 1-95(part), 1995) 
Sec. 74-518. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Except as provided in sections 74-519 and 74-520, no person shall place a new potential primary source, new potential secondary source or new potential route within the minimum setback zone. 
(b)  Except as provided otherwise in section 74-519, no person shall place a new potential primary source within the maximum setback zone. 
(Code 2008, § 13.14.030; Ord. No. 1-95(part), 1995) 
Sec. 74-519. - Waivers, exceptions and certifications of minimal hazard. 
(a)  If, pursuant to section 14.2(B) of the Act, the owner of a new potential primary source, new potential secondary source, or new potential route is granted a waiver by the agency; such owner shall be deemed to have a waiver to the same extent from section 74-518(a). 
(b)  If, pursuant to section 14.2(C) of the Act, the owner of a new potential primary source (other than land filling or land treating), new potential secondary source, or new potential route is granted an exception by the board, such owner shall be deemed to have an exception to the same extent from section 74-518(a). 
(c)  If, pursuant to section 14.2(C) of the Act, the owner of a new potential primary source (other than land filling or land treating), is granted an exception by the board, such owner shall be deemed to have an exception to the same extent from section 74-518(b). 
(d)  If, pursuant to section 14.5 of the Act, the owner of a new potential primary source, new potential secondary source or new potential route is issued a certificate of minimal hazard by the agency, such owner shall not be subject to section 74-518(a) to the same extent that such owner is not subject to section 14.2(D) of the Act. 
(Code 2008, § 13.14.040; Ord. No. 1-95(part), 1995) 
Sec. 74-520. - Exclusion. 
    Section 74-518(a) shall not apply to new common sources of sanitary pollution as specified pursuant to section 17 of the Act and the regulations adopted hereunder by the agency; however, no such common sources may be located within the applicable minimum distance from a community water supply well specified by such regulations. 
(Code 2008, § 13.14.050; Ord. No. 1-95(part), 1995) 
Chapter 78 - ZONING 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 78-1. - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited as "The Zoning Code of the City of Eureka 2009." 
(Code 2008, § 17.10; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.10), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-2. - Purpose. 
(a)  The purposes of this chapter shall be: 
(1)  Securing adequate light, pure air, and safety from fire and other dangers; 
(2)  Conserving the value of land, buildings, and structures throughout the city; 
(3)  Lessening and avoiding congestion in the public streets; 
(4)  Lessening and avoiding hazards to persons and damage to property resulting from the accumulation or runoff of stormwaters or floodwaters; 
(5)  Promoting the public health, safety, comfort, morals and general welfare; 
(6)  Regulating and limiting the height and bulk of buildings and structures hereafter to be erected; 
(7)  Establishing, regulating and limiting the building or setback lines on or along any street, traffic way, drive, parkway, or stormwater or floodwater runoff channel or basin; 
(8)  Regulating and limiting the intensity of the use of lot areas, and regulating and determining the area of open spaces within and surrounding buildings and structures; 
(9)  Classifying, regulating and restricting the location of trades and industries and the location of buildings, structures and land designed for specified industrial, commercial, residential and other uses; 
(10)  Dividing the entire city into districts of such number, shape, area, and such different classes according to the use of land, buildings and structures, intensity of the use of lot area, area of open spaces, and other classification as may be deemed best suited to carry out the purposes of this chapter; 
(11)  Fixing regulations and standards to which buildings, structures or uses therein shall conform; 
(12)  Prohibiting uses, buildings, or structures incompatible with the character of such districts; and 
(13)  Preventing additions to and alteration or remodeling of existing buildings, structures or uses in such a way as to avoid the restrictions and limitations lawfully imposed under this chapter. 
(b)  In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to the minimum requirements adopted for promotion of the public health, morals, safety, and the general welfare. Wherever the requirements of this chapter are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, or ordinances, the most restrictive, or that imposing the higher standards shall govern. 
(c)  It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul, or in any way impair or interfere with private restrictions placed upon property by covenant, deed or other private agreement, or with restrictive covenants running with the land. Where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon land, buildings, or structures than is imposed or required by such existing provisions of law, ordinance, contract or deed, the provisions of this chapter shall control. 
(Code 2008, § 17.20; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.20), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-3. - Application of regulations. 
(a)  Except as hereinafter provided, no building or land shall after passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived be used or occupied and no building or part thereof shall be erected, moved, or altered unless in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located. 
(b)  No building shall after the passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived be erected or altered: 
(1)  To accommodate or house a greater number of families; 
(2)  To occupy a greater percentage of lot area; or 
(3)  To have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards, or inner or outer courts than is specified herein for the district in which such building is located. 
(c)  Control over bulk. All new buildings and structures shall conform to the bulk requirements established herein for the district in which each building or structure shall be located. Further, no existing building or structure shall be enlarged, reconstructed, structurally altered, converted, or relocated in such a manner as to conflict with, or if already in conflict with, in such a manner as to further conflict with, the bulk regulations of this chapter for the zoning district in which such building or structure shall be located. 
(d)  No part of a yard or other open space required about any building for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this chapter shall be included as a part of a yard or other open space similarly required for another building. 
(e)  All territory which may hereafter be annexed to the municipality shall be the subject of a public hearing by the planning and zoning commission after due notification in the manner appropriate to zoning amendments and within 90 days of the date of such annexation. After such hearing and recommendation of the planning and zoning commission, the status of the new zoning district shall be determined by the city council as an amendment to the zoning code. In the interim between annexation and such council determination, if any, the territory annexed to the city shall be zoned as designated in the annexation agreement. 
(f)  Whenever any street, alley, or other public way is vacated by official action of the municipality, the zoning district adjoining each side of such street, alley, or public way shall be automatically extended to the center of such vacation; and all such included in the vacation shall then henceforth be subject to all appropriate regulations of the extended districts. 
(Code 2008, § 17.30; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.30), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-4. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accessory structure means any building, property, or structure in a secondary or subordinate capacity from the main or principal building or structure on the same premises, the use of which is an accessory use to the main or principal use of the property, and which further is detached from the main or principal structure or building on the property. 
    Accessory use means a use customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use and located on the same lot with such principal use. 
    Agricultural uses means the growing of crops in the open and the raising and feeding of stock and poultry, including farming, truck gardening, flower gardening, apiaries, aviaries, mushroom growing, nurseries, orchards, forestry, fur farm, including the necessary structures and farm dwellings for those owning or operating the premises or the immediate families thereof, or those directly employed thereon; and further including a roadside stand for the sale of products produced on the premises, and signs thereon. 
    Alley means a permanent service right-of-way which affords only a secondary means of access to property abutting such right-of-way and is not intended for general traffic circulation. 
    Alteration means a change or rearrangement in the structural parts of an existing building, structure, facilities; or an enlargement whether by extending on a side or by increasing height; or the moving from one location or position to another. 
    Automobile service station means any building or premises used for the dispensing, sale, or offering for sale at retail of any automobile fuel or oils. When the dispensing, sale, or offering for sale is incidental to the conduct of a public garage, the premises are classified as a public garage. 
    Bank complex. 
(1)  Bank means an institution for keeping, lending, exchanging, and issuing money. 
(2)  Complex means made up of a number of parts. 
    Basement means a story having part but not more than one-half its height below grade. 
    Board means the planning and zoning commission of the city. 
    Boardinghouse means a building used for the lodging, with or without meals, of not more than five individuals, and where compensation is paid in money, goods, or labor. A boardinghouse shall comply with all the requirements for a single-family dwelling. A boardinghouse shall be considered one dwelling. 
    Building means a structure designed, built, or occupied as a shelter or roofed enclosure for persons, animals, or property, including tents, lunch wagons, dining cars, campers, cars, trailers, and other roofed structures on wheels or other supports used for residential, business, mercantile, storage, commercial, industrial, institutional, assembly, educational, or recreational purposes. For the purpose of this definition, roof shall include an awning or other similar covering whether or not permanent in nature. 
    Building area means the total area taken on a horizontal plane at the largest floor level of the main or principal building and all accessory buildings on the same lot exclusive of uncovered porches, terraces, steps, or awnings, marquees, and non-permanent canopies and planters. 
    Building floor area means the sum of the gross horizontal areas of several stories of a building including cellar and basement areas and the areas of roofed porches and terraces. All dimensions shall be measured between exterior faces of walls. 
    Building floor area habitable means the sum of the horizontal areas of all rooms in a building used for habitation such as living room, dining room, kitchen, bedroom, bathroom, or closet but not including hallways, stairways, service rooms or utility rooms. No unheated rooms such as enclosed porches, or rooms without at least one window or skylight opening onto a yard or court, measured between the interior faces of walls. 
    Building, front line of, means the line of that face of the building nearest the front line of the lot. This face includes sun parlors and covered porches whether enclosed or unenclosed, but does not include steps. 
    Building, principal, means a building in which is conducted the main or principal use of the lot on which the building is situated. 
    Bulk means the size of buildings in terms of floor area and floor area ratio, the location of building walls in relation to lot lines and to the exterior walls of other buildings, and the yards, front, side, and rear, required under the terms of this chapter. 
    Cellar means a story having less than one-half of its height above grade. 
    City means the City of Eureka, Illinois. 
    Community center. 
(1)  Community means a group of people living together and having similar interests and works. 
(2)  Center means a main point or place where there is much activity. 
    Country estate means a zoning classification which requires single-family detached dwellings with lots at least two acres in area and a lot width at the building setback line of 120 feet or more. 
    Court means an open space, other than a yard, on the same lot with a building, which is bounded on two or more sides by, but is not enclosed by, the walls of such building. 
    Coverage means that percentage of the plot or lot area covered by the building area. 
    Curb level means the average elevation of the established curb of a street taken along the curb line between the points of intersection of the curb line and the lot lines. Where no curb has been established the curb level shall be the average elevation of the land surface along the street right-of-way line and the lot lines. 
    Day care facility means any person, group of persons, agency, association, entity, or organization, whether established for gain or otherwise, who or which receive or arrange for the care or placement of one or more children or adults unrelated to the operator of the facilities, apart from the parents, established and maintained for the care of children or adults, which regularly provides day care for less than 24 hours per day for either: 
(1)  More than eight children or adults in a family home; or 
(2)  More than three children or adults in a structure other than a family home. 
    Dormitory means: 
(1)  A large room in which many persons sleep. 
(2)  A building providing sleeping and living accommodations. 
    Driveway width means regulating the maximum width of any residential driveway. No driveway of a single-family residential property shall be wider than 24 feet. No driveway for a multifamily residential property shall be allowed more than two curb cuts for driveway access and the total shall not exceed 48 feet. Each multifamily residential property driveway curb cut shall be no more than 24 feet with five feet minimum distance between curb cuts. 
    Duplex means a two-family dwelling unit. This type of dwelling unit may be attached, sharing a common wall, semi-detached, sharing some portion of an adjoining structure or detached, defined as two separate units with no adjoining structure built on a single lot. 
    Duplex, zero lot line, means a two-family dwelling which has been not only designed for separate ownership of each of its two individual dwellings units, but also is approved in accordance with the procedures set within this chapter. 
    Dwelling group means a group of two or more single-family, two-family, or multifamily dwellings in whatever combination, occupying a lot or lots in one ownership. 
    Dwelling, multiple, means a building used as a residence for more than two families living independently of each other and doing their own cooking therein, including apartment houses, apartment hotels, group houses, and row houses; not to include trailer coaches or mobile homes. 
    Dwelling, single-family, means a permanent building used as a residence exclusively by one family, not to include trailer coaches or mobile homes. 
    Dwelling unit means a dwelling or portion thereof providing complete living facilities for one family. 
    Engineer means the person or firm retained as engineer by the city. 
    Family means a group of one or more persons occupying a premises and living as a single housekeeping unit, whether or not related to each other by birth, adoption, or marriage, but no unrelated group shall consist of more than five persons, as distinguished from a group occupying a boarding or lodging house or hotel, as herein defined. 
    Fence means a manmade structure which is constructed for the purpose of or has the effect of enclosing or screening the area it is constructed upon. All portions of the fence, including posts and materials used to set posts must be kept on or inside the property line. If there is a dispute over the location of the property line markers, the property owner constructing the fence must have a survey and show proof of property line before construction. The fence face without post must be faced out to the adjoining property. 
    Fence, ornamental, means a fence, the surface area of which is more than 50 percent open. Ornamental fences may not have pointed or dangerous projections. 
    Flag lot. 
(1)  The term "flag lot" means a lot where the main or principal building area of the lot does not abut or adjoin a public street but is connected to such public street by a narrow strip of land which is part of the lot. Flag lots shall have a frontage on a public street of not less than 30 feet. 
(2)  Flag lots will not be permitted except where such flag lots satisfy all of the following requirements: 
a.  Such lots contain a minimum area of one acre, excluding the area of the narrow strip of land connecting the main or principal use area, or the building area, to the public street. Lots outside the corporate limits shall have at least 21/2 acres. 
b.  Such lots provide for a minimum width at the public street of 30 feet, which minimum width shall be maintained from the public street to the main or principal use area, or building area, of such lot and shall not be a part of an easement, right-of-way or shared street access. 
    Floor area, gross. 
(1)  For the purpose of determining floor area ratio, the gross floor area of a building shall be the sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of such building, measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls or from the centerline of party walls separating two buildings. In particular, gross floor area shall include: 
a.  Basement space. 
b.  Elevator shafts and stairwells at each floor; 
c.  Attic floor space provided there is structural headroom of more than 71/2 feet; 
d.  Interior balconies and mezzanines; 
e.  Porches, breezeways and decks, whether or not enclosed; and 
f.  Accessory structures. 
(2)  Gross floor area for purposes of determining floor area ratio, however, shall not include: 
a.  Basement space where more than one-half the basement story is eight feet or less below the average level of the finished grade; (crawl space) 
b.  Elevator and stair bulkheads, water tanks, and cooling towers; 
c.  Attic floor space where structural headroom is 71/2 feet or less; and 
d.  Floor space used for mechanical equipment where structural headroom is 71/2 feet or less. 
    Floor area ratio (FAR) means the numerical value obtained by dividing the gross floor area of a building by the total area of the lot or parcel of land on which such building is located. 
    Garage. 
(1)  Private garage means an accessory building or an accessory portion of the principal building which is intended for and used to store the private passenger vehicles of the family resident upon the premises, and in which no business, service, or industry connected directly or indirectly with automotive vehicles is carried on; provided that not more than one-half of the space may be rented for the private vehicles of persons not resident on the premises, except that all the space in a garage of one- or two-car capacity may be so rented. Such a garage shall not be used for more than one commercial vehicle and the load capacity of such commercial vehicle shall not exceed five tons. 
(2)  Public garage means any building where automotive vehicles are painted, repaired, rebuilt, reconstructed, or stored for compensation. 
    Governing body means the mayor and city council of the City of Eureka, Illinois. 
    Height means the vertical measurement from grade to a point midway between the highest and lowest points of the roof of a building or the vertical measurement from the average level of the surface of the ground immediately surrounding a structure to the uppermost portions of such structure. 
    Hotel. See Motel/hotel. 
    Kennel means the keeping or housing of three or more dogs six months or older, either as an accessory use or a principal use. Any kennel shall be within a completely enclosed building, or if outdoor runs are provided, they shall be completely enclosed by a woven wire fence, solid fence or fence wall. A kennel or any part thereof shall not be located in any front or side yard, nor within five feet of any side or rear lot line in a rear yard. 
    Lot means a parcel of land occupied or intended for occupancy by a use permitted in this chapter, including one main building together with its accessory building, the open spaces and parking spaces required by this chapter, and having its principal frontage upon a street. The term "lot" shall also include the term "plot" or "parcel." 
(1)  If public sanitary sewers are not available and septic tank systems are to be used for sewage disposal, the minimum lot size shall be 20,000 square feet. 
(2)  If neither a public sanitary sewer nor a public water system is available, the minimum lot size shall be one acre, with a lot width at the setback line of 120 feet or more. 
    Lot, corner, means a lot located: 
(1)  At the junction of and abutting two or more intersecting streets; 
(2)  At the junction of and abutting a street and the nearest shoreline or high water line of a stormwater or floodwater runoff channel or basin; 
(3)  At the junction of and abutting two or more stormwater or floodwater runoff channels or basins; or 
(4)  At and abutting the point of abrupt change of a single street where the interior angle is less than 135 degrees and the radius of the street is less than 100 feet. 
    Lot, interior, means a lot other than a corner lot. 
    Lot line means a line bounding a lot or parcel of property. 
    Master plan means the complete plan or any of its parts for the development of the city and adopted by the governing body as the official plan. 
    Motel/hotel means a building or a group of detached, semi-detached, or attached buildings containing guest rooms or dwelling units each of which, or each pair of which, has a separate entrance leading directly from the outside of the building, with garage or parking space conveniently located to each unit, and which is designed, used or intended to be used primarily for the accommodation of motor vehicle transients. The term "motel/hotel" does not include boardinghouses, or trailer courts. 
    Nonconforming structure means a structure lawfully existing and which does not conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
    Nonconforming use means a use which lawfully occupied a building or land prior to the passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, and which does not conform with the regulations of the district in which it is located. For the purpose of this chapter, any use lawfully established prior to the passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived which is nonconforming solely by virtue of lacking off-street parking or loading facilities, as required hereafter for new uses, shall not be deemed a nonconforming use. 
    Nursing or convalescent home means a building containing sleeping rooms where persons are housed or lodged and are furnished with meals and nursing care for hire. 
    Parking lot means a lot, court, yard, or portion thereof used for the parking of vehicles which may or may not contain parking spaces. 
    Parking space means an all-weather surfaced area within the lot lines, enclosed in the main building, in an accessory building, or unenclosed, sufficient in size to store one standard automobile, and if the space is enclosed, comprising an area of not less than 140 square feet; if unenclosed, at least 20 feet by ten feet, with an all-weather surface permitting satisfactory ingress and egress of an automobile. 
    Person means and includes a corporation as well as an individual. 
    Planned development means a tract of land which is developed as a unit under single ownership or control, which includes two or more main or principal structures and is identified to its main or principal use by its functional definition prefix as dwelling group. 
    Planning and zoning commission means the planning and zoning commission of the city. 
    Residential district or zone means R-1 and R-2 districts. 
    Right-of-way means the entire dedicated tract or strip of land that is to be used by the public for circulation and service. 
    Ringelmann chart means a smoke chart giving shades of gray to which the density of columns of smoke rising from stacks may be compared. Each such shade of gray is categorized according to a Ringelmann number. 
    Screen planting means a vegetative material of sufficient height and density to filter adequately from view, in adjoining districts, structures and uses on the premises upon which the screen planting is located. 
    Setback line means the building restriction line nearest the front of and across a lot establishing the minimum distance to be provided between the line of a structure located on said lot and the nearest street right-of-way or centerline or the nearest shoreline or high water line of a stormwater or floodwater runoff channel or basin. 
    Service means a helpful act, aid, or conduct that is useful to others. 
    Sign means any structure or device for visual communication that is used for the purpose of bringing the subject thereof to the attention of the public, but not including any flag, badge, or insignia of any government or governmental agency, or any civic, charitable, religious, patriotic, fraternal or similar organization, or any sign indicating address. 
    Special use means a use permitted in a district pursuant to, and in compliance with, procedures specified herein. 
    Story means that portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there is no floor above, then the space between any floor and the ceiling next above. 
    Street means a public or private thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. A street may be designated as an avenue, boulevard, drive, highway, lane, parkway, place, road, thoroughfare, or by other appropriate name. 
    Structure means a combination of materials, other than a building, to form a construction that is safe and stable and includes among other things stadiums, platforms, radio towers, sheds, storage bins, fences, garbage receptacles, dumpsters and display signs. 
    Structure, main or principal, means the structure in or on which is conducted the main or principal use of the lot on which it is located. 
    Trailer camp or mobile home park means a tract of land meeting the standards established by the county health authorities and by the state department of health: 
(1)  Where two or more inhabited trailer coaches are parked; or 
(2)  Which is used by the public as parking space for two or more inhabited trailer coaches. 
    Trailer coach, mobile home, means any enclosure or vehicle used for living, sleeping, business, or storage purposes, having no foundation other than wheels, blocks, skids, jacks, horses, or skirting, and which has been or reasonably may be equipped with wheels or other devices for transporting it from place to place. 
    Trailer court means the premises upon which one or more occupied trailer coaches are located. 
    Used, occupied or located, as applied to any land, building, use, structure or premises, means and includes the words "intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied or located." 
    Yard means an open space, other than a court, of uniform width or depth on the same lot with a structure lying between the structure and the nearest lot line and occupied and unobstructed from the surface of the ground upward except as may be specifically provided by the regulations and standards herein. 
    Yard, front, means an open space on the same lot with a main building, extending the full width of the lot and situated between the street line and the front line of the building projected to the side lines of the lot. The depth of the front yard shall be measured between the front line of the building and the front property line. If the front property line is located at the street centerline or section line, then the front yard shall be measured from the front line of the building to the edge of the nearest street use. 
(1)  Covered porches, whether enclosed or unenclosed, shall be considered as a part of the main building and shall not project into a required front yard or any closer to the street than any structure in line with the property along a street. For purposes of this chapter, corner lots at two intersecting streets shall have a front yard adjacent each street. 
(2)  Reverse frontage lots shall only have one front yard adjacent the street to which the building is numbered or addressed. 
    Yard, rear, means an open space on the same lot with a main building, extending the full width of the lot and situated between the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the building projected to the side lines of the lot. The depth of the rear yard shall be measured between the rear line of the building or any protruding structure and the rear property line. 
    Yard, side, means an open space and/or distance in feet between the farthest extension of the main or accessory building on the lot to the side lot line, and extending from the front line of the building to the rear line of the building. If a corner lot, the side yard shall be the longest lot line of the inside property lines. 
    Zero lot means a duplex of which both dwelling units may be sold separately if: 
(1)  At the time the dwelling units are severed from common ownership, the owners of the two dwelling units have signed an agreement to run with the land, in a form adequate to ensure access for maintenance and providing for maintenance of the walls and driveways or a set of covenants and restrictions are in place to provide for said maintenance. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as permitting the construction of any adjacent buildings using only one wall for both buildings; each building shall have its own wall. 
(2)  A subdivision plat dividing the lot has been approved by the planning and zoning commission prior to recording. A formal subdivision procedure shall not be required provided theduplex otherwise complies with the requirements of the zoning code, as amended from time to time. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in no case of division or combination shall any residual lot or parcel be created which does not meet the requirements of this code. 
(Code 2008, § 17.50; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.50), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-5. - Site plan requirements. 
CHECK LIST FOR SITE PLAN SUBMITTAL TO THE EUREKA PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION FOR REVIEW OF PLANS 
If all documents required are not submitted with the site plan, they will NOT be reviewed by the Commission. 
Office Use only 
Commercial - Multiple-Family Residential - Three units or more submitted. 
Yes N/A Meets Code Site Plan - (7) Seven plans must be submitted ____________ ____________ ____________ 1. Site plans must be ruled using black ink and have the Engineer's Stamp on the drawings. ____________ ____________ ____________ 2. All lot line dimensions with total lot square feet with street address. ____________ ____________ ____________ 3. Adjoining streets and property ____________ ____________ ____________ 4. Zoning for property site plan and surrounding property ____________ ____________ ____________ 5. Location of proposed construction, show distance of construction from front, side and rear yard property lines. ____________ ____________ ____________ 6. Show all existing buildings, signs, etc., on the property and distances as required in #7 plus distance from new construction with total square feet for all existing structures. ____________ ____________ ____________ 7. Show all entrances and exits and width of each ____________ ____________ ____________ _ 8. Corner lot - show distance from centerline of highway or street ____________ ____________ ____________ 9. State permit for entrance if required on State Highway ____________ ____________ ____________ 10. Landscaping ____________ ____________ ____________ _ 11. Water and sewer connection ____________ ____________ ____________ 12. Water retention plan as required, with calculations for lot drainage or showing no need for water retention. ____________ ____________ ____________ 13. Erosion control plan ____________ ____________ ____________ 14. Complete set of construction drawings with the Architect's stamp. ____________ ____________ ____________ 15. Parking spaces plus handicap - total required ____________ . ____________ ____________ ____________ 16. Show all current easements and if a new lot a 10-foot easement must be provided for around the entire inside of the lot lines. ____________ ____________ ____________  
(Code 2008, § 17.40; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.40), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-6. - Rate fee structure, permit and inspection fees. 
    Zoning variance and miscellaneous fees: 
(1)  Application for a variance: $50.00. 
(2)  Demolition fee: $25.00. 
(3)  Change in use: $25.00. 
(4)  Application for a special use: $50.00. 
(5)  Moving structure from one lot to another will be a fee of $1,500.00 for permit request. Any foundation or additional construction required will be billed per standard building permit rates. This fee is established to cover the costs involved with police and maintenance labor needed during house moves. 
(Code 2008, § 17.1440; Ord. No. 09-06, § I, 5-4-2009; Ord. No. 09-08, § I, 11-16-2009; Ord. No. 11-02, § I, 2-21-2011; Ord. No. 12-12, § I, 7-2-2012; Ord. No. 12-21, § I, 11-5-2012; Ord. No. 15-01, § I, 1-5-2015) 
Sec. 78-7. - Public notice. 
    It shall be the intent of the planning and zoning commission to have the public advised of any request for a variance, special use, zoning change or any other request not specified or authorized for a zoning district or the municipal zoning code and subdivision code as included in this code. The following procedure must be followed for any application requiring a public hearing review by the planning and zoning commission for approval. 
(1)  Applicant must have completed the procedures for application for any request requiring a public hearing by the planning and zoning commission. 
(2)  Applicant shall pay an application fee of $25.00 plus reimbursement for the cost of publication and posting, for any request requiring a public hearing, review and approval by the planning and zoning commission and this shall be submitted with the application. Each request shall constitute a separate application and a separate fee shall apply. 
(3)  Applicant shall pay the cost to publish the notice of the public hearing. 
(4)  Posting requirements. 
a.  A public notice sign must be posted for any request requiring a public hearing by the planning and zoning commission. 
b.  Applicant shall use the signs provided by the city for public notice. A 24-inch by 36-inch sign shall be purchased from the city at a cost of $20.00 per sign. There shall be a minimum of one sign posted on each property included in and for which an application has been submitted for consideration by the planning and zoning commission at a public hearing. 
c.  Signs shall be erected not more than ten feet from each boundary of the property that abuts a public road/street unless greater distances are required to enhance visibility. The zoning administrator shall determine the number of signs to be posted on the property to meet this requirement. If the property does not abut a public road, the signs shall be posted where they can be readily seen by the public. Signs shall be posted at the two nearest intersecting streets. The zoning administrator shall have final approval of sign site location. 
d.  All information listed on the public notice sign must be complete. Applicant shall print clearly all information so it is easily readable by the public. The zoning administrator shall have final approval on whether adequate information has been provided and to determine legibility of sign information. The applicant is responsible for maintaining the sign and legibility of information contained therein. 
e.  The signs for public notice for any public hearing shall be posted not less than 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. The signs must remain posted until the date of the public hearing. Failure to post and maintain the signs will postpone the hearing. 
(Code 2008, § 17.460; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.460), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-8. - Building inspector. 
    This chapter shall be enforced by the city building inspector who shall be appointed by the mayor and hold a one-year contract with the city with the consent of the city council. No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued by him except where the provisions of this chapter shall have been complied with. 
(Code 2008, § 17.970; Ord. No. 09-15, § I, 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-9. - Permits. 
    Except for any agricultural use, it shall be unlawful to establish any use of a building, structure, or land, either by itself or in addition to another use, or to erect a new building or structure, or part thereof, or to rebuild, structurally alter, add to, or relocate any building or structure, or part thereof, without obtaining a permit from the city in accordance with the following regulations: 
(1)  Applications for permits shall be filed in written form with the city, shall state the legal description of the property, the name and address of the owner, the applicant and the contractor, the estimated value of the completed improvement, and shall describe the uses to be established or expanded, and shall give such information as may be required by this chapter for its proper enforcement. 
(2)  All applications for a building permit shall be accompanied by a dimensioned drawing of the lot or parcel of land, which dimensioned drawing shall show the location of all improvements, existing and planned, including, but not limited to, buildings, patios, decks, automobile parking areas and driveways, fences and pools and any and all perimeter landscaping and/or screening required. For those lots which are part of a subdivision for which a stormwater drainage plan has been approved pursuant to the subdivision code, all applications for building permits shall be accompanied by a dimensioned drawing of the lot or parcel of land showing the location of all improvements, as previously described hereinabove, and showing conformance with the applicable stormwater drainage plan for the subdivision. For commercial and industrial developments, all applications for building permits must comply in all respects to the stormwater control provisions of the subdivision code, including limitation, and, as amended from time to time. Residential developments not a part of a subdivision for which a stormwater drainage plan has been approved is not required to meet this requirement. 
(3)  Each permit issued for a main building shall also cover any accessory structures or buildings constructed at the same time on the same premises, and such permit shall be posted in plain sight on the premises for which it is issued until completion of construction or occupancy. 
(4)  Any work or change in use authorized by permit but not substantially started within 90 days shall require a new permit. Once work has begun, such work not completed within two years shall require a new permit. A permit shall be revoked by the building inspector when he shall find from personal inspection or from competent evidence that the rules or regulations under which it has been issued are being violated. 
(5)  All applications and a copy of all permits issued shall be systematically filed and kept by the city. 
(6)  Fees. To partially defray expenses of administering the chapter a fee where required shall be charged for each permit and collected by the city who shall account for the same to the municipality. A filing fee of $25.00 shall be charged for each permit, plus an additional $2.50 per $1,000.00 of construction value. With exception to permits issued for pools, fences, and storage sheds under 200 square feet, the above fee shall be no less than $25.00. If construction commences without a valid building permit, the above fee shall be doubled. There shall be no refund of any permit fees paid hereunder. The above fee shall not be required to be paid by any tax supported unit or district. Construction value for all new building construction shall be calculated using the most recent edition of the R. S. Means Square Foot Costs. 
(7)  A permit shall be required for interior alterations and improvements on existing structures other than one- and two-family dwellings when a change of use to a more hazardous use occurs. The degree to which a use is deemed more hazardous shall be determined by its classification in the city's most recently adopted version of the International Building Code. No permit shall be required for maintenance and interior alterations and improvements on existing one- and two-family dwellings. 
(8)  The finished site elevations shall allow for the habitable improvements constructed on the site to: 
a.  Have a finished grade with a slope of two percent away from the foundation; and 
b.  The finished floor, excluding subterranean floors, to have a minimum height of one foot above the elevation of drainage ways upon or adjoining the property upon which the habitable improvement is located. 
(Code 2008, § 17.980; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.980), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-10. - Certificates of occupancy. 
(a)  No land shall be occupied or used and no building hereafter erected, structurally altered, or extended shall be used or changed in use until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the building inspector. 
(b)  All certificates of occupancy shall be applied for coincident with the application for building permit, and said certificate shall be issued within three days after the construction shall have been approved. Approved public utilities must be connected to any residence and in use, prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit. 
(c)  Certificates of occupancy for the use of vacant land shall be applied for before any such land shall be occupied or used, and a certificate of occupancy shall be issued within three days after the application has been made, provided such use is in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  The city shall maintain a record of all certificates and copies shall be furnished, upon request, to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building affected. 
(e)  No permit for excavation for, or the erection or structural alteration to any building shall be issued until an application has been made for a certificate of occupancy. 
(f)  No occupancy of a structure shall take place until a certificate of occupancy has been issued. In cases where there are no life safety issues that would endanger the occupants of the structure or the public, the city may issue a temporary certificate of occupancy that is valid for a period of time agreeable to the city but not to exceed 90 days. A temporary certificate of occupancy will only be issued if there are extenuating circumstances that have not allowed construction to be completed. The contractor must deposit with the city a refundable fee of $1,000.00. The building inspector shall be provided access into the structure in order to complete the inspection. All applicable fees for additional inspections must be paid to the city before the final occupancy certificate is granted. If a final inspection is not approved within the approved length of time not to exceed 90 days, the entire $1,000.00 will be forfeited. 
(Code 2008, § 17.990; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.990), 11-2-2009; Ord. No. 15-05, § I, 4-6-2015) 
Sec. 78-11. - Amendments. 
(a)  The city council may from time to time, on its own motion or on petition after report by the planning and zoning commission and after hearing and public notice of such hearing given by publication in the city at least 15 days before the time of hearing, amend, supplement, or change by ordinance, the regulations and districts herein or subsequently established. In addition to the public notice referred to above, written notice of all proposed zoning amendments shall be given to the owners or inhabitants of all parcels of land adjoining the property under consideration for rezoning. This additional notice shall be mailed or delivered by the city clerk to the address of the adjoining property, or to the owner if that address is different than the adjoining property and such different address is known to the clerk. In addition, a sign shall be posted on the premises seeking rezoning, stating the proposed zoning change. The failure of the clerk to send or the failure of the owner or occupier of the adjoining parcels to receive said additional notice, or the failure to post a sign, shall not affect the validity of any ordinance amending the zoning code. 
(b)  In addition to any power herein granted or contained, the city council reserves and retains the power to determine and vary by ordinance the application of the regulations herein contained in harmony with their general purpose and intent in cases where there are practical difficulties or particular hardship in the way of carrying out the strict letter of any of those regulations relating to the use, construction, or alteration of buildings or structures or the use of land. However, no such variance shall be made by the corporate authorities as specified without a hearing before the board of appeals. 
(c)  Whenever owners of 50 percent or more of the street frontage in any block shall present to the city council a petition, duly signed and acknowledged, requesting such amendment or reclassification, it shall be the duty of the city council to refer this petition to the planning and zoning commission to hold a hearing thereon, as provided by statute. 
(d)  Before any action shall be taken under this chapter, the party petitioning for a change shall deposit with the city clerk the sum of $25.00 plus reimbursement for the cost of publication and posting, and under no condition shall this sum or any part thereof be refunded for failure of the amendment to be enacted into law. 
(Code 2008, § 17.1000; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.1000), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-12. - Application form for zoning amendment, special use, variance, and appeal. 
APPLICATION FORM; ZONING PETITION CITY OF EUREKA ZONING PETITION 
Petition for (check appropriate item(s)): 
____________ Zoning Amendment 
____________ Special Use 
____________ Variance 
____________ Appeal 
Petitioner Name: _____ _____ 
Address: _____ 
Phone: _____ 
Name of Owners of Property: _____ 
A copy of the deed or mortgage conveying the property to the owners must be attached hereto; said deed or mortgage to contain an accurate legal description of the property. 
A statement must be attached to this petition stating in detail the intended use of the property. 
The specific use requested is ____________ and the current zoning classification is ____________ . Also indicate the zoning classification of all adjacent properties. North, South, East, and West. 
Attach a drawing describing with reasonable accuracy the location of the property in question and all adjoining properties, residences, fences and other structures that might be affected by the zoning or special use. Lot size, building sizes, distance of structure from lot lines, and location of parking lots, municipal water and sewer services, all easements on the property and driveways are also needed. 
In the case of Special Use request, a statement must be attached reciting facts as to why the Special Use is needed, both in the neighborhood and the community, and any impact the Special Use will have on the use of neighboring property, on traffic patterns, and on the capacity of City facilities, such as water mains and sewer mains to serve the area. 
It shall be the responsibility of the petitioner to contact the chairman of the Planning and zoning commission at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to the public hearing to determine if the Commission will need additional information. Failure to contact the chairman may result in the Planning and zoning commission deferring action until the following month's meeting. 
Dated ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
_____ _____
Signature of owners Signature of occupants (who are not owners) 
____________ FEES PAID ____________ SITE PLAN SUBMITTED ____________ FLOOR PLAN SUBMITTED 
Site Plan - Required Drawing must be ruled on graph paper showing all requirements listed. 
____________ Drawing of the lot showing lot size 
____________ Streets, intersections, driveways 
____________ Location of all buildings, fences, etc., on lot showing distances from - front - side - rear property lines 
____________ Municipal water and sewer lines 
____________ Easements on the lot 
____________ Adjoining properties, residences, fences and other structures with distances to property line 
____________ Zoning of property and surrounding property 
Sec. 78-13. - Violations; remedies and appropriate actions. 
    In case a building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, or maintained, or any building, structure, or land is used in violation of this chapter, the proper authorities of the city council, in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, maintenance, or use; to restrain, correct, or abate such violation; to prevent the occupancy of said building, structure, or land; or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business, or use in or about such premises. 
(Code 2008, § 17.1010; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.1010), 11-2-2009) 
Secs. 78-14-78-44. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BOARD OF APPEALS 

Sec. 78-45. - Organization. 
(a)  A board of appeals is hereby established in accordance with the provisions of the statute applicable thereto. The board of appeals shall be comprised of two members of the planning and zoning commission and three members of the city council as appointed by the mayor. The members shall serve for four years from appointment. Meetings of the board shall be held at such time and place within the municipality as the board may require or determine. 
(b)  Special meetings may be held at the call of the chairman or as determined by the board. Such chairman, or in his absence, the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the board of appeals shall be open to the public. 
(c)  Such board shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member on every question. If any member is absent or fails to vote, the minutes shall indicate such fact. The board shall adopt its own rules of procedure not in conflict with the statute or this chapter. 
(d)  Appeals to the board of appeals may be taken by any person aggrieved or by an officer, department, board, or bureau of the municipality. Such appeal shall be taken within 20 days from the date of the action appealed from, by filing with the city administrator and board of appeals a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds thereof. The city administrator shall forthwith transmit to the board all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the city administrator certifies to the board, after the notice of appeal has been filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. The board of appeals shall fix a reasonable time for hearing of the appeal and give due notice thereof to the parties and decide the same within a reasonable time. The board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the use, requirement, decision, or determination as, in its opinion, ought to be made in the premises. 
(Code 2008, § 17.930; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.930), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-46. - Jurisdiction; granting of variances. 
(a)  Variance application. The zoning board of appeals shall hear and decide appeals from any order, requirements, decision, or determination made by the planning and zoning commission. It shall also hear and decide all matters referred to it or upon which it is required to pass under this chapter. The board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify or amend the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from to the extent and in the manner that the board may decide to be fitting and proper in the premises, and to that end the board shall also have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken. When a property owner shows that a strict application of the terms of this chapter relating to the use, construction, or alteration of buildings or structures, or to the use of land, imposes upon him practical difficulties or particular hardship, then the board may, in the following instances only, make such variations of the strict application of terms of this chapter as are in harmony with its general purpose and intent when the board is satisfied, under the evidence heard before it, that the granting of such variance will not merely serve as a convenience to the applicant, but is necessary to alleviate some demonstrable hardship so great as to warrant a variance: 
(1)  To permit the extension of a district where the boundary line of a district divides a lot in single ownership as shown of record. 
(2)  To permit the reconstruction of a nonconforming building which has been destroyed or damaged to an extent of more than 50 percent of its value, by fire or act of God, or the public enemy, where the board shall find some compelling public necessity requiring a continuance of the nonconforming use, but in no case shall such a permit be issued if its primary function is to continue a monopoly. 
(3)  To make a variance, by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape of a specific piece of property of record, or by reason of exceptional topographical conditions the strict application of any provision of this chapter would result in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties or particular hardship upon the owner of such property, and amount to a practical confiscation of property, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience to such owner, provided such relief can be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and without substantially impairing the general purpose and intent of the comprehensive plan as established by the regulations and provisions contained in this chapter. 
(4)  To interpret the provisions of this chapter where the street layout actually on the ground varies from the street layout as shown on the district map fixing the several districts. 
(5)  To waive the parking requirements in the business or industrial districts whenever the character or use of the building is such as to make unnecessary the full provision of parking facilities or where such regulations would impose an unreasonable hardship upon the use of the lot, as contrasted with merely granting an advantage or convenience. 
(6)  To permit a building to be erected, reconstructed, altered, or enlarged so that the building lines would extend beyond the distance specific in this chapter into side yards or into front yards; provided that such variance may not be granted: 
a.  Unless there is a building in the block that extends beyond the distance from the front street line specified in this chapter, in which case the building line may be permitted to extend as near to the front street line as such nonconforming building; 
b.  Unless the lot is irregular in shape, topography, or size; or 
c.  Unless the street line of the lot is directly opposite the street line of a lot which is irregular in shape, topography, or size. 
(7)  To permit in any district such modifications of the requirements of the regulations of this chapter as the board may deem necessary to secure all appropriate development of a lot where adjacent to such lot on two or more sides there are buildings that do not conform to the regulations of the district. 
(b)  Nothing herein contained shall be construed to give or grant the board the power or authority to alter or change the zoning code or the district map; such power and authority being reserved to the city council. The board of appeals may impose such conditions and restrictions upon the use of premises benefited by a variance, except in a specific case, after an application for a permit has been made to the city and after duly advertised public hearing held by the board as prescribed by statute. The notice of hearing shall contain the address or location of the property for which the variance or other ruling by the board is sought as well as a brief description of the nature of the appeal. In order to partially defray the expenses of the public hearings involving variances, the applicant shall pay the sum of $100.00 to the city clerk at the time of the filing of the appeal for the variance. 
(c)  The city also reserves the right to itself to grant variations as to the terms of this chapter as set forth in section 78-11. 
(Code 2008, § 17.940; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.940), 11-2-2009) 
Secs. 78-47-78-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DISTRICTS; ZONING MAP 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 78-66. - Establishment of districts. 
    The municipality is divided into the following types of districts: 
A Agricultural 
R-1 Single-Family Residential only 
R-2 Multiple-Family Residential 
P-R Planned Residential 
B-1 Central Business District 
B-2 General Retail District 
I-1 Light Industrial District (FAR 2.0) 
I-2 Heavy Industrial District (FAR 5.0) 
CE Country Estates 
(Code 2008, § 17.60; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.60), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-67. - New or annexed land. 
(a)  Any land which may be annexed to the city shall be classified in accordance with the following schedule: 
COUNTY CLASSIFICATIONS County Zoning Classification City Zoning Classification in County upon Annexation Conservation A Agriculture Conservation B Agriculture Agriculture Agriculture Residential AR R-1 Residential Residential AS R-1 Residential Residential CS R-2 Residential Commercial B-2 General Retail Business Industrial I-1 Industrial  
(b)  Special uses existing when land is annexed to the city shall continue including all conditions or restrictions imposed when the special use was authorized. 
(Code 2008, § 17.60; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.60), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-68. - Map of zoning districts. 
    These districts are bounded and defined as shown on the maps entitled Zoning Districts, Eureka, Illinois, which accompany, and which, with all explanatory matter thereon, are made a part of this chapter as if fully set out herein. 
(Code 2008, § 17.70; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.70), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-69. - Rules for interpretation of district boundaries. 
(a)  All property within the corporate limits of the municipality is under the jurisdiction of this chapter. 
(b)  All properties within 11/2 miles of the corporate limits of the municipality is under the jurisdiction of this chapter. 
(c)  Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the aforesaid districts as shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets or highways, street lines or highway right-of-way lines, such centerlines, street lines, or highway right-of-way lines shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
(2)  Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately follow the lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be said boundaries. 
(3)  Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately parallel to the centerlines or street lines of streets, or the centerlines or right-of-way lines of highways, such district boundaries shall be construed as being parallel thereto and at such distance therefrom as indicated on the zoning map. If no distance is given, such dimension shall be determined by the use of the scale shown on the zoning map. 
(4)  Where the boundary of a district follows a railroad line, such boundary shall be deemed to be located midway between the main tracks of said railroad line. 
(5)  In areas not subdivided into lots and blocks, the district boundary lines shall be determined by scale to the nearest ten feet. 
(6)  All streets, alleys, public ways, and railroad rights-of-way, if not otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be in the same zone as the property immediately abutting. Where the centerline of a street, alley, public way or railroad right-of-way serves as a district boundary, the zoning of such areas, when not otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be the same as that of the abutting property up to such centerline. 
(d)  Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the official zoning map or in other circumstances are not covered by the subsections (c)(1) through (6) of this section, the planning and zoning commission shall interpret the district boundaries. 
(Code 2008, § 17.80; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.80), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-70. - Transition zones. 
(a)  Where a lot in a business or industrial district abuts a lot in a residential district there shall be provided along such abutting side or rear lot lines a yard equal in width or depth to that required in the residential district. 
(b)  Where the frontage on one side of a street between two intersecting streets is zoned partly as residential and partly as business or industrial, the building setback in the business district or the industrial district shall be equal to the required front depth of the residential district. 
(c)  Where a zoning district boundary line parallel or approximately parallel to a street divides a lot having street frontage in the less or more restricted zoning district, the provisions of this chapter covering the less restricted portion of such lot may extend to the entire lot, but in no case for a distance of more than 25 feet of such zoning district boundary line. 
(d)  Where a zoning district boundary line divides a lot and such line is perpendicular or approximately perpendicular to the street upon which the lot fronts, the provisions covering the less or the more restricted portion of such lot may be extended to the entire lot, but in no case for a distance of more than 25 feet from such zoning district boundary lines. 
(Code 2008, § 17.90; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.90), 11-2-2009) 
Secs. 78-71-78-98. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - AGRICULTURAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 78-99. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the agricultural district regulations is to provide for certain lands in the outlying areas of the city prior to development of those areas into subdivisions. The agricultural district is intended to regulate those areas within the city predominantly devoted to agricultural uses and which it is desired to maintain and encourage such open use of land. 
(1)  If public water is available within 150 feet of the property and/or the property is contiguous to the city, the property must be annexed and required to connect to the public water supply before any new construction. 
(2)  If public sewer is available within 300 feet of the property and/or the property is contiguous to the city the property must be annexed and required to connect to the public water supply and sanitary sewer system before any new construction. 
(Code 2008, § 17.100; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.100), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-100. - Permitted uses, A Agricultural District. 
(a)  No building premises or land shall be used and no building shall be hereafter erected or altered on an A Agricultural District, unless otherwise provided for in this chapter. 
(b)  The following uses are permitted in the agricultural district subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Agriculture. 
(2)  Community buildings (churches, grange halls, and the like). 
(3)  Dwellings, single-family. 
(4)  Forest preserves. 
(5)  The raising or growing of livestock or poultry provided that any building housing such animals or poultry or any feed lot shall be located at least 300 feet from any residential district boundary and any sewage lagoon, manure pit or storage area shall be so located, designed, constructed and operated that no odor therefrom is noticeable at any residential district boundary. 
(6)  Churches, temples, other places of public worship. 
(7)  Public or private schools offering general instruction between kindergarten and twelfth grade levels, public or private colleges offering courses leading toward an associate, bachelor or advanced degree in arts and science or comparable recognized degree. 
(8)  Kennels for the keeping or housing of three or more dogs, six months old or older, either as an accessory use or principal use. Any kennel shall be within a completely enclosed building, or, if outdoors, shall be completely enclosed by a woven wire fence, solid fence, or a wall. A kennel shall be located in the rear yard and at least 300 feet from any boundary of a residential zone. 
(9)  Grain storage, commercial, if not nearer than 300 feet to any residence other than that of the owner or lessor of the site. 
(10)  Businesses conducted in a home, provided that not more than one sign with a maximum of six square feet may be displayed setting forth such occupation and that a gravel, crushed rock, or improved access road shall be provided off the public right-of-way. 
(11)  Lakes (artificial). 
(12)  The raising or growing of crops and other vegetative products including ornamental plants in the open. 
(13)  Parks or recreation areas operated by a unit of government or homeowners association. 
(14)  Other customary accessory uses and accessory structures provided such uses are incidental to the principal use and do not include any activity commonly conducted as a business. Furthermore, no accessory structure shall be constructed, placed, or made upon the property unless it shall comply with the following additional requirements: 
a.  The aggregate ground floor area of all accessory structures on any single lot up to one-half acre in size shall not exceed the lesser of: 
1.  1,200 square feet; or 
2.  The ground floor area of the principal structure on the property. 
b.  The aggregate ground floor area of all accessory structures on any single lot greater than one-half acre in size shall not exceed the following limitations: 
1.  Lot size up to one acre: 1,600 square feet. 
2.  Lot size larger than one acre up to two acres: 2,000 square feet. 
3.  Lot size larger than two acres: no limit. 
c.  An accessory structure shall not be constructed before the principal building. The accessory structure shall not be located any closer than ten feet from any other structure or building (whether an accessory structure or the main or principal structure or building) on the property or on immediately adjacent and adjoining property. 
d.  The accessory structure shall not be located in, or project upon, the minimum required front yard, nor shall the accessory structure be located any closer than 21/2 feet from the rear lot line and 21/2 feet beginning from the rear of the house back, side lot lines of the property. 
e.  The accessory structure shall not exceed in height the lesser of: 
1.  22 feet in height; or 
2.  The height of the main or principal structure or building on the property. 
f.  Coverage shall not exceed 40 percent of the lot. For purposes of this subsection, the term "coverage" means that percentage of the plot or lot area covered by building area, inclusive of the main or principal building or structure and all accessory structures, calculated from an aerial or plan view of the lot or plot. For purposes of calculating coverage, decks, porches, and breezeways shall also be included. 
g.  The floor area ratio (FAR) shall not exceed 50 percent of the lot area. For purposes of this subsection in determining the floor area ratio, the gross floor area shall include the gross floor area of the main or principal structure or building and the gross floor area of all accessory structures on the property. 
(Code 2008, § 17.110; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.110), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-101. - Special uses. 
    The following uses are permitted as special uses when authorized by the planning and zoning commission and recommended to the city council for approval after a public hearing. 
(1)  Cemeteries, mausoleums, crematories, in cemeteries of not less than 50 acres. 
(2)  Municipal sewage treatment plants. 
(3)  Veterinary office, animal hospitals, animal boarding and kennels (see also I-1 districts). Not within 300 feet of a residential district and animals must be in an enclosed building. 
(4)  Nurseries, including the raising of plants, shrubs, and trees and the retail sale thereof; further that buildings may be erected and used for the purpose of selling said plants, shrubs, and trees, and other products related to home gardening. 
(5)  Public utility substations, but not including power generation or gas manufacturing plants. 
(6)  Any special use not specified within this code for an agricultural district shall be determined on a case by case basis by the planning and zoning commission. 
(Code 2008, § 17.120; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.120), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-102. - Floor area ratio. 
    The floor area ratio on a lot shall not exceed 50 percent. Any building in the A district used as a residence shall contain on the ground floor at least 700 square feet of livable floor space. 
(Code 2008, § 17.130; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.130), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-103. - Height requirements. 
    Each dwelling structure shall have a minimum ceiling height of eight feet over a majority of the area of the ground floor. No building shall be over three stories or a maximum of 35 feet. 
(Code 2008, § 17.140; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.140), 11-2-2009; Ord. No. 11-02, § I, 2-21-2011; Ord. No. 12-21, § I, 11-5-2012) 
Sec. 78-104. - Yards required. 
    Yards of the following minimum depths shall be provided: 
(1)  Front yard: not less than 80 feet from the center of the road or 50 feet from the right-of-way line, whichever is greater. Where a lot is located at the intersection of two or more streets there shall be a front yard on each street side of the lot. No accessory building shall project beyond the front yard line on either street. 
(2)  Side yards: each not less than 30 feet wide on each side. 
(3)  Rear yard: each not less than 30 feet. 
(4)  30 feet of street frontage. 
(Code 2008, § 17.160; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.160), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-105. - Automobile storage or parking space. 
    Adequate off-street parking in accordance with the provisions of this chapter is required. 
(Code 2008, § 17.170; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.170), 11-2-2009) 
Secs. 78-106-78-123. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 78-124. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the residential regulations is to provide for a range of sound residential environments and housing opportunities compatible with the comprehensive plan of the community, and appropriately related to the present street, highway, school, park, utility, police, fire, and other similar supporting facilities. 
(Code 2008, § 17.180; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.180), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-125. - Special uses. 
    The following uses are permitted as special uses in the R-1 and R-2 districts after a public hearing and recommendation by the planning and zoning commission when approved by the city council. 
(1)  Real estate offices, so long as the structure to be used for a real estate office is an existing building and that adequate parking is available. 
(2)  Accessory commercial uses may be established in the R-1 Residential District subject to the following general requirements, restrictions and limitations, and such other restrictions, requirements and limitations as the planning and zoning commission and city council shall deem proper under the particular circumstances: 
a.  The use to which the property may be put shall be limited exclusively to B-1 or B-2 Business District: assembly, storage, or the provision of service to goods or products. 
b.  The one or more of the following uses accessory to a use permitted in a property shall be located within 200 feet of the primary B-1 or B-2 zoned property for which the property's use shall be accessory. 
c.  The property shall not have been occupied as a residence or otherwise used for residential purposes for a period of 120 days immediately preceding the filing of the special use application. 
d.  In order to preserve the residential character of the neighborhood and the property, the following restrictions on the accessory commercial use shall apply to the property: 
1.  Interior window dressings, residential in character, shall be maintained on all windows, such that the accessory commercial use of the property shall not be visible from the exterior of the premises. 
2.  No signs of any kind or character shall be posted, erected, or constructed upon the property. 
3.  No exterior display of the accessory commercial use shall be made or permitted. 
4.  No more than four vehicles shall be parked on the property at any one time, and said vehicles shall be parked in the driveway thereof. 
5.  No deliveries by vendors, contractors, agents, or any supplier shall be made to or upon the property, directly or through a freight carrier, unless sufficient off-street delivery facilities are available such that any delivery vehicle shall be entirely outside of all driving lanes on city streets or highways. 
6.  The accessory commercial use shall not be operated on any day after the hour of 8:00 p.m. nor before the hour of 8:00 a.m. Central Time. 
7.  No bulk storage of flammable materials, or inflammable, explosive, or hazardous material shall be allowed or permitted upon the property except in such quantities as are necessary for such accessory commercial use and as shall be consumed and completely used during the standard business day. Any such unused or unconsumed materials at the end of each day shall be completely removed from the property. 
8.  No noxious, offensive, or nauseous fumes, odors, or noises shall be permitted or allowed to permeate from the property, and be audible from adjacent property. 
9.  No sales of any goods, products, or services shall be made from or upon the property. 
10.  Certified public accounting, and other general accounting, offices so long as the structure is an existing building and that adequate off street parking is available. 
11.  Tutoring facilities and classrooms so long as the structure is an existing building and that adequate off street parking is available. 
12.  Child day care facilities may be established in the R-2 Multiple-Family Residential District, subject to such restrictions, requirements, and limitations as may be deemed proper under the circumstances. 
(3)  Cemeteries, provided the location thereof is approved by resolution of the city council after a public hearing is held and recommendation is made by the planning and zoning commission. 
(4)  Community centers. 
(Code 2008, § 17.190(M); Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.190(M)), 11-2-2009; Ord. No. 11-10, 11-7-2011) 
Sec. 78-126. - Storage of flammable liquids in residential districts. 
    The storage of gasoline in bulk quantities in underground storage tanks in residential zoning districts is prohibited. However, the use of propane tanks for heating in above ground tanks not to exceed 100-pound capacity is allowed in residential districts. 
(Code 2008, § 17.240; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.240), 11-2-2009) 
Secs. 78-127-78-150. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - R-1 District 

Sec. 78-151. - Intent. 
    R-1 Residential District is intended to include those portions of the city developed predominantly with one-family dwellings or individual lots where it is deemed desirable to maintain and encourage this pattern of development or those undeveloped portions of the city in which it is deemed desirable to encourage this pattern of predominant land usage and density of populations. 
(Code 2008, § 17.200(intro. ¶); Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.200(intro. ¶), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-152. - Uses permitted. 
    Uses permitted in R-1 districts shall be as defined in this section: 
(1)  One-family dwellings (this does not include mobile homes); 
(2)  Libraries, public museums, fire stations, police stations; 
(3)  Churches, temples other places of public worship; 
(4)  Public or private schools offering general instruction between kindergarten and twelfth grade levels; public or private colleges offering courses leading toward an associate, baccalaureate or advanced degree in arts or science or comparable recognized degree; 
(5)  Parks, recreation areas, recreation buildings operated by a unit of government; government buildings but not including storage yards or buildings for the housing of materials or similar materials, neighborhood centers, approved by the planning and zoning commission, not for profit; 
(6)  Farming, truck gardening, horticultural nurseries, but not including the raising, housing, pasturing or keeping of bees, fowl or livestock; 
(7)  Temporary buildings, structures and uses incidental to construction on the site, for a period not to exceed one year; 
(8)  Home occupations which are of a hand-craft or service character, customarily conducted within a dwelling incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for living purposes and which does not have any exterior evidence of such secondary use other than a sign as provided in the chapter under signs. The occupation must conform to the following additional conditions: 
a.  The amount of floor area devoted to the use must not exceed 200 square feet. 
b.  No articles shall be sold or offered for sale except those produced on the premises. 
c.  No equipment shall be used except of a type that is similar in character to that normally used for domestic or household purposes. 
d.  No more than one person outside the family shall be employed in the home occupations. 
(9)  Customary accessory uses and accessory structures provided such uses are incidental to the principal use and do not include any activity commonly conducted as a business. Garage sales or yard sales are allowed as an accessory use, providing that each sale lasts no more than three consecutive days and no more than three sales are conducted on the same lot during any calendar year. Furthermore, in any R-1 district, no accessory structure shall be constructed, placed, or made upon the property unless it shall comply with the following additional requirements: 
a.  The aggregate ground floor area of all accessory structures on any single lot up to one-half acre in size shall not exceed the lesser of: 
1.  1,200 square feet; or 
2.  The ground floor area of the principal structure on the property. 
b.  The aggregate ground floor area of all accessory structures on any single lot greater than one-half acre in size shall not exceed the following limitations: 
1.  Lot size up to one acre: 1,600 square feet. 
2.  Lot size larger than one acre up to two acres: 2,000 square feet. 
3.  Lot size larger than two acres: no limit. 
c.  An accessory structure shall not be constructed before the principal building. The accessory structure shall not be located any closer than ten feet from any other structure or building (whether an accessory structure or the main or principal structure or building) on the property or on immediately adjacent and adjoining property. 
d.  The accessory structure shall not be located in, or project upon, the minimum required front yard, nor shall the accessory structure be located any closer than 21/2 feet from the rear lot line and 21/2 feet beginning from the rear of the house back, side lot lines of the property. 
e.  The accessory structure shall not exceed in height the lesser of: 
1.  22 feet in height; or 
2.  The height of the main or principal structure or building on the property. 
f.  Coverage shall not exceed 40 percent of the lot. For purposes of this subsection, the term "coverage" means that percentage of the plot or lot area covered by building area, inclusive of the main or principal building or structure and all accessory structures, calculated from an aerial or plan view of the lot or plot. For purposes of calculating coverage, decks, porches, and breezeways shall also be included. 
(Code 2008, § 17.200(A); Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.200(A)), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-153. - Floor area ratio. 
    Any building used as a residence shall have a minimum height of nine feet above front grade level, and shall contain on the ground floor at least 700 square feet of livable floor space. The floor area ratio on a lot shall not exceed five-tenths (50 percent) for a single-family dwelling, and five-tenths (50 percent) for a two-family dwelling. In determining the floor area ratio, the gross floor area shall include the gross floor area of all main or principal structures or buildings and the gross floor area of all accessory structures located upon the property. 
(Code 2008, § 17.200(B); Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.200(B)), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-154. - Required lot area and street frontage. 
(a)  Single-family dwellings shall be constructed on a lot no less than 7,200 square feet and have a lot width at the setback line no less than 60 feet. 
(b)  Required street frontage shall be 60 feet. 
(Code 2008, § 17.200(C); Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.200(C)), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-155. - Yards required. 
    Yards of the following minimum depths shall be provided: 
(1)  Front yard. Not less than 20 feet unless the dwelling unit is constructed in an established area on one side of the street between two intersecting streets which is improved with buildings that have observed a front yard depth of less than 20 feet. In such established districts, the front yard depth may be the same as, but not less than, the building immediately adjacent to either side of the proposed building structure. Where a lot is located at the intersection of two or more streets, there shall be a front yard on each street side of the lot, except that the buildable width of such lot shall not be reduced to less than 32 feet. No accessory building shall project beyond the front yard line on either street. 
(2)  Side yards for residential. Each lot shall have not less than six feet from the fascia (overhang) of the building to the lot line, and the sum of the two side yards shall not be less than 12 feet. 
(3)  Rear yard. Each not less than 20 feet or 20 percent of the depth of the lot, whichever is greater, but in no event shall exceed 50 feet. 
(Code 2008, § 17.200(D); Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.200(D)), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-156. - Maximum building height. 
    Except as otherwise provided with respect to accessory structures, no building shall be over three stories above ground level or a maximum of 35 feet above ground level, whichever is less. 
(Code 2008, § 17.200(E); Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.200(E)), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-157. - Automobile storage or parking space. 
    Adequate off-street parking is required in accordance with the provisions of section 78-262. 
(Code 2008, § 17.200(F); Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.200(F)), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-158. - Lot coverage. 
    Coverage of any lot shall not exceed 40 percent. 
(Code 2008, § 17.200(G); Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.200(G)), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-159. - Fences. 
(a)  Front yard fences. 
(1)  Front yard fences on interior lots must be ornamental fences, not more than 48 inches in height above grade. Any fence other than an ornamental fence is not permitted in front yards on interior lots. 
(2)  Front yard fences on corner lots must be ornamental fences, not more than 48 inches in height above grade; provided, however, any other fence including an ornamental fence, not more than six feet in height above grade is permitted in that front yard which the principal building or structure does not face, and provided that such fence is set back from the street line no less than ten feet or one-half the distance of that front yard, whichever is greater. 
(b)  Side and rear yard fences. Side yard and rear yard fences may be either ornamental fences or any other fence, but may not exceed six feet in height above grade. 
(c)  All fences must comply with the visibility requirements contained in section 78-508(c). 
(d)  The applicant shall locate their property lines. The applicant shall be required to have a certified survey of his property if the property line is in dispute before construction can begin. 
(e)  The face of the fence with post exposed shall be turned toward and directed into the applicant's property with the straight line of the fence without post facing turned out. 
(f)  The applicant shall be required to keep all portions of the fence and post on their property. 
(Code 2008, § 17.200(H); Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.200(H)), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-160. - Yard lights. 
    With the construction of any new residence, single-family, multifamily or any other new residential construction the building permit application site plan must include a yard light. Builder shall be required to install a yard light which shall operate automatically from sunset to sunrise and be located in the front yard ten feet from the front lot line and within three feet of the driveway. All wiring for any yard light shall be buried underground a minimum depth of 24 inches in accordance with the National Electrical Code. No occupancy permit shall be issued without the required yard light installation. 
(Code 2008, § 17.200(I); Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.200(I)), 11-2-2009) 
Secs. 78-161-78-188. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - R-2 District 

Sec. 78-189. - R-2 Districts. 
    The R-2 Multiple-Family Residential District is intended to include those portions of the city developed or to be developed with apartments, one-family dwellings, nursing homes, sheltered care homes and group residential facilities. 
(Code 2008, § 17.210(intro. ¶); Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.210(intro. ¶)), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-190. - Uses permitted. 
    The following uses are permitted in the R-2 district: 
(1)  Any use permitted in an R-1 district. 
(2)  Two-family dwellings. 
(3)  Multifamily residences; sheltered care homes, nursing homes; hospitals for humans; homes for mentally retarded; subject to the restrictions herein set forth for such uses. Upon approval of the planning and zoning commission one or more of the following uses may be established clearly incidental to a multifamily residence, sheltered care home or nursing home; restaurant, office of a doctor, dental or similar practitioner in the healing arts. Other incidental uses may be approved by the planning and zoning commission. Such incidental use shall be allowed only if the primary use and benefit is for the occupants of the principal use. 
(4)  Multiple-family dwelling. Floor area requirement for one-bedroom units shall be a minimum of 700 square feet per unit, two-story multiple family dwelling units shall be 1,100 square feet subject to the approval of the planning and zoning commission and the city council. 
(5)  Roominghouses and boardinghouses where lodging is provided for compensation to three or more but not more than 20 persons. 
(6)  Funeral homes and undertaking parlors. 
(7)  Private or fraternal clubs, lodges, fraternities and sororities, except those whose chief activity is primarily a business in nature. 
(8)  Mobile home parks subject to special use regulation. 
(9)  Townhouses subject to special use regulations. 
(10)  Tourist homes. 
(11)  Dormitories. 
(12)  Day care homes which receive more than three up to a maximum of 12 children for less than 24 hours per day, as defined in the Illinois Child Care Act of 1969, as a special use. 
(13)  Group day care homes which receive more than three up to a maximum of 16 children for less than 24 hours per day, as defined in the Illinois Child Care Act of 1969, as a special use as defined in this chapter. 
(14)  Adoption-only homes which receive only children whose parents' parental rights have been terminated or surrendered, as defined in the Illinois Child Care Act of 1969, as a special use as defined in this chapter. 
(15)  Day care centers which regularly provide day care for less than 24 hours per day for more than eight children in a family home as defined in the Illinois Child Care Act of 1969, and as a special use as defined in this chapter. 
(16)  Clubs and lodges, excepting such clubs or lodges the chief activity of which is a service customarily carried on as a business or primarily for gain. In conjunction with such club or lodge a dining room may be operated provided it is incidental to the activities of said club or lodge, and is conducted for the benefit of the members thereof only, and further provided no sign is displayed advertising such activity. 
(17)  Detached two-family dwelling construction. 
(18)  Customary accessory uses and accessory structures provided such uses are incidental to the principal use and do not include any activity commonly conducted as a business. Garage sales or yard sales are allowed as an accessory use, providing that each sale lasts no more than three consecutive days and no more than three sales are conducted on the same lot during any calendar year. Furthermore, in R-2 districts, no accessory structure shall be constructed, placed, or made upon the property unless it shall comply with the following additional requirements: 
a.  Where the principal use of the property is for single-family residence or two-family residences, the requirements and restrictions hereinabove contained in this section shall apply. 
b.  Where the principal use of the property is multifamily dwellings in excess of two-family residences, the following restrictions and requirements shall apply: 
1.  The sum of the square feet of all private garages shall not exceed 300 square feet multiplied by the number of dwelling units located upon the property; provided, however, there shall be permitted one additional accessory structure, not to exceed 576 square feet. Notwithstanding any other provision of this zoning code, no business, service or industry may be carried on or conducted in any private garage or other accessory structure. 
2.  An accessory structure shall not be constructed before the principal building. The accessory structure shall not be located any closer than ten feet from any other structure or building (whether an accessory structure or the main or principal structure or building) on the property or on immediately adjacent and adjoining property. 
3.  The accessory structure shall not be located in, or project upon, the minimum required front yard, nor shall an accessory structure be located and closer than 21/2 feet from the rear lot line or 21/2 feet beginning from the rear of the house back, side lot lines of the property. 
4.  Coverage shall not exceed 60 percent. For purposes of this section, the term "coverage" means that percentage of the plot or lot area covered by building area, inclusive of the main or principal building or structure and all accessory structures, calculated from an aerial or plan view of the lot or plot. For purposes of calculating coverage, decks, porches, and breezeways shall also be included. 
5.  No accessory structure shall exceed in height the lesser of 22 feet in height or the height of the shortest main or principal structure or building located upon the property. 
(Code 2008, § 17.210(A); Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.210(A)), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-191. - Floor area ratio. 
    The floor area ratio on a lot shall not exceed 1 4/10 (140 percent). In determining the floor area ratio, the gross floor area shall include the gross floor area of all main or principal structures or buildings and the gross floor area of all accessory structures located upon the property. 
(Code 2008, § 17.210(B); Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.210(B)), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-192. - Required area and width. 
(a)  Single-family dwellings. Each single-family dwelling shall be erected on a lot having an area of not less than 7,200 square feet and having a lot width of not less than 65 feet. 
(b)  Two-family dwellings. Each two-family dwelling having common ownership shall be erected on a lot area of not less than 7,200 square feet and a width of not less than 75 feet. 
(c)  Zero lot line duplexes. Zero lot line duplexes may be severed so long as each resulting lot contains an area of not less than 5,000 square feet and a lot width of not less than 49 feet six inches and otherwise complies with this zoning code. Zero lot line duplexes are subject to special use regulations as defined in this chapter. 
(d)  Multifamily dwellings. 
(1)  Each multifamily (more than two families) dwelling containing units of 700 square feet or less shall be erected on a lot having an area of not less than 2,500 square feet per unit and a lot width of not less than 75 feet. 
(2)  Each multifamily (more than two families) dwelling containing units having more than 700 square feet shall be erected on a lot having an area of not less than 3,000 square feet per unit and a lot width of not less than 75 feet. 
(Code 2008, § 17.210(C)(1)-(4); Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.210(C)(1)-(4)), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-193. - Yards required. 
    Yards of the following minimum depths shall be provided: 
(1)  Front yard. Not less than 20 feet unless the dwelling unit is constructed in an established area on one side of the street between two intersecting streets which is improved with buildings that have observed a front yard depth of less than 20 feet. In such established districts, the front yard depth may be the same as, but not less than, the building immediately adjacent to either side of the proposed building structure. Where a lot is located at the intersection of two or more streets, there shall be a front yard on each street side of the lot, except that the buildable width of such lot shall not be reduced to less than 32 feet. No accessory building shall project beyond the front yard line on either street. 
(2)  Side yard. Each lot shall have not less than six feet from the fascia (overhang) of the building to the lot line, and the sum of the two side yards shall not be less than 12 feet. 
(3)  Side yard required for zero lot line duplexes. Only one side yard of six feet need be provided for each dwelling unit, and on a corner lot, there shall be two front yards of not less than 25 feet facing each of the streets. For zero lot line duplexes in R-2 districts, each side yard shall have not less than six feet from the fascia (overhang) of the building to the lot line, and the sum of the two side yards shall not be less than 12 feet. 
(4)  Rear yard. Each not less than 20 feet or 20 percent of the depth of the lot, whichever is greater, but in no event shall exceed 50 feet. 
(Code 2008, § 17.210(C)(4)(a); Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.210(C)(4)(a)), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-194. - Maximum building height. 
    Except as otherwise provided with respect to accessory structures, no building shall be over three stories above ground level or a maximum height of 35 feet above ground level, whichever is less. 
(Code 2008, § 17.210(C)(4)(b); Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.210(C)(4)(b)), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-195. - Automobile storage or parking space. 
    Adequate off-street parking in accordance with the provisions of section 78-510. 
(Code 2008, § 17.210(C)(4)(c); Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.210(C)(4)(c)), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-196. - Lot coverage. 
    Coverage of any lot shall not exceed 60 percent. 
(Code 2008, § 17.210(C)(4)(d); Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.210(C)(4)(d)), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-197. - Fences. 
(a)  Fences and any part of the underground support shall remain on the builder's property. 
(b)  Front yard fences. 
(1)  Front yard fences on interior lots must be ornamental fences, not more than 48 inches in height above grade. Any fence other than an ornamental fence is not permitted in front yards on interior lots. 
(2)  Front yard fences on corner lots must be ornamental fences, not more than 48 inches in height above grade; provided, however, any other fence, including an ornamental fence, not more than six feet in height above grade, is permitted in that front yard which the principal building or structure does not face, and provided that such fence is set back from the street line no less than ten feet or one-half of the distance of that front yard, whichever is greater. 
(3)  All regulations for a fence in R-1 districts shall apply. 
(c)  Side and rear yard fences. Side yard and rear yard fences may be ornamental fences or any other fence, but may not exceed six feet in height above grade. 
(d)  All fences must comply with the visibility requirements contained in section 78-508(c). 
(e)  The applicant shall locate their property lines. If the property line is undefined and any dispute over the location of said property line arises, the applicant shall be required to have a certified survey done before construction. 
(f)  The face of the fence with post exposed shall be turned toward and directed into the applicant's property with the straight line of the fence without post facing turned out. 
(g)  The applicant shall be required to keep all portions of the fence and post on their property. 
(Code 2008, § 17.210(C)(4)(e), (5)-(12); Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.210(C)(4)(e), (5)-(12)), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-198. - Additional requirements for duplexes. 
    Duplexes will conform to the following conditions: 
(1)  Each dwelling unit in an R-2 district must have a floor area of not less than 700 total square feet on one level. If two levels, there must be no less than 1,000 total square feet. The areas of garages, porches, cellars and basements shall not be included. 
(2)  Each dwelling unit in an R-2 district must have no less than 35 percent of the width of the surface on the ground floor facing the street upon which the dwelling is addressed devoted primarily to dwelling purposes (and not to or for garage purposes). The percentage of the width of the surface on the ground floor shall be determined by measuring the total surface facing the street upon which the dwelling is addressed at ground level and measuring the surface of that portion of the dwelling unit devoted primarily to dwelling purposes. 
(3)  Each dwelling unit must have separate services including water and sewer services with individual shut offs for each unit and all other utilities with separate meters. 
(4)  Each dwelling unit must otherwise meet the requirements of this zoning code, including, but not by way of limitation, lot areas, yard requirements, building heights, and accessory buildings. 
(5)  Fire-rated walls, as per the adopted International Building Code, shall be required between each dwelling unit when: 
a.  Units are attached. 
b.  Detached or semi-detached units have less than 12 feet between adjacent structures. This measurement is measured from the overhang or greatest protrusion. 
c.  When any building is constructed closer than six feet to the subdivision line of a lot designated as zero lot line. 
(6)  Each dwelling unit located on a single lot not designated as zero lot line, may have only one owner for both units. 
(7)  Each dwelling unit located on a single lot designated as zero lot line may be subdivided and owned by two separate owners when the following conditions have been met: 
a.  Each resulting lot will have a minimum of 5,000 square feet or more. The resulting lots are not required to be of equal dimensions as long as the minimum square feet are met. Example: an odd shaped lot with 12,000 square feet can be divided so one lot has 5,000 square feet minimum and the other resulting lot can have 7,000 square feet. 
b.  The lot was designated and approved as zero lot line by the planning and zoning commission. 
c.  The dwelling units meet the requirements of a zero lot as set forth in this chapter. 
(Code 2008, § 17.150; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.150), 11-2-2009; Ord. No. 11-23, § I, 12-5-2011) 
Secs. 78-199-78-219. - Reserved. 
Subdivision IV. - Planned Residential District 

Sec. 78-220. - Purpose. 
    It is the intent and purpose of the R-P Planned Residential District to encourage the total planning of large un-subdivided or undeveloped tracts, rather than lot-by-lot development. Established uses within the district, such as farming, golf course, parks, large estates or institutional uses would be permitted to continue and to be improved and expanded, it being the intent of these district regulations to provide a framework within which the conversion of such land to residential uses may be accomplished. 
(Code 2008, § 17.230(A); Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.230(A)), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-221. - Uses. 
    No building or premises shall be used and no building shall be hereafter erected or altered within any R-P Planned Residential District unless otherwise provided for in this division, except for the following uses: 
(1)  Farming, truck gardening, horticultural nurseries, but not including the raising, housing, pasturing or keeping of bees, fowl or livestock within 300 feet of a lot line. 
(2)  Parks, recreation areas, recreation buildings or operation by a unit of government; nature preserves. 
(3)  Country clubs, golf courses not conducted as a business or for profit. 
(4)  Planned unit development, which may consist of individual building sites for one or more of the following: one-family dwellings, two-family dwellings, row or town houses, garden apartments, high rise apartments; sheltered care facilities nursing homes, residential hotels; together with common property such as a park, recreation area, recreation building or facility, off-street parking areas or facilities. 
(5)  Signs subject to approval by the planning and zoning commission. 
(Code 2008, § 17.230(B); Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.230(B)), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-222. - Standards for planned unit development. 
(a)  Location. A planned unit development shall be located on a tract having a gross area of at least ten acres. 
(b)  Floor area ratio. The total area of all floors in all buildings on the tract shall not exceed 80 percent of the gross area of the tract. Open space: The total area of the open space, including streets, drives, open parking areas, open recreation areas and landscaped areas, shall be at least 85 percent times the total floor area. 
(c)  Total area of open space. The total area of the open space exclusive of that in streets, drives, and open parking areas shall be at least one-half the total floor area. 
(d)  Building height. No building shall hereafter be erected or altered to exceed 35 feet in height. 
(e)  Yards and courts. Yards and courts shall be provided to assure adequate privacy, essential uses. Yard depth shall assure adequate distances between building walls on the property and on abutting off-site properties. The size, number, and location of courts shall be determined in accordance with the procedures and standards set forth. 
(1)  Space between buildings. The minimum horizontal distance between the buildings shall be: 
a.  15 feet between clustered or "zero lot line" single-family detached buildings. 
b.  20 feet between single-family detached dwellings. 
c.  30 feet between buildings, other than single-family detached dwellings, of one or 21/2 stories in elevation. 
d.  Equal to the height of the taller building in the case of freestanding buildings greater than 21/2 stories in elevation. 
(2)  Yards. The required yards along the periphery of the planned unit development shall be at least equal in width or depth to that of the adjacent zoning district. 
a.  Buildings of more than 24 feet in height shall provide a setback from any property line of not less than equal to the height of such buildings. 
b.  Notwithstanding, yards along the external boundary of the planned unit development shall be provided as specified in single-family residential and multifamily sections of this chapter. 
(f)  Off-street parking. Off-street parking shall be provided at the rate of two spaces for each dwelling unit. 
(Code 2008, § 17.230(C)-(F); Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.230(C)-(F)), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-223. - Site plan approval. 
(a)  Site plan approval of a planned unit development shall first be obtained from the planning and zoning commission. Site plans therefor shall be submitted to the commission for its approval, modification or disapproval. Such plans shall show; lot lines; building placement and type; width of bounding streets; the location and size of all interior streets, drives, parking areas, height of buildings; landscaping; and distance between buildings; parking and such other details as deemed necessary by the planning and zoning commission to show the complete planned development. 
(b)  In its deliberation, the planning and zoning commission shall give due consideration to the probable effect the proposal would have on surrounding land uses; the adequacy of existing water and sewer utilities serving the site; the relation of the building height and mass to surrounding structures; the effect the project will have as a traffic generator on streets giving access to the site, and desirable outlook, adequate natural light and ventilation, convenient access to and around the building and may request any additional information they require to make their decision. 
(c)  The planning and zoning commission may approve the plans as submitted, may approve the plans subject to modification or may disapprove the plan. The planning and zoning commission decision in each case shall be in writing, spread upon the minutes of the commission, with copies to the applicant and the city council. 
(Code 2008, § 17.230(G); Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.230(G)), 11-2-2009) 
Secs. 78-224-78-254. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - COUNTRY ESTATES DISTRICTS 

Sec. 78-255. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the Country Estates District regulations is to provide for certain lands in the outlying areas of the city and within 1.5 miles of any corporate limit line to permit the development of low density residential subdivisions with large lots. 
(Code 2008, § 17.250; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.250), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-256. - Classification. 
    Where the topography of the land does not lend itself to conventional subdividing, it may, with the approval of the planning and zoning commission and the city council, be developed under the country estates classification. Country Estates Districts can be established to permit the development of acreage plots within the municipality and within 1.5 miles. This will permit the development of an attractive, low density type of subdivision that would be highly beneficial to the municipality. All lots must be two acres or more in size. 
(Code 2008, § 17.260; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.260), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-257. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses are permitted in the Country Estates District subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings as defined in this chapter. 
(2)  Churches or similar places of worship. 
(3)  Schools. 
(4)  Libraries, museums. 
(5)  Public parks and playgrounds. 
(6)  Existing railroad and rights-of-way. 
(7)  Nurseries, truck gardening, and raising of farm crops but not raising of poultry, pets, or livestock; and provided that no building shall be erected or maintained on the property for purpose of selling products grown and raised. Horses and ponies are permitted in this district only as an accessory use on an individual one-family dwelling lot and for the pleasure of the occupants of the dwelling and their bona fide guests, and not for hire. A stable, as a principal use, for the housing of horses or ponies only of the occupants of the country estate subdivision of which it is a part, may be approved as part of the subdivision if such community facility is deemed appropriate, in which case, individual accessory stables on one-family dwelling lots shall not be permitted. 
(8)  Lakes. 
(9)  Other customary accessory uses and buildings, provided such uses are additional to the principal use and do not include any activity commonly conducted as a business. An accessory building shall not be constructed before the principal building, and shall be located on the same lot with the principal building and no nearer than ten feet to any part thereof; provided that no part of any accessory building may be used for residential purposes, except that domestic employees of the owners, lessee, or occupants of the principal building, and the family of such employee may have quarters in such accessory building. No accessory building shall exceed 22 feet in height. There shall be no occupancy of this premises until the permanent residence is built. 
(10)  Unlighted golf courses. 
(11)  Boats, campers, trucks, and other recreational vehicles shall be housed in a building. 
(Code 2008, § 17.270; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.270), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-258. - Floor area ratio. 
    Any building used as a residence shall have a minimum height of nine feet above the front grade level and shall contain at least 700 square feet if on one level and 1,000 square feet if on two levels of livable area, excluding the basement. Floor area shall not exceed five percent of the lot area for the residence. 
(Code 2008, § 17.280; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.280), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-259. - Required lot area. 
(a)  Each dwelling shall be located on a lot having an area of not less than two acres and width of not less than 200 feet at setback line. 
(b)  All lots as defined in this chapter as a flag lot shall have a minimum of 30 feet of street frontage. 
(1)  A flag lot is defined as a lot where the main or principal building area of the lot does not abut or adjoin a public street but is connected to such public street by a narrow strip of land which is part of the lot. 
(2)  Such lots contain a minimum area of at least 21/2 acres excluding the area of the narrow strip of land connecting the main or principal use area, or the building area, to the public street. 
(3)  Such lots provide for a minimum width at the public street of 30 feet, which minimum width shall be maintained from the public street to the main or principal use area, or building area, of such lot and shall not be a part of an easement, right-of-way or shared street access. 
(4)  All residential lots as defined in this chapter other than lots defined as a flag lot shall have a minimum of 120 feet of street frontage. 
(Code 2008, § 17.290; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.290), 11-2-2009; Ord. No. 13-04, § I, 3-18-2013) 
Sec. 78-260. - Yards required. 
    Yards of the following minimum depths shall be provided: 
(1)  Front yard shall be not less than 80 feet from the right-of-way line or 110 feet from the street centerline, when no right-of-way line exists. Where the lot is located at the intersection of two or more streets, there shall be a front yard on each side of the lot. No accessory building shall project beyond the front line of either street. 
(2)  Side yards shall each be not less than 25 feet. 
(3)  Rear yards shall each be not less than 50 feet. 
(4)  No chainlink or wire front yard fences will be permitted. No fences will be permitted in side yards or rear yards over six feet in height. 
(Code 2008, § 17.300; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.300), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-261. - Maximum building height. 
    Except as otherwise provided with respect to accessory structures, no building shall be over three stories above ground level or a maximum height of 35 feet above ground level, whichever is lesser. 
(Code 2008, § 17.310; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.310), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-262. - Off-street parking. 
(a)  Adequate off-street parking shall be provided for all vehicles owned or used. 
(b)  All country estates shall be required to meet the regulations for construction of country estates as defined in the city subdivision code. Any definition or specification in conflict with this section shall be superseded by this section effective with the passage and approval of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(Code 2008, § 17.320; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.320), 11-2-2009) 
Secs. 78-263-78-287. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 78-288. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the Commercial Districts is to accommodate businesses by the grouping of compatible businesses in areas well located to serve the needs of the individual businesses and those of the community; and also to create convenience to the public, by minimizing traffic congestion, discouraging unsightly and inefficient business development, and promoting business prosperity and shopping convenience. 
(Code 2008, § 17.330; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.330), 11-2-2009) 
Secs. 78-289-78-309. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - B-1 Central Business District 

Sec. 78-310. - B-1 districts. 
    Local retail districts are designed for the convenience shopping of those people residing in the adjacent neighborhood residential areas; and to permit only such uses as are necessary to satisfy these limited basic shopping needs which occur daily or frequently, thus requiring shopping facilities close to residences. 
(Code 2008, § 17.340(intro. ¶); Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.340(intro. ¶)), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-311. - Uses permitted. 
(a)  The following uses are permitted in the B-1 district: 
(1)  Dwelling units and lodging rooms, provided that they are not located on the ground floor of buildings, nor on the same floor as a business use. 
(2)  Additional uses as follows: 
Apartments, when ancillary to a business use. 
Bakeries. 
Banks. 
Barbershops. 
Beauty parlors. 
Battery stations, tire repair shops and gasoline service stations. 
Bus stations. 
Dairies. 
Home, regional, district, and branch offices of manufacturing, commercial, service, and industrial companies and corporations where only executive, administrative, and clerical functions are performed. 
Hotels and motels. 
Stores for the collection and distribution of laundry and dry cleaning articles, but not for treatment, cleaning or processing of such articles, unless with nonflammable liquids. 
Libraries and reading rooms. 
Medical and dental clinics, excluding hospitals and animal clinics. 
Municipal, state, or federal administrative or service buildings. 
Museums. 
Offices of doctors, dentists, optometrists, lawyers, architects, engineers, and similar professions. 
Offices for educational, fraternal, professional, and religious organizations. 
Photograph and art studios. 
Printing and publishing establishments. 
Public buildings, libraries, fire stations, police stations and post offices but no schools. 
Public garages. 
Recreation. 
Real estate and insurance company offices. 
Restaurants. 
Shops for electrical work, plumbing, steam fitting, tinsmiths, lock smithing, painting, decorating and upholstering. 
Stores, shops, showrooms and salesrooms for the conduct of retail business. 
Tailor, millinery and dressmaking shops. 
Theaters. 
Temporary buildings for construction purposes for a period not to exceed the duration of such construction. 
Professional offices. 
(b)  Any use not so specified shall be determined on a case by case basis by the planning and zoning commission. 
(Code 2008, § 17.340(A); Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.340(A)), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-312. - Special uses. 
    The following use is permitted as a special use when recommended by the planning and zoning commission after a public hearing and authorized by the city council. 
(1)  Electric or telephone substations and other governmental and utility service uses. 
(2)  Day care centers which regularly provide day care for less than 24 hours per day for more than three children in a facility other than a family home, as defined in the Illinois Child Care Act of 1969. 
(3)  Churches and other religious organizations. 
(Code 2008, § 17.340(B); Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.340(B)), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-313. - Floor area ratio. 
    The numerical value obtained by dividing the gross floor area of a building or buildings by the total area of the lot or parcel of land on which such building or buildings are located. The floor area ratio shall not exceed eight-tenths (80 percent). 
(Code 2008, § 17.340(C); Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.340(C)), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-314. - Required lot area. 
    The net land area for each business establishment shall not be less than 5,000 square feet. 
(Code 2008, § 17.340(D); Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.340(D)), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-315. - Yards required. 
(a)  Front yard. There shall be no front yard required. 
(b)  Side yard. There is no side yard required, but if provided, a side yard shall be no less than three feet in width. There shall be provided a side yard along any lot line which adjoins a residential district; it shall be not less than ten feet in width. 
(c)  Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard not less than ten feet in depth but the rear yard need not exceed the ten feet in depth; however, when a rear lot line abuts an alley, one-half the width of such alley may be counted toward satisfaction of the rear yard requirement. 
(Code 2008, § 17.340(E); Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.340(E)), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-316. - Maximum building height. 
    No building shall be over three stories above ground level or a maximum height of 35 feet above ground level, whichever is lesser. Ground level shall be determined by street grade/elevation. 
(Code 2008, § 17.340(F); Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.340(F)), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-317. - Automobile storage or parking space. 
    Adequate off-street parking and loading in accordance with the provisions of section 78-510. 
(Code 2008, § 17.340(G); Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.340(G)), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-318. - Required conditions. 
(a)  All bank complexes, business, service, repair or processing, storage, or merchandise display shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed building except for off-street automobile parking and off-street loading. Off-street staging/loading areas shall allow for five cars within the property boundaries. 
(b)  Not more than six persons including owners or managers shall be engaged at any time in fabricating, repairing, or other processing of goods in any establishment. 
(Code 2008, § 17.340(H); Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.340(H)), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-319. - Permanent outdoor seating. 
    Tables, chairs, benches and umbrellas or other forms of permanent seating shall be permitted upon sidewalks and within municipal rights-of-way within any B-1 Central Business District upon compliance with the following list of requirements and upon the approval of an application for a building permit by the city. Such temporary fixtures shall be permitted between May 1 and November 1 upon approval by the city with the following requirements. 
(1)  Applicant shall file an application for a building permit with the city and receive approval by the zoning administrator prior to such use. 
(2)  Applicant shall provide upon approval of said permit, and annually thereafter, a certificate of insurance listing the city as additional insured on the applicant's liability insurance policy in the minimum amount of $1,000,000.00 per occurrence. 
(3)  No permitted device or fixture shall extend farther than four feet from an existing building, except umbrellas that comply with subsection (4) of this section. 
(4)  Umbrellas, if the subject of this permit, shall maintain a minimum height above the ground surface of six feet eight inches. 
(5)  Owner shall maintain all fixtures or devices in good condition and shall be responsible at all times for any fixture or related device placed on said sidewalk or right-of-way. 
(6)  The minimum width remaining for pedestrian walkway after installation of such devices or fixtures shall be five feet. 
(7)  The violation of any of the above provisions shall be reason for revocation of said permit by the zoning administrator. 
(Code 2008, § 17.340(I); Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.340(I)), 11-2-2009) 
Secs. 78-320-78-341. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - B-2 General Retail District 

Sec. 78-342. - B-2 Districts. 
    General retail districts are designed to cater to the needs of a larger consumer population than served by the local retail district and so are mapped typically in major shopping center locations characterized by large establishments generating larger volumes of vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
(Code 2008, § 17.350(intro. ¶); Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.350(intro. ¶)), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-343. - Uses permitted. 
    The following uses are permitted in the B-2 district: 
(1)  Any use permitted in B-1 districts. 
(2)  Business uses may be conducted above the ground floor, but not on the same floor as residential uses. 
(3)  Additional uses are as follows: 
Antique shops. 
Apparel shops. 
Appliance stores, sales and repair. 
Arcades and video game rooms. 
Art and school supply stores. 
Art galleries. 
Automobile detailing and customizing shops, provided there is no body repair or painting performed on the premises. 
Automobile parts and accessories stores. 
Automobile service stations. 
Banks and financial institutions. 
Bicycle sales, rental and repairs. 
Blue printing and photocopying establishments. 
Book and stationery stores. 
Bowling alleys and structures accommodating recreational activities. 
Cab stands. 
Camera and photographic supply stores. 
Candy and ice cream stores or shops selling similar commodities where the commodities may be produced on the premises; but all such production shall be either sold at retail on the premises or sold in stores or other means owned and operated by the producing company. 
Carpet and rug stores. 
Car washes. 
Catering establishments. 
China and glassware stores. 
Clothing and equipment rentals. 
Coffee houses. 
Coin and philatelic stores. 
Convenience stores. 
Currency exchanges. 
Day care centers which regularly provide day care for less than 24 hours per day for more than three children in a facility other than a family home, as defined in the Illinois Child Care Act of 1969. 
Department stores. 
Drive-in type food and beverage sales. 
Drug stores. 
Dry cleaning and laundry receiving stations; processing to be done elsewhere. 
Electronics and communications stores. 
Employment agencies. 
Florists. 
Food stores, grocery stores, meat markets, bakeries, delicatessens, and package liquor stores. 
Funeral homes and mortuaries. 
Furniture stores, including upholstery. 
Furrier shops, including the incidental storage and conditioning of furs. 
Garden supply and feed stores. 
Gas stations. 
Gift shops. 
Hardware and houseware stores. 
Health and exercise clubs, gymnasiums, physical culture and health service reducing and tanning salons and masseurs. 
Hobby shops. 
Hotels and motels. 
Hospitals, monasteries, nunneries, religious retreats, homes for aged, orphanages, and institutions of an educational, charitable, or philanthropic nature. 
Interior decorating shops, including upholstery and making of draperies, slip covers, and other similar articles. 
Jewelry store, including repair. 
Laundries, automatic self-serve. 
Leather goods and luggage stores. 
Live bait. 
Loan offices. 
Locksmith shops. 
Monument sales. 
Musical instruments, sales and repairs. 
Newspaper offices. 
Office supply stores. 
Oil change and lubrication facilities. 
Orthopedic and medical appliance stores, but not including the assembly or manufacture of such articles. 
Paint and wallpaper stores. 
Pawn shops. 
Pet shops. 
Photography studios, including the developing of film and pictures. 
Post offices. 
Public meeting halls. 
Restaurants. 
Restricted production and repair, limited to the following: art, needlework, clothing, custom manufacturing and alterations for retail only, jewelry from precious metals, watches, dentures, and optical lenses. 
Sales and display rooms. 
Schools: music, dance, or business. 
Service: cleaning or repair shops for personal, household, or garden equipment. 
Sewing machine sales and service. 
Shoe and hat repair. 
Shoe stores. 
Skating rinks, indoor. 
Sporting goods stores. 
Tailor or dressmaking shops. 
Tea rooms. 
Temporary building for construction purposes for a period not to exceed the duration of such construction. 
Temporary outdoor demonstrations and exhibitions of merchandise primarily for outdoor use. 
Temporary outdoor food vending and produce markets. 
Theaters (not outdoor). 
Tobacco shops. 
Toy shops. 
Travel bureaus and transportation ticket offices. 
Typewriter and business machines sales and service. 
Upholstery shops. 
Variety stores. 
Video and equipment sales and rental. 
Any use not specified will require a special use permit. 
(4)  All uses permitted in the B-2 district, including storage, must be conducted within an enclosed structure, with the exception of accessory outside sales or display of retail merchandise, provided that such accessory use does not violate parking, lot coverage, or other code regulations, and does not occupy a corner sight triangle or in any way create a public safety hazard. 
(Code 2008, § 17.350(A); Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.350(A)), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-344. - Special uses. 
    The following uses are permitted as special uses when authorized by the city council after a public hearing and recommendation by the planning and zoning commission. 
(1)  Those special uses permitted in a B-1 district. 
(2)  Bus depots. 
(3)  Clubs and lodges: private, fraternal, or religious. 
(4)  Golf courses, miniature golf courses, and driving ranges. 
(5)  Inside mini-warehousing and storage. 
(6)  Machinery, equipment and vehicle rental. 
(7)  Skating rinks and parks, outdoor. 
(Code 2008, § 17.350(B); Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.350(B)), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-345. - Floor area ratio. 
    The numerical value obtained by dividing the gross floor area of buildings by the total area of the lot or parcel of land on which such buildings are located. Floor area ratio shall not exceed 90 percent. 
(Code 2008, § 17.350(C); Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.350(C)), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-346. - Required area. 
    Regulations governing lot area in B-1 districts shall apply. 
(Code 2008, § 17.350(D); Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.350(D)), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-347. - Required yards. 
(a)  Front yard. There shall be provided on every lot a front yard not less than 20 feet in depth. 
(b)  Side yard. Side yard of at least six feet is required and there shall be provided a side yard along any lot line which adjoins a residence district; it shall be not less than ten feet in width. 
(c)  Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard not less than ten feet in depth; however, when a rear lot line abuts an alley, one-half the width of such alley may be counted toward satisfaction of the rear yard requirement. 
(Code 2008, § 17.350(E); Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.350(E)), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-348. - Maximum building height. 
    No building shall exceed a height of 35 feet above ground level, except as hereinafter provided in subsections (1) and (2) of this section. The term "above ground level" means the actual height of the building measured from the sidewalk level, or equivalent established grade, to the highest part of the building, specifically excluding from those exceptions contained in section 78-708. 
(1)  The maximum height of a building above ground level may be exceeded where the lot upon which the building is located or to be constructed provides for one foot of additional building setback, on the front, side and rear yards, for each additional foot of height above ground level of the building; provided, however, the height of the building above grade level may in no instance exceed 60 feet. 
(2)  Any building or structure that exceeds 35 feet in height shall provide a hard surface fire access road or lane located in close proximity to the building or structure, which fire access road or lane shall be of sufficient width to allow for access and staging of emergency vehicles thereon. 
(Code 2008, § 17.350(G)(1), (2); Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.350(G)(1), (2)), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-349. - Automobile storage or parking space. 
    There shall be adequate off-street parking and loading provisions in accordance with section 78-510. 
(Code 2008, § 17.350(G)(3); Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.350(G)(3)), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-350. - Permanent outdoor seating. 
    Tables, chairs, benches and umbrellas or other forms of permanent seating shall be permitted upon sidewalks and within municipal rights-of-way within any B-2 General Retail District upon compliance with the following list of requirements and upon the approval of an application for a building permit by the city. Such temporary fixtures shall be permitted between May 1 and November 1 upon approval by the city with the following requirements. 
(1)  Applicant shall file an application for a building permit with the city and receive approval by the zoning administrator prior to such use. 
(2)  Applicant shall provide upon approval of said permit, and annually thereafter, a certificate of insurance listing the city as additional insured on the applicant's liability insurance policy in the minimum amount of $1,000,000.00 per occurrence. 
(3)  No permitted device or fixture shall extend farther than four feet from an existing building, except umbrellas that comply with subsection (4) of this section. 
(4)  Umbrellas, if the subject of this permit, shall maintain a minimum height above the ground surface of six feet eight inches. 
(5)  Owner shall maintain all fixtures or devices in good condition and shall be responsible at all times for any fixture or related device placed on said sidewalk or right-of-way. 
(6)  The minimum width remaining for pedestrian walkway after installation of such devices or fixtures shall be five feet. 
(7)  The violation of any of the above provisions shall be reason for revocation of said permit by the zoning administrator. 
(Code 2008, § 17.340(I); Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.340(I)), 11-2-2009) 
Secs. 78-351-78-373. - Reserved. 
Subdivision IV. - Special Use 

Sec. 78-374. - Special use; additional uses by approval. 
    Special use is designed primarily to furnish areas served by general retail districts with necessary services and goods not allowed in general retail districts because they are incompatible with the uses permitted in the general retail districts. 
(1)  Special uses allowed by approval. 
a.  Any use permitted in B-1 and B-2 districts. 
b.  Additional uses shall be the following: 
Artisans in ceramics and nonferrous metals. 
Animal hospitals and veterinary clinics without outside kennels. 
Auction rooms. 
Boat sales. 
Building material establishments, dimension lumber, millwork, cabinets and other building materials; provided that no milling, planing, jointing, or manufacturing of millwork shall be conducted on the premises. 
Bus depots. 
Cartage and express facilities providing storage of goods, motor trucks, and other equipment, if in enclosed structures. 
Caskets and casket supplies. 
Clubs and lodges: private, fraternal or religious. 
Contractors or construction offices and shops such as building, concrete, electrical, masonry, painting, plumbing, refrigeration, and roofing. 
Dry cleaning and laundry establishments, commercial. 
Exterminating shops. 
Garages, public, for storage, repair, and servicing of automobiles, and trucks, including body repair and painting, but not including auto wrecking yards. 
Greenhouses or nurseries. 
Garden supply and feed stores. 
Ice storage. 
Laboratories, medical and dental research and testing. 
Machinery sales, including farm machinery sales. 
Machinery, equipment, and vehicle rental. 
Mail order houses. 
Meat markets, including the sale of meats and meat products to restaurants, hotels, clubs, or other similar establishments. 
Meat processing without slaughtering and food lockers. 
Miniature golf courses. 
Motorcycle sales and service. 
Motor vehicle and equipment sales and service. 
Open sales lots. 
Orthopedic and medical appliance stores, but not including the assembly or manufacture of such articles. 
Packaging and crating. 
Printing and publishing establishments. 
Public garages, including new and used car sales rooms. 
Recording studios and radio stations. 
Research laboratories. 
Sheet metal shops. 
Storage and warehousing, and wholesale establishments. 
Trailer sales. 
Any use not listed will require a special use permit. 
(2)  Special uses. The following uses are permitted as special uses when authorized by the city council after a public hearing and recommendation by the planning and zoning commission. 
a.  Those special uses permitted in B-1 and B-2 districts. 
b.  Drive-in theaters. 
c.  Electric and telephone substations and other governmental and utility service uses. 
d.  Light assembling and packaging of materials, goods and products provided entirely within enclosed buildings. 
e.  Mobile homes and trailer courts provided that the water and sanitary facilities furnished conform to the requirements of the state health department. 
f.  Outdoor recreation and amusement establishments, including shooting ranges, motorized racing tracks, and mechanical rides. 
(3)  Floor area ratio. Floor area ratios shall not exceed 90 percent. 
(4)  Required area. Regulations governing lot area in B-1 districts shall apply. 
(5)  Required yards. 
a.  Front yard. None. 
b.  Side yard. There shall be provided a side yard along any side lot line which adjoins a residence district; its width shall not be less than ten feet and it shall not contain off-street parking and loading facilities. 
c.  Rear yard. Regulations governing rear yard requirements in B-1 districts shall apply, except that where the rear yard adjoins another business property and where loading and unloading space is located elsewhere on the property, and where the building is not more than one story in height the rear yard may be reduced five feet. 
(6)  Off-street parking and loading. There shall be adequate off-street parking and loading provisions in accordance with this chapter. 
(7)  Maximum building height. No building shall exceed a height of 35 feet above ground level, except as hereinafter provided in subsections (7)a and b of this section. The term "above ground level" shall mean the actual height of the building measured from the sidewalk level, or equivalent established grade, to the highest part of the building, specifically excluded from those exceptions contained in section 78-510. 
a.  The maximum height of a building above ground level may be exceeded where the lot upon which the building is located or to be constructed provides in the final plat thereof for one foot of additional building setback, on the front, side and rear yards, for each additional foot of height above ground level of the building; provided, however, the height of the building above grade level may in no instance exceed 100 feet. 
b.  Any building or structure that exceeds 35 feet in height shall provide a hard surface fire access road or lane located in close proximity to the building or structure, which fire access road or lane shall be of sufficient width to allow for access and staging of emergency vehicles thereon. 
(Code 2008, § 17.360; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.360), 11-2-2009) 
Secs. 78-375-78-391. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 78-392. - Purpose. 
(a)  The manufacturing districts set forth in this chapter are established to protect public health, safety, comfort, convenience, and the general welfare and to protect the economic base of the city, as well as the value of real estate, by regulating manufacturing development in appropriate locations. These general objectives include, among others, the following specific objectives: 
(1)  To protect established residential areas and the health of families living therein, by restricting those nearby manufacturing activities which may create offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat, glare, fire hazards, and other objectionable influences to those areas which are appropriate therefor. 
(2)  To provide adequate space in appropriate locations for most types of manufacturing and related activities so that the economic structure of the community may be strengthened; and that employment opportunities may be found in the interest of public prosperity and welfare. 
(3)  To provide more space for manufacturing activities in locations accessible to railways and highways, so that the movement of raw materials, finished products and employees can be carried on efficiently and with a minimum of danger to public life and property. 
(4)  To establish proper standards of performance which will restrict obnoxious manufacturing activities, while at the same time encourage and permit the manufacturing activities which have adopted facilities for the processing of finished products without adversely affecting the health, happiness, safety, convenience, and welfare of the people living and working in nearby areas. 
(5)  To protect manufacturing districts from incompatible uses of land by prohibiting the use of such space for nonresidential development, thereby preserving the land for a more appropriate use in accordance with the plans for city improvement and development. 
(6)  To promote the most desirable use of land in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan of the city, to conserve the use of property, to promote stability of manufacturing activities and related development, and to protect the character and established development in each area of the community; to enhance and stabilize the value of land and to protect the tax base of the city. 
(b)  Any restriction not covered under this section shall meet the requirements governed by the state regulatory code. 
(Code 2008, § 17.370; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.370), 11-2-2009) 
Secs. 78-393-78-412. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Performance Standards 

Sec. 78-413. - Noise. 
(a)  Application of noise performance standards. Any use established in an industrial district shall be so operated as to comply with the performance standards governing noise set forth hereinafter for the district in which such use shall be located. No use already established on the effective date of this section shall be so altered or modified as to conflict with or further conflict with the performance standards governing noise established hereinafter for the district in which such use is located. Objectionable sounds of an intermittent nature shall be controlled so as not to become a nuisance to adjacent use. All uses, existing or proposed, shall be operated in conformance with the applicable requirements embodied in the regulations of the Illinois Administrative Code, Title 35 - Environmental Protection, Subtitle H - Noise Pollution, as amended from time to time. Complaints to sound/noise shall be referred to as noise defined under the state regulatory code. 
(b)  Method of measurements of noise level. Sound measured with a sound level meter and associated octave band filter, manufactured in compliance with standards described by the American Standards Association. Measurement shall be made using the flat network of the sound level meter. Impulsive type noises shall be subject to the performance standards hereinafter prescribed provided that such noises shall be capable of being accurately measured with such equipment. Noises capable of being so measured shall be those noises which cause rapid fluctuations of the needle of the sound level meter with a variation of no more than plus or minus two decibels. Noises incapable of being so measured, such as those of an irregular and intermittent nature, shall be controlled so as not to become a nuisance to adjacent uses. 
(c)  Limitations on noise levels; noise in I district . At no point on the boundary of a residence or business district shall the sound intensity level of any individual operation or plant (other than the operation of motor vehicles or other transportation facilities) exceed the decibel levels in the designated octave bands shown in Table 1 set forth hereinafter for districts indicated: 
Octave Band Cycles
Per Second All Residential
Districts Sound Level in Decibels
B1, B2 37.5 to 75 58 73 75.5 to 150 54 69 150 to 300 50 65 300 to 600 46 61 600 to 1,200 40 55 1,200 to 2,400 33 48 2,400 to 4,800 26 41 Over 4,800 20 35  
(d)  Method of measurement. Measurement is to be made at the nearest boundary of the nearest residential area or at any other point along the boundary where the level is higher. The sound levels shall be measured with a sound level meter and associated octave band filter as prescribed by the American Standards Association. 
(Code 2008, § 17.380(A); Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.380(A)), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-414. - Smoke and particulate matter. 
(a)  In addition to the performance standards specified hereinafter, the emission of smoke or particulate matter in such a manner or quantity as to be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, comfort, or welfare is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall henceforth be unlawful. All uses, existing or proposed, shall be operated in conformance with the applicable requirements embodied in the regulations of the Illinois Administrative Code, Title 35 - Environmental Protection, Subtitle B - Air Pollution, section 212 and/or most current and applicable code. 
(b)  The emission from all sources within any lot area during any one-hour period of particulate matter containing more than ten percent by weight of particles having a particle size larger than 44 microns is prohibited. 
(c)  Dust and other types of air pollution borne by the wind from such sources as storage areas, yards, streets, and so forth within lot lines shall be kept to a minimum by appropriate landscaping, or other acceptable means. 
(d)  For the purpose of grading the density of smoke, the Ringlemann Chart currently published and used by the United States Bureau of Mines shall be employed. The emission of smoke particulate matter of density equal to or greater than #3 on the Ringelmann Chart is prohibited at all times except as otherwise provided hereinafter. 
(e)  The location within lot lines of smoke stacks shall be determined as follows: 
(1)  Where total emission per use, the number of stacks being optional is up to 15 smoke units per hour, the following standards apply: 
a.  Smoke stack setback from lot lines on all sides. 
b.  Where the lot abuts a highway as designated on the zoning map the setback line shall be at least 100 feet from the nearest right-of-way. 
(2)  Where the lot abuts a major street as designated on the zoning map, the setback line shall be at least 60 feet from the nearest right-of-way line, except as provided in subsection (e)(4) of this section. 
(3)  Where the lot abuts a minor street as designated on the zoning map, the setback line shall be at least 50 feet from the nearest right-of-way line, except as provided in subsection (e)(4) of this section. 
(4)  Where the lot abuts a street with a right-of-way width of less than 70 feet, the setback line shall be at least 85 feet from the centerline of such right-of-way. 
(5)  Where the lot abuts a stormwater or floodwater channel or basin, the setback line shall be at least 50 feet from the nearest shoreline or floodwater line. 
(f)  During a one-hour period in each 24-hour period, each stack may emit up to 30 smoke units when blowing soot or cleaning fires with no more than eight minutes of smoke density of Ringelmann #2. Only during such fire cleaning periods shall smoke of a density of Ringelmann #3 be permitted, and then not for a period in excess of four minutes. Where total smoke emission per use, the number of stacks being optional is 16 to 30 smoke units per hour, the following standards apply: 
(1)  Smoke stack setback from lot lines on all sides 250 feet. 
(2)  During one-hour period in each 24-hour period each stack may emit up to 45 smoke units when blowing soot or cleaning fires with no more than eight minutes of smoke of density of Ringelmann #2. Only during such fire cleaning periods shall smoke of a density of Ringlemann #3 be permitted and then not for a period in excess of four minutes. 
(Code 2008, § 17.380(B); Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.380(B)), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-415. - Toxic or noxious matter. 
    Any use established in an industrial district shall be so operated as to comply with the performance standards governing emission of toxic or noxious matter set forth hereinafter. No use shall for any period of time discharge across the boundaries of the lot to the surface water, soil groundwater, or air of the lot wherein it is located, toxic or noxious matter in such concentrations as to be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, comfort, welfare, or cause injury or damage to property or business. 
(Code 2008, § 17.380(C); Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.380(C)), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-416. - Odors. 
(a)  Any use established in an industrial district shall be operated as to comply with the performance standards governing odorous materials set forth hereinafter. No use already established on the effective date of this section shall be so altered or modified as to conflict with, or further conflict with, the performance standards governing odorous materials established hereinafter. 
(b)  In all industrial districts, the emission of odorous matter in such quantities as to produce nuisance or hazard beyond lot lines is prohibited. In determining such offensive odors, Table III (Odor Thresholds) in chapter 5 of the Air Pollution Abatement Manual (copyright 1951) by Manufacturing Chemists Assoc., Inc., Washington, D.C., shall serve as a guide and/or most current and applicable codes. All uses shall be operated in conformance with the applicable requirements embodied in the regulations of the Illinois Administrative Code, Title 35 - Environmental Protection, Subtitle B - Air Pollution, section 245. 
(Code 2008, § 17.380(D); Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.380(D)), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-417. - Fire and explosion hazards. 
(a)  The storage, use, or manufacture of solid materials or products ranging from incombustible to moderate burning is permitted. 
(b)  The storage, use, or manufacture of solid materials or products ranging from free to active burning, to intense burning is permitted; provided the said materials shall be stored, used, or manufactured within completely enclosed buildings having incombustible exterior walls, and protected throughout by an effective automatic fire extinguishing system; or said materials may be stored outdoors with at least 50-foot clearance from all lot lines. 
(c)  The storage, use, or manufacture of flammable liquids or materials which produce flammable or explosive vapors or gases, shall be permitted in accordance with the regulations of the state fire marshal. 
(Code 2008, § 17.380(E); Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.380(E)), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-418. - Vibration limitations. 
    Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, any use permitted in this district creating intense earth-shaking vibrations such as are created by heavy drop forges, shall be set back at least 500 feet from the lot lines of such use on all sides. 
(Code 2008, § 17.380(F); Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.380(F)), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-419. - Glare and heat. 
    Any operation producing intense glare or heat shall be performed within an enclosed building or behind a solid fence or wall, in such a manner as to be undetectable without instruments from any point along lot lines. 
(Code 2008, § 17.380(G); Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.380(G)), 11-2-2009) 
Secs. 78-420-78-436. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - I-1 Light Industrial District 

Sec. 78-437. - Uses permitted. 
    The following uses are permitted in I-1 districts: 
(1)  Light manufacturing, fabricating, assembling, packaging, repairing, servicing, and processing of material, goods and products provided entirely within enclosed buildings. 
(2)  Animal hospitals, veterinary clinics, and pounds with outside kennels. 
(3)  Bottling works, steam laundries, dry cleaning plants, blacksmith shops. 
(4)  Dog kennels. 
(5)  Lumber, wood, feed, or other similar storage yards. 
(Code 2008, § 17.390(A); Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.390(A)), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-438. - Special use. 
    The following uses are permitted as special uses in I-1 districts when authorized by the city council after a public hearing and recommendation by the planning and zoning commission: 
(1)  Any use not listed above which is permitted in B-1 and B-2 districts. 
(2)  Bulk storage, sale, and distribution of flammable liquids, fats, or oils in tanks. 
(3)  Bus or truck garage, yards, docks, terminals and transfer points. 
(4)  Day care facilities, subject to such restrictions, requirements, and limitations as may be deemed proper under the circumstances. 
(Code 2008, § 17.390(B); Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.390(B)), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-439. - Floor area ratio. 
    In I-1 districts, the floor area ratio on a lot shall not exceed 90 percent. 
(Code 2008, § 17.390(C); Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.390(C)), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-440. - Yards required. 
    In I-1 districts, yards of the following minimum depths shall be provided: 
(1)  Front yards shall be not less than 25 feet. 
(2)  Side yards shall be not less than ten feet. 
(3)  Rear yard shall be not less than 25 feet. 
(4)  When adjoining a residence district, any side or rear yard shall not be less than 25 feet and a solid wall or solid fence shall be provided along the property line. Such fences or walls shall be uniformly painted, and in no case shall be less than six feet high or more than seven feet high. 
(Code 2008, § 17.390(D); Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.390(D)), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-441. - Maximum building height. 
    In I-1 districts, no building shall exceed a height of 80 feet above ground level, except as hereinafter provided in subsections (1) and (2) of this section. The term "above ground level" means the actual height of the building measured from the sidewalk level, or equivalent established grade, to the highest part of the building, specifically excluded from those exceptions contained in section 78-511. 
(1)  The maximum height of a building above ground level may be exceeded where the lot upon which the building is located or to be constructed provides in the final plat thereof for one foot of additional building setback, on the front, side and rear yards, for each additional foot of height above ground level of the building; provided, however, the height of the building above grade level may in no instance exceed 100 feet. 
(2)  Any building or structure that exceeds 35 feet in height shall provide a hard surface fire access road or lane located in close proximity to the building or structure, which fire access road or lane shall be of sufficient width to allow for access and staging of emergency vehicles thereon. 
(Code 2008, § 17.390(E); Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.390(E)), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-442. - Automobile storage or parking space. 
    In I-1 districts, adequate off-street parking in accordance with the provisions of section 78-510. 
(Code 2008, § 17.390(F); Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.390(F)), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-443. - Accessory uses permitted. 
    Outside storage of raw materials, work in process inventory, finished goods inventory, and supplies is a permitted use accessory to the main use of the property; provided, however, that such outside storage shall be limited and conditioned as follows: Such outside storage must be limited to an area no greater in size than the floor area of the first floor of the enclosed buildings on the parcel. 
(Code 2008, § 17.390(G); Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.390(G)), 11-2-2009) 
Secs. 78-444-78-469. - Reserved. 
Subdivision IV. - I-2 Heavy Industrial District 

Sec. 78-470. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  The uses permitted in the I-2 district generally include those manufacturing and industrial activities which cannot be operated economically without creating some conditions which may be objectionable or obnoxious to the occupants of adjoining properties and for that reason must be grouped in areas where similar industrial uses are located, or where permitted uses will be best located in accordance with the comprehensive plan of the city, which is designed to protect the welfare of the community. Therefore, the following uses are hereby permitted, provided that full compliance with the performance standards hereinafter set forth shall be established and constantly maintained, and provided further that all such uses shall be on a minimum lot size of one acre. 
(b)  Manufacturing, fabricating, assembly, and processing of materials, articles, and products which are prohibited in I-1 district but which are not prohibited by the performance standards herein established for I-2 district, and which are not otherwise prohibited or restricted. 
(1)  All uses in I-1 district as a special use, except no residential use shall be permitted in I-2 district. 
(2)  Any manufacturing, processing, and treatment of materials and goods and products which require the use of large quantities of water, produce large quantities of waste material of which involve the disposal, into public sewers or otherwise of any quantities of toxic, noxious, corrosive, or explosive substances. 
(3)  Incinerators for household waste disposal. 
(4)  Manufacturing, processing, and bulk storage of noxious, toxic, corrosive, and explosive solid, liquid, or gaseous chemicals, including fireworks manufacturing. 
(5)  Extraction and processing of mineral products including ore, stone, sand, gravel, clay, topsoil, cement, lime, plaster, asbestos, fertilizer, and abrasives. 
(6)  Lumber mills, sawmills, plain mills, and flour or grain mills. 
(7)  Manufacturing and processing of coal, petroleum, tar and asphalt products, including coke, illuminating gas, linoleum oilcloth, roofing material, and asphalt tile. 
(8)  Ore smelters, foundries, blast and open hearth furnaces, Bessemer converters, metal ingot, plate, tube, and wire and strip mills. 
(9)  Processing of animal and vegetable products such as tanneries, distilleries, breweries, slaughterhouses, rendering plants, glue, soap, paint and varnish manufacturers, wool and textile scouring, sizing, bleaching, and dyeing. 
(10)  Salvage yards, coal yards, or junk yards. 
(11)  Seed processing establishments. 
(Code 2008, § 17.410(A); Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.410(A)), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-471. - Special uses. 
    The following uses are permitted as special uses in I-2 districts when authorized by the city council after a public hearing and recommendation by the planning and zoning commission: 
(1)  Ammonia, bleaching powder, or chlorine manufacture. 
(2)  Carbon manufacture. 
(3)  Celluloid manufacture. 
(4)  Coal distillation. 
(5)  Coke ovens. 
(6)  Distillation of tar. 
(7)  Explosives, fireworks, and gunpowder manufacture or storage. 
(8)  Fat rendering. 
(9)  Grease, lard, or tallow manufactured or refined from animals. 
(10)  Hair manufacture. 
(11)  Incineration, reduction, storage, or dumping of slaughterhouse refuse, rancid fats, dead animals, or offal. 
(12)  Petroleum manufacture. 
(13)  Ethanol manufacture. 
(Code 2008, § 17.410(B); Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.410(B)), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-472. - Floor area ratio. 
    In I-2 districts, the floor area ratio on a lot shall not exceed 50 percent. 
(Code 2008, § 17.410(C); Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.410(C)), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-473. - Yards required. 
    In I-2 districts, yards of the following minimum depths shall be provided: 
(1)  Front yards shall be the same as required in I-1 districts. 
(2)  Side yards shall be the same as required in I-1 districts. 
(3)  Rear yards shall be the same as required in I-1 districts. 
(Code 2008, § 17.410(D); Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.410(D)), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-474. - Automobile storage or parking space. 
    In I-2 districts, adequate off-street parking in accordance with the provisions of section 78-510. 
(Code 2008, § 17.410(E); Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.410(E)), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-475. - Maximum building height. 
    In I-2 districts, no building shall exceed a height of 80 feet above ground level, except as hereinafter provided in subsections (1) and (2) of this section. The term "above ground level" means the actual height of the building measured from the sidewalk level, or equivalent established grade, to the highest part of the building, specifically excluding therefrom those exceptions contained in section 78-511. 
(1)  The maximum height of a building above ground level may be exceeded where the lot upon which the building is located or to be constructed provides in the final plat thereof for one foot of additional building setback, on the front, side and rear yards, for each additional foot of height above ground level of the building; provided, however, the height of the building above grade level may in no instance exceed 100 feet. 
(2)  Any building or structure that exceeds 35 feet in height shall provide a hard surface fire access road or lane located in close proximity to the building or structure, which fire access road or lane shall be of sufficient width to allow for access and staging of emergency vehicles thereon. 
(Code 2008, § 17.410(F); Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.410(F)), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-476. - Performance standards. 
    In I-2 districts, performance standards are stated in subdivision II of this division. 
(Code 2008, § 17.410(G); Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.410(G)), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-477. - Accessory uses. 
    Accessory uses permitted in I-2 districts shall include outside storage of goods and materials. 
(Code 2008, § 17.410(H); Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.410(H)), 11-2-2009) 
Secs. 78-478-78-507. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS 

Sec. 78-508. - Areas. 
(a)  Reduced lot area. No lot shall be so reduced in area that any required open space will be smaller than prescribed in the regulations for the district in which the lot is located. Whenever such reduction in lot area occurs, any building located on this lot shall not thereafter be used until the building is altered, reconstructed, or relocated so as to comply with the area and yard requirements applicable thereto. 
(b)  Dwelling on small lots. Notwithstanding the limitations imposed by any other provisions of this chapter, the planning and zoning commission shall permit erection of a single-family dwelling in a district permitting such use on a lot, separately owned or under contract of sale and containing, on or before January 1, 1988, an area or a width smaller than that required for a single-family dwelling, but complying with all other requirements for dwellings; and provided that adjacent lots in common ownership shall be combined to equal or approach the standard minimum size requirements. 
(c)  Visibility at intersections. On a corner in any residence district no fence, wall, hedge earth terraces, parking facilities, or other structure or plant which would obstruct motor vehicle visibility of traffic approaching the corner or intersection, shall be erected, placed, or maintained within the triangular area formed by the intersecting lot lines nearest the street intersection, and a straight line joining said lot lines at points which are 20 feet distant from the point of intersecting lot line. 
(Code 2008, § 17.710; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.710), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-509. - Yards. 
(a)  Terraces. A terrace shall not be considered as a part of the structure in determining the lot area if such terrace is unroofed. 
(b)  Projecting architectural features. Projecting architectural features shall not encroach upon required yards. 
(c)  Projecting architectural features of business properties. All overhanging awnings and similar structures must be at least eight feet six inches above the sidewalk at any point, and overhanging signs, canopies, marquees, and similar structures must be a minimum of eight feet six inches above the sidewalk at any point. Such structures cannot project closer than one foot to any driveway. 
(d)  Fire escapes. Open fire escapes should not extend into any required yard. Fire escapes may not extend more than four feet six inches. 
(e)  Location of accessory buildings. Any accessory building or building overhang shall not extend any closer than 21/2 feet from any side and/or rear lot lines and cannot be placed on a recorded easement. 
(f)  Mechanical equipment. Mechanical equipment, including, but not limited to, outdoor heating and cooling equipment, generators, refuse compactors, and other noise-producing equipment ancillary to any nonresidential use must be located no more than five feet from the principal structure. Such equipment must not be placed within any required yard or setback, or within ten feet of the property line whichever is greater and must also meet screening requirements as applicable in this chapter. No structure or any part of the structure shall encroach on the 2.5-foot setback for side or rear yards. 
(Code 2008, § 17.720; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.720), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-510. - Off-street parking. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Driveway means the area of any residential property designed for vehicular ingress and egress to and from the property including any such area as shall have been prepared for the parking of vehicles. Such portion of the driveway situated in the front yard shall not exceed the width of the garage plus 12 feet. In the event the dwelling has no garage, the maximum width of a driveway in the front yard shall be 24 feet. The above notwithstanding, in no event shall a driveway in the front yard be wider than 24 feet nor may the width be more than 40 percent of the frontage width at the setback line, whichever is less. 
(1)  No driveway curb cut of a single-family residential property shall be wider than 24 feet. 
(2)  No driveway curb cut for a multifamily residential property shall be allowed more than two curb cuts for driveway access and each curb cut shall not exceed 24 feet. The total combined curb cut for a multifamily residential property shall not exceed 24 feet. 
    Employee or number of employees means the greatest number of persons to be employed in the building in question during any season of the year at any time of the day or night. 
    Off-street parking space. 
(1)  The term "off-street parking space" means a space of 180 square feet of appropriate dimensions for the parking of an automobile, exclusive of the access drives or aisles thereto. 
(2)  All off street parking for property zoned as industrial, commercial, residential or agriculture shall allow adequate turning radius for a parking space or structure used to park cars, so that the entire turning radius for egress or ingress into any parking space or structure is maintained on the lot or property upon which the parking is provided. A minimum of 19 feet shall be provided. 
    Seating means the seating capacity of a particular building as determined by the specifications and plans filed with the city planning and zoning commission; in the event individual seats are not provided, each 24 inches of benches or similar seating accommodations shall be considered as one seat for the purposes of this section. 
    Vehicle means all motor vehicles and trailers, including, but not limited to, automobiles, trucks, travel trailers, campers, motor homes, tent trailers, boats, boat trailers, snowmobiles, snowmobile trailers, and camping trailers. No such vehicles shall be parked outside a garage on more than ten percent of the area of the lot on which the dwelling is located, measured from the front line of the dwelling rearward, and including the area of the lot on which the dwelling is located. 
(b)  Off street parking required. 
(1)  In the use of land for residential, commercial, industrial, or any other purposes, no residential, commercial, industrial, or any other building or structure shall be erected without the required off-street parking. No major repairs can be made to an existing residential, commercial, industrial, or any other building or structure, unless there are in existence upon the lot the required minimum parking spaces and additional room for required parking spaces as defined in this chapter. Unless provision is made for the location on the lot, concurrently with the erection or major repairs, off-street parking space on the basis of the following minimum requirements: 
a.  Dwellings. 
1.  A one-family dwelling shall have at least two off-street parking spaces. 
2.  A two-family dwelling shall have at least four off-street parking spaces. 
3.  A dwelling occupied by three or more families shall have two parking spaces per family. 
b.  Hotels, including clubs, lodginghouses, tourist homes and cabins, motels, trailer courts, camps in parks, boardinghouses and roominghouses, dormitories, sororities, fraternities, and all other similar places offering overnight accommodations shall have at least one off-street parking space for each one guest room. 
c.  Hospitals, including sanitariums, asylums, orphanages, convalescent homes, homes for the aged and infirmed, and all other similar institutions shall have at least one off-street parking space for each four patient beds, plus at least one additional off-street parking space for each staff and visiting doctor, plus at least one additional off street parking space for each three employees, including nurses. 
d.  Restaurants, including bars, taverns, night clubs, lunch counters, diners, and all other similar dining or drinking establishments shall have at least one off-street parking space for each four seats provided for patrons' use. 
e.  Theaters, including motion picture houses shall have at least one off-street parking space for each six seats provided for patrons' use. 
f.  Places of public assembly, including private clubs, lodges, and fraternal buildings not providing overnight accommodations, assembly halls, exhibition halls, convention halls, skating rinks, dance halls, bowling alleys, sports arenas, stadiums, gymnasiums, amusement parks, race tracks, fairgrounds, circus grounds, funeral homes, mortuaries, community centers, libraries, museums, and all other similar places of relatively infrequent public assembly shall have at least one off-street parking space for each four seats provided for patrons use, or for each four persons in average attendance when seats are not provided for all patrons. 
g.  Auditoriums shall have at least one off-street parking space for each four seats provided for patrons' use. 
h.  Churches shall have at least one off street parking space for each eight fixed seats in the main worship hall of the church. 
i.  Schools shall have, for grade and junior high schools, at least one parking space for each 20 students of design capacity; and for high schools, at least one parking space for each seven students of design capacity. 
j.  Wholesale, manufacturing, and industrial plants, including warehouses and storage buildings and yards, public utility buildings, contractors equipment and lumber yards, research laboratories, business service establishments such as blueprinting, printing, and engraving, soft drink bottling establishments, fabricating plants, and all other structures devoted to similar mercantile or industrial pursuits shall have at least one off-street parking space per two employees plus one space per company vehicle. 
k.  Retail establishments, including personal service shops, equipment or repair shops, gasoline or other motor fuel stations, motor vehicle sales or repair establishments, all retail stores and businesses, and banks or other financial and lending institutions shall have at least one off-street parking space for each 400 square feet of gross floor area. 
(2)  Office buildings, including commercial, governmental and professional buildings, and medical and dental clinics shall have at least one off-street parking space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area. 
a.  On the same premises with every building devoted to retail trade, retail and wholesale food markets, warehouses, supply houses, wholesale or manufacturing trade, hotels, hospitals, laundries, dry-cleaning establishments, or other buildings where large amounts of goods are received or shipped, erected in any district, there shall be provided loading and unloading space as follows: 
1.  Buildings of 10,000 square feet of floor area shall have one off-street loading space plus one additional off-street loading and unloading space for each additional 14,000 square feet of area. 
2.  Each loading space shall be not less than 14 feet in width and 50 feet in length. 
b.  Where parking is provided, handicap accessible parking spaces shall be provided in compliance with the following table, except as required by sections 1106.2 through 1106.4 of the International Building Code. The number of accessible parking spaces shall be determined based on the total number of parking spaces provided for the facility. 
1.  Exception. This section does not apply to parking spaces used exclusively for buses, trucks, other delivery vehicles, law enforcement vehicles or vehicular impound and motor pools where lots accessed by the public are provided with an accessible passenger loading zone. 
Total Parking 
Spaces Provided Required Minimum Number 
Handicap Accessible Spaces 1 to 25 1 26 to 50 2 51 to 75 3 76 to 100 4 101 to 150 5 151 to 200 6 201 to 300 7 301 to 400 8 401 to 500 9 501 to 1,000 2% of total More than 1,000 20, plus one for each 100 over 1,000  
2.  Hospital outpatient facilities. Ten percent of patient and visitor parking spaces provided to serve hospital outpatient facilities shall be accessible. 
3.  Rehabilitation facilities and outpatient physical therapy facilities. Twenty percent, but not less than one, of the portion of patient and visitor parking spaces serving rehabilitation facilities and outpatient physical therapy facilities shall be accessible. 
(3)  In case of a use not specifically mentioned, the requirements for off-street parking or off-street loading for a use which is so mentioned and to which said use is similar, shall apply. 
(4)  The off-street parking facilities required for the uses mentioned in this section, and for other similar uses, shall be on the same lot or parcel of land as the structure they are intended to serve, but in case of nonresidential uses when practical difficulties prevent their establishment upon the same lot, the required parking facilities shall be provided within 300 feet of the premises to which they are appurtenant. 
(5)  No part of an off-street parking area required for any building or use for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this section shall be included as a part of an off-street parking area similarly required for another building or use unless the type of structure indicates that the period of usage of such structures will not be simultaneous with each other. 
(6)  In case of mixed uses, the total requirement for off-street loading space shall be the sum of the requirements of the various uses computed separately as specified in this chapter, and the off-street loading space for one use shall not be considered as providing the required off-street loading space for any other use. 
(7)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the joint use of off-street parking or off-street loading for two or more buildings or uses, and the total of such spaces when used together shall not be less than the sum of the requirement of the various individual uses computed separately in accordance with this chapter. 
(8)  All off-street parking facilities required pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be surfaced with asphalt, concrete, or bituminous cement binder pavement and shall be graded and drained to dispose of all surface water. Any lighting in connection with off-street parking shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away from all adjoining residence buildings, residence zones, or streets. 
(9)  No certificate of occupancy will be issued upon completion of any building or repair operations unless and until all off-street parking requirements shown upon the plans, or made a part of the building permit, shall be in place and ready for use. 
(10)  Off-street parking of vehicles shall not be allowed in the front yards in residential districts upon any unimproved surface. As used in this section, the term "unimproved surface" includes, but is not limited to, grass and dirt surfaces. 
(11)  Off-street parking of vehicles in residential districts shall be allowed under the following provisions when not in conflict with subsection (b)(10) of this section: 
a.  Parking is prohibited in the front yard beyond the front line extended of the dwelling unit unless upon a driveway and provided that the vehicle at no time is parked within the public right-of-way or within the site triangle; the site triangle being the imaginary triangular area formed by the intersecting lot lines nearest the street or alley intersection, and a straight line adjoining said lot lines at points which are 20 feet from the point of intersecting lot lines. 
b.  Vehicles may be parked in garages, sheds, or driveways, and in side and rear yards, subject to the other provisions specifically stated in this article. However, no abandoned or inoperative vehicles as defined in this Code may be parked anywhere on a property except in enclosed garages or sheds. 
c.  Setbacks for the parking of vehicles outside a garage for more than 30 consecutive days shall meet the following standards: 
1.  Front yard. Five feet from the dwelling side of a sidewalk used by the public, or if there is no such sidewalk, then ten feet from the street pavement. The above notwithstanding, no vehicle shall be parked on a driveway within the public right-of-way. For purposes of this subsection only, corner lots shall be deemed to have only one front yard; that front yard being the one located adjacent to the street for which the property is addressed, subject to the other provisions specifically stated in this article. 
2.  Side yard. Five feet; except that the five-foot setback requirement shall not apply where there is no building on an adjoining lot within ten feet of the vehicle. 
3.  Rear yard. Zero feet, subject to the other provisions specifically stated in this chapter. 
(12)  Individual subdivision covenants which are more restrictive than the provisions of subsection (b)(11) of this section will continue to be enforceable by private action according to their terms. 
(13)  All off street parking for property zoned as industrial, commercial, residential or agricultural shall allow adequate turning radius for a parking space or structure used to park cars, so that the entire turning radius for egress or ingress into any parking space or structure to be used to park cars is maintained on the lot or property upon which the parking is provided. 
(c)  Penalty. Any person, firm, or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with the off-street parking provisions of this chapter shall correct the condition or violation within seven days of the mailing by the city of a written notice to the occupant of the dwelling. If such occupant fails after receiving the seven-day notice to correct the violation, the city may make application to the circuit court for an injunction or other injunctive relief requiring conformance with the provisions in this chapter or obtain such other order as the court deems necessary to secure compliance with the off-street parking provisions. 
(Code 2008, § 17.730; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.730), 11-2-2009; Ord. No. 15-04, § I, 4-6-2015) 
Sec. 78-511. - Height. 
    No building shall be erected, reconstructed, relocated, or structurally altered so as to have a greater height than permissible under the limitations set forth herein for the district within which such building is located, except that antennas, satellite dishes, parapet walls, chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulk heads, fire towers, grain elevators, silos, spires, steeples, stacks, stage towers or scenery lifts, water towers, and necessary mechanical appurtenances shall be permitted to exceed the maximum height provisions when erected in accordance with all other rules and regulations of the city. 
(Code 2008, § 17.740; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.740), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-512. - Nonconforming uses. 
(a)  The lawful use of any building or structure existing on or before January 1988 may be continued, although such use does not conform with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  A nonconforming use shall not be extended, but the extensions of a lawful use to any portion of the building designed for a nonconforming use which existed prior to January 1988, shall not be deemed the extension of such nonconforming use. Any such valid extension must meet the lot area, side yard, front yard, and rear yard requirements provided for that district in which the nonconforming building is located. A nonconforming use of land shall not be extended, or moved to another area of the plot, or increased in intensity of use. 
(c)  A nonconforming building may not be reconstructed or structurally altered during its life to an extent exceeding in aggregate cost 50 percent of the current fair value of the building unless said building is changed to a conforming use. A building designed for a nonconforming use, however, may be reconstructed or altered beyond the limitations herein provided by the action of the planning and zoning commission, after public hearing as required by law in case of variances. The limitations herein provided shall not prohibit the restoration to a safe condition of any structure or portion thereof declared unsafe by a proper authority. 
(d)  If a nonconforming use has ceased for any period of time, it shall not be reestablished unless the nonconforming use was in a building designed, arranged, and intended for such use. 
(e)  Once changed to a conforming use, no building or land shall be permitted to revert to a nonconforming use. A nonconforming use shall not be substituted or added to another nonconforming use. 
(f)  Whenever the boundaries of a district shall be changed so as to transfer an area from one district to another district of a different classification, the foregoing provisions shall also apply to any nonconforming uses existing therein. 
(Code 2008, § 17.745; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.745), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-513. - Key lock box system. 
(a)  Identification of structures required to comply. The following structures shall be equipped with a key lock box at or near the main entrance or such other location as required or permitted by the chief of the fire department, or its successor organization: 
(1)  Commercial and industrial structures protected by an automatic alarm system or automatic suppression system, or commercial and industrial structures that are secured in a manner that restricts access during an emergency; 
(2)  Multifamily residential structures having more than four residential units that have restricted access through locked doors and have a common corridor for access to the living units; and 
(3)  Governmental structures and nursing care facilities. 
(b)  Contents of key lock box. The key lock box must contain the keys for the exterior doors, the keys for all the interior doors within the structure, a card containing the emergency contact people and telephone numbers for the structure, and a scaled floor plan of the structure. In lieu of having the interior keys at the exterior locations, a second key lock box may be located within the main lobby of the structure to hold the interior keys. All keys within the key lock box shall be labeled for easy identification either by the tenant name or indexed to the floor plan of the structure and must be kept current. 
(c)  Certain structures need not comply. All structures in existence on May 1, 2015, and all such structures not in existence on July 1, 2004, but for which a building permit was issued prior to May 1, 2015, shall not be subject to the provisions of this section, with the exception of multifamily residential structures having more than four residential units that have restricted access through locked doors and have a common corridor for access to the living units. 
(d)  New construction. All structures required to be equipped with a key lock box as provided above, for which a building permit is issued on or after May 1, 2015, must have a key lock box installed and operational prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the city. 
(e)  Substantial improvements to existing structures. If any structure required to be equipped with a key lock box as provided above is substantially improved on or after May 1,2015, such a substantially improved structure must have a key lock box installed and operational prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the city. The term "substantial improvement to an existing structure," for purposes of this section, shall mean an improvement to or involving the exterior of the structure and costing not less than $25,000.00. 
(f)  Type of key lock box system. The fire chief will designate the type of key lock box system to be used and implemented within the city, and will have the authority to require all structures that are described in subsection (a) of this section to use the designated system. 
(g)  Rules and regulations. The fire chief is authorized to implement rules and regulations for the use of the lock box system by the fire department. 
(Code 2008, § 17.747; Ord. No. 15-07, § I, 4-20-2015; Ord. No. 15-15, § I, 7-20-2015) 
Sec. 78-514. - Building design guidelines. 
(a)  Purpose. The planning and zoning commission finds that it is in the best interest of the health, safety, and general welfare of the residents and visitors of the city that minimum building design standards be established for new building construction within the city. It is the specific intent of the city to: 
(1)  Minimize adverse impacts of new development upon adjoining properties and existing land uses; 
(2)  Encourage a basic level of architectural variety and quality; and 
(3)  Conserve and enhance the built environment and visual appeal of the community. 
(b)  Applicability. Building design standards shall be required in all city zoning districts as follows: 
(1)  At the time of placement, construction, or expansion of any principal building. 
(2)  At the time of placement, construction, or expansion of any accessory building that will exceed 400 square feet in total area on one or more floors. 
a.  Nonresidential developments. All nonresidential developments, including, but not limited to, business, commercial, industrial, manufacturing, or institutional uses, shall require a minimum 35 percent brick, stone, stucco, or other decorative masonry on any portion of a building exterior that includes a public entrance or fronts a public street. 
b.  Exterior doors and windows shall be excluded from the calculation of applicable surface area. 
c.  Acceptable decorative masonry shall include split faced block, fluted block, glazed block, ceramic, simulated stucco, simulated brick, simulated stone, or other decorative concrete masonry units. Simulated panelized sheathing and smooth face concrete block, painted or unpainted, shall not be considered decorative masonry. 
d.  Other decorative materials appropriate for the business or institutional applications that achieve the above-stated purposes may be acceptable upon review and approval by the planning and zoning commission. 
e.  Large-scale commercial developments. All developments within any B-1 or B-2 zoning district containing 60,000 or more total square feet on one or more floors shall comply with the following minimum design and construction standards: 
1.  A minimum 90 percent brick, stone, stucco, or other decorative masonry is required on any portion of a building exterior that includes a public entrance or fronts a public street. A minimum 35 percent brick, stone, stucco, or other decorative masonry is required on all remaining sides of the building. 
2.  Exterior doors and windows shall be excluded from the calculation of applicable surface area. 
3.  Acceptable decorative masonry shall include split faced block, fluted block, glazed block, ceramic, simulated stucco, simulated brick, simulated stone, or other decorative concrete masonry units. Simulated panelized sheathing and smooth face concrete block, painted or unpainted, shall not be considered decorative masonry. 
4.  Other decorative materials appropriate for the business or institutional application that achieve the above-stated purposes may be acceptable upon review and approval by the planning and zoning commission. 
5.  Any building or portion of a building exterior that includes a public entrance or fronts a public street shall not exceed 100 lineal feet in wall length without providing architectural relief in the facade. Architectural relief shall consist of using arcades, cornices, eaves, gables, focal points, or other offsets in elevation. This requirement may be modified upon review and approval by the planning and zoning commission if a substantial portion of the wall length is blocked from view. 
f.  With the construction of any new residence for which a building permit is sought, a yard light which shall operate automatically from sunset to sunrise shall be located in the front yard ten feet from the front lot line and within three feet of the driveway. All wiring for any yard light shall be buried underground a minimum depth of 24 inches in accordance with the National Electrical Code. 
g.  Prohibited buildings. The placement and outdoor use of garbage receptacles, shipping containers or freight storage units (including, but not limited to, sea-land containers, railroad car bodies, trailers, truck and bus beds, etc.) for purposes other than the original manufactured intent is prohibited in all zoning districts unless one or more of the following exceptions are met: 
1.  The container or unit is used in a manner consistent with the original manufactured intent and is otherwise permitted by this chapter. 
2.  The container or unit is a component of an approved special use. 
3.  The container or unit will be used for temporary, supplemental storage of goods or materials for no more than 90 days in a calendar year. 
4.  The container or unit will be used for temporary storage or disposal of materials associated with construction or remodeling of a principal building. In such instance, the container shall be removed upon project completion and within a one-year period. 
(Code 2008, § 17.749; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.748), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-515. - Elevators. 
    Where elevators are provided at least one elevator shall be provided for fire department emergency access to all floors. The elevator car shall be of such a size and arrangement to accommodate an ambulance stretcher 24 inches by 84 inches (610 mm by 2134 mm) with not less than five-inch (127 mm) radius corners, in the horizontal, open position and shall be identified by the international symbol for emergency medical services (star of life). The symbol shall not be less than three inches (76 mm) in height and shall be placed inside on both sides of the hoist way doorframe. 
(Code 2008, § 17.749; Ord. No. 15-16, § I, 7-20-2015) 
Secs. 78-516-78-538. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SPECIAL USES 

Sec. 78-539. - Purpose. 
    The development and execution of this chapter is based upon the division of the city into districts, within which districts the uses of land and buildings and the bulk and location of buildings and structures in relation to the land are substantially uniform. It is recognized, however, that there are special uses which, because of their unique characteristics, cannot be properly classified in any particular district without consideration, in each case, of the impact of those uses upon neighboring land and of the public need for the particular use at the particular location. Such special uses fall into three categories: 
(1)  Uses publicly operated or traditionally affected with a public interest; and 
(2)  Uses entirely private in character, but of such an unusual nature that their operation may give rise to unique problems with respect to their impact upon neighboring property or public facilities. 
(3)  A "special use" is a use which is requested by the public welfare, but which is incompatible with the uses normally permitted in the zoning districts established herein. It shall be deemed and determined by the planning and zoning commission and as further defined in this article. It is declared the policy and purpose of this chapter to employ the special use as a flexible means of permitting certain exceptions to the districts established and the rules and regulations adopted herein, in cases where the public benefit of such uses outweighs the potential harm, and under such conditions imposed as are necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare and individual property rights. 
(Code 2008, § 17.420; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.420), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-540. - Initiation of special use. 
    Any person having a freehold interest in land, or a possessor's interest entitled to exclusive possession, or a contractual interest which may become a freehold interest or exclusive possessor's interest which is specifically enforceable, may file an application to use land for one or more of the special uses provided in this chapter in the zoning district in which the land is located. Any person who has a mere possessor's interest and is entitled to exclusive possession for a period of less than five years must have the persons having a freehold interest in the property join in the application. 
(Code 2008, § 17.430; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.430), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-541. - Application for special use. 
    An application for a special use permit, except a planned development special use permit, shall be filed with the city on a form prescribed by the planning and zoning commission. The application shall be accompanied by such plans or data prescribed by the commission. The application shall include a statement in writing by the applicant and adequate evidence showing that the proposed special use will conform to the standards set forth in this chapter. To partially defray the cost of this procedure, the applicant shall pay the sum of $25.00 plus reimbursement for the cost of publication and posting, to the city at the time of filing of the application. 
(Code 2008, § 17.440; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.440), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-542. - Procedure for consideration of a special use. 
(a)  A written application shall be filed with the city stating the name and address of the applicant and of the owner of record; the location of the property; the specific special use sought; facts to demonstrate hardship or inability to meet the zoning code, reasons for request for special use in general and for the specific special use sought. A detailed site plan shall accompany the application. 
(b)  The planning and zoning commission shall conduct a public hearing thereon, after publication of hearing notice in a newspaper of local circulation at least 15 days but not more than 30 days prior to the date of hearing. 
(c)  The applicant shall cause a copy of the notice to be delivered to the owner of record of all property within 300 feet thereof and to the occupants within said 300 feet, and shall so certify at the hearing. Evidence of mailing notice to the person responsible for the last tax bill shall be deemed meeting the owner of record notification requirements. 
(d)  Anyone wishing to do so may speak for or against said application. 
(e)  The hearing may be adjourned from time to time to afford everyone an opportunity to be heard. A written record shall be kept and shall constitute a public record. 
(f)  Upon completion of the hearing, the planning and zoning commission may grant in whole or in part, or deny the petition for special use. In granting a special use it may impose such additional conditions as deemed necessary in the particular case to further the zoning plan and protect surrounding uses. 
(g)  The planning and zoning commission shall notify the applicant and the city council of its decision in writing and shall submit their recommendation at a regularly scheduled council meeting for approval by the corporate authorities. 
(Code 2008, § 17.450; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.450), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-543. - Hearing on applicant. 
    Upon receipt in proper form of the application and statement referred to in this section, the planning and zoning commission shall hold at least one public hearing on the proposed special use. Not more than 30 days or less than 15 days in advance of such hearing, notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, as prescribed by applicable state statutes. Supplemental or additional notices may be published or distributed as the commission may, by rule, prescribe from time to time. 
(Code 2008, § 17.470; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.470), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-544. - Authorization. 
    For each application for a special use permit, the planning and zoning commission shall recommend approved with any stipulations, additional conditions, and guarantees, that they feel are necessary for the protection of the public interest. The city council may grant or deny any application for a special use. 
(Code 2008, § 17.480; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.480), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-545. - Standards. 
(a)  Findings. No special use shall be recommended by the planning and zoning commission unless such commission shall find that: 
(1)  The establishment, maintenance, or operation of the special use will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, morals, comfort, or general welfare. 
(2)  The special use will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of other property in the immediate vicinity for the purposes already permitted, nor substantially diminish or impair property values within the neighborhood. 
(3)  The establishment of the special use will not impede the normal and orderly development and improvement of the surrounding property for uses permitted in the district. 
(4)  Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage, or necessary facilities have been or are being provided. 
(5)  Adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress and egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets. 
(6)  The special use shall, in all other respects, conform to the applicable regulations of the district in which it is located, except as such regulations may, in each instance, be modified by the city council pursuant to the recommendations of the planning and zoning commission. 
(7)  Where it is found a use not otherwise acceptable to the neighborhood in which located would be acceptable with certain conditions of use operation and improvement, the planning and zoning commission may recommend requiring the granting of such nonconforming special use subject to specified conditions. Such conditions may include: 
a.  Landscape screening or fencing. 
b.  Hours of operation. 
c.  Night lighting (including parking areas) so as not to be annoying to surrounding properties. 
d.  Requirements for access lanes and parking areas to protect pedestrian safety. 
e.  Restraint on signage so as to be compatible with surrounding properties. 
f.  Limitation on outdoor storage. 
g.  Any other such requirements which, in the opinion of the planning and zoning commission or city council, would render the use compatible with surrounding properties. 
(8)  When dealing with radio, television, telephone and similar communication towers/antennas and wind generating power devices, which exceed the height limitations of the zoning district in which it would be located, and their associated structures, the following additional special conditions must be met: 
a.  All applicable setback requirements and other requirements of a particular zoning district in which the tower is to be located, inclusive of all guy lines and other associated structures, must be met, except for height restrictions. 
b.  The tower will be constructed to the minimum height necessary to serve its purpose. 
c.  That the tower's proposed location, height and configuration has received prior Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and Federal Communications Commission (FCC) approval. 
d.  That said tower is designed, approved and attested to by a qualified structural engineer, verifying the safety and viability of the tower. 
e.  The electronics and other operational apparatus to be attached to the tower must be certified by a qualified electronics engineer that said electronics and other operational apparatus will not interfere with other radio and television signals or other electronic devices or apparatus. 
f.  All towers must meet the minimum lighting requirements by the FAA and FCC and such lighting must be shielded, to the extent possible, to prevent illumination of the ground below. 
g.  Antenna support structures must be constructed from one of the following materials: aluminum, galvanized steel, or equally weather resistant materials. 
h.  All ground mounted antenna support structures exceeding 35 feet in height shall be mounted in concrete and erected in such a manner so as to conform with ANSI/EIA-222-E for minimum basic wind speed for the locale, with one-half-inch radial ice load. 
i.  All antenna support structures, whether ground or roof mounted, shall be properly grounded to adequately protect against a direct strike of lightning, in conformance with ANSI/EIA standards. 
j.  The planning and zoning commission and city council shall consider the following factors in determining whether or not a special use for a tower/antenna should be granted: 
1.  Existing uses and zoning of nearby property; 
2.  The extent to which property values are diminished by the tower/antenna in question; 
3.  The relative gain to the public as compared to the hardships imposed on the individual property owners; 
4.  The suitability of the property for the tower/antenna; 
5.  The public need for the tower/antenna; and cultural patterns of nearby property; 
6.  Those aesthetic considerations which bear substantially on the economic, social aspects of the community. 
(b)  Zero lot line. 
(1)  Conditions. Individual dwelling units in any two-family dwelling shall not be sold separately, unless such two-family dwelling has been properly designated as a zero lot line duplex in accordance with the following standards and procedures. No dwelling unit in a two-family dwelling shall be designated or sold as a zero lot line duplex unless each of the following conditions have been met: 
a.  Each dwelling unit has a floor area of not less than 1,000 square feet for a single-story unit, and 1,250 square feet for a unit having more than one story. The areas of garages, open porches, cellars and basements shall not be included for the purpose of determining the area of a dwelling unit. 
b.  The owner has obtained a plat of survey prepared by an Illinois licensed land surveyor, which plat of survey divides the lot upon which the two-family dwelling is located into a separate sub-lot for each dwelling unit. The survey may be prepared after construction of improvements on the lot, but must in any event be recorded in the office of the county recorder of deeds before title to any portion of the property is transferred by the owner to any third person. The survey shall include not only a scaled and dimensioned outline of the exterior of each dwelling unit, but also a scaled and dimensioned drawing of all other exterior improvements on each sub-lot, including, but not limited to, sidewalks, driveways and patios. 
c.  Each sub-lot created by the aforesaid plat of survey shall have an area of not less than 5,000 square feet, and a lot width at the right-of-way line of the street at which the unit is properly addressed of not less than 49 feet six inches for interior lots and 85 feet for corner lots. 
d.  Each dwelling unit has separate utility services with separate meters for each service. 
e.  The owner of the two-family dwelling prior to its conversion to a zero lot line duplex has prepared covenants which bind all owners of either dwelling unit or their successors in interest. Such covenants shall be of form and content satisfactory to the planning and zoning commission and suitable for recording, and shall address and/or require, at a minimum, the following: 
1.  The proper maintenance of the common wall between the individual dwelling units. 
2.  The proper maintenance of the dwelling units. 
3.  A consistent design and color scheme for the exterior of the dwelling units. 
4.  Additions to the dwelling units. 
5.  Repair of the dwelling units in the event of damage or destruction. 
6.  Regulations concerning the construction, design and location of accessory structures, including, without limitation, garages, storage sheds and fences. 
7.  Firewalls shall have been constructed according to the latest edition of the International Boca Building Code for zero lot line approval. 
f.  The two-family dwelling meets all other applicable requirements of this zoning code, including, but not limited to, those pertaining to lot areas, yard requirements, and height of buildings. 
g.  The two-family dwelling meets all other applicable requirements of this code, including, but not limited to, its building code. 
Zero lot line development will require each unit to have a side yard, front yard and a rear yard. 
(2)  Procedure. 
a.  Any person seeking the designation of an existing or proposed two-family dwelling as a zero lot line duplex, shall submit an application to the zoning administrator on a form prescribed by such administrator, which application shall be accompanied by the following: 
1.  Building plans for the two-family dwelling unit. 
2.  Proposed covenants which meet the standards hereinabove set forth. 
b.  Upon receipt of the aforesaid information, the zoning administrator shall refer the matter first for consideration as a special use under the procedures established in the zoning code for consideration of proposed special uses. Within a reasonable time after submission, the planning and zoning commission shall either approve the application and designate the two-family dwelling unit as a zero lot line duplex, or deny the application and provide a written explanation of the reasons for the denial. Upon approval of an application for designation of a two-family dwelling unit as a zero lot line duplex, the zoning administrator shall, on behalf of the city, sign the plat of survey submitted by the owner. Dwelling units in a zero lot line duplex shall not be sold separately until both the plat of survey and covenants in the forms approved by the zoning administrator have been recorded in the office of the county recorder of deeds with a copy of the recorded plat provided to the zoning administrator. 
(3)  Special finding for special use required. No such special use for a zero lot line duplex shall be approved without a conclusion by the planning and zoning commission, in addition to those criteria required pursuant to this chapter, that the proposed zero lot line duplex is consistent in style with other structures in the adjoining neighborhood and that the proposed zero lot line duplex will not detract from the appearance of the neighborhood. 
(4)  Prior consultation encouraged. Any person who intends to seek the designation of a two-family dwelling as a zero lot line duplex is encouraged to engage in informal consultations with the zoning administrator prior to the preparation of a formal plat or survey. 
(Code 2008, § 17.490; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.490), 11-2-2009; Ord. No. 10-13, § I, 11-1-2010) 
Sec. 78-546. - Termination of special uses. 
    The discontinuation, abandonment, or enlargement of any special use, or any violation of the conditions, stipulations, or guarantees applicable to any special use shall cause the special use to terminate instantly and without notice. In the event of said termination, the only uses allowed on the land previously subject to the special use shall be the uses permitted in the applicable zoning classification. 
(Code 2008, § 17.500; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.500), 11-2-2009) 
Secs. 78-547-78-570. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SIGNS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 78-571. - Purpose. 
    There is a significant relationship between the manner in which signs are displayed and public safety, and the stability of the economic value of adjoining property. The reasonable display of signs is necessary as a public service and to the conduct of competitive commerce and industry. The regulations in this chapter establish minimum standards for the display of signs in direct relationship to the functional use of property as permitted within the zoning districts which are provided in this subsection. It is at the city's discretion as to whether any application for a permit will be approved. 
(Code 2008, § 17.510; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.510), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-572. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Area of sign means and includes the background material on which the sign is painted or mounted. If the sign is of individual letters attached to a building, the area shall be considered as within the perimeter of a line drawn around all the letters. If a projected or freestanding sign has two sides, its area shall be based on only one side. 
    Awning or canopy sign means a sign painted, stamped, stitched or otherwise applied on the valance of an awning. 
    Banner means a long, narrow sign made from canvas, paper or other lightweight material secured or mounted on a wall on at least two sides or attached to a permanent existing structure. Said structure shall include, but shall not be limited to, fences, buildings, light poles and sign poles. 
    Billboard means a sign which advertises goods, products, or services not sold on the premises on which the sign is located. 
    Copy means any display or message on a sign surface containing wording, numbers, symbols, or graphics and intended for visual communication. 
    Directional signs means real estate signs indicating for sale, for rent, for lease and open house, stating that a property is for sale, rent, or lease or having an open house. 
    Electronic message board means any sign or portion of a sign whose display information can be systematically changed or altered on a panel composed of electrically illuminated segments. An electronic message board shall not be considered a flashing sign. 
    Flag means a sign made from canvas, paper or other lightweight material secured or mounted on one side as to allow movement by the wind. 
    Flashing sign means any sign directly or indirectly illuminated where the source of illumination flashes on or off, winks or blinks with varying light intensity or color, shows motion or creates the illusion of motion or revolves in a manner to create the illusion of being on or off. 
    For sale or for rent signs means signs stating that the property on which the sign is displayed is for sale or rent and may include the name of the owner or agent with address and telephone number. 
    Freestanding or ground sign means any sign supported by one or more upright poles, columns or braces placed in or on the ground and not attached to any building or structure. 
    Frontage means all sides of a lot abutting a street right-of-way shall be considered frontage. 
    Identification sign means a sign which includes the street address and the name of the owner or occupant or the name of the building if it has several occupations if any are conducted on the premises. 
    Illuminated sign means any sign which has characters, letters, figures, designs or outlines illuminated by electric lights, tubes or other means of illumination. 
    Inflatable sign means any inflated balloon or lighter than air object greater than 64 cubic feet in volume and displayed more than six feet above the ground. 
    Monument sign means any freestanding sign supported primarily by an internal structural framework or integrated into landscaping or other solid structural features where the base of the sign structure is on the ground or a maximum of 12 inches above ground. 
    Moving sign means any sign or portion of a sign which structurally rotates, revolves, extends, retracts or otherwise is in motion in any manner. 
    Nonconforming sign means any sign which was lawfully erected and maintained prior to such time as it came within the purview of this subsection and any amendments thereto, and which fails to conform to all applicable regulations and restrictions of this subsection; provided, however, such term shall not include any sign or other advertising structure which was erected or maintained in violation of any law or this subsection. 
    Obsolete sign or off-premises sign means any sign which advertises a business which is not being conducted on or immediately adjacent to the premises on which the sign is located. 
    Permanent sign means any wall sign, free standing or ground sign, roof sign, awning or canopy sign designed and constructed to be a fixed in place sign for the specific purpose intended. Temporary signs shall not be converted to permanent signs. 
    Political sign means signs or posters announcing candidates seeking public political office in any local, state, or national election. 
    Portable sign means any sign not permanently affixed to the ground or a building, including, but not limited to, sandwich board signs, chalkboard signs, message boards and any sign attached to or displayed on a vehicle that is used for the express purpose of advertising a business establishment, product, service or entertainment, when the vehicle is so parked as to attract the attention of the motoring or pedestrian traffic. 
    Projecting sign means any sign attached to a building that projects from the wall or face of the building more than 15 inches. 
    Promotional signs means signs for the purpose of bringing to the attention of the public the goods or services offered on the premises. This includes, but is not limited to, wall signs, projecting signs and freestanding signs. 
    Roof sign means any sign erected upon, against, or directly above a roof, or on top or above the parapet or on a functional architectural appendage above the roof. 
    Shopping center sign means an integrated shopping center freestanding sign with the name and street address of the shopping center. 
    Sight triangle means the imaginary triangular area formed by the intersecting lot lines nearest the street intersection, and a straight line joining said lot lines at points which are 20 feet from the point of intersecting lot lines. 
    Sign means: 
(1)  Any structure or device or visual communication that is used for the purpose of bringing the subject thereof to the attention of the public, but not including any flag, badge or ensign of any governmental agency of any state or of any civic, charitable, religious, or patriotic, fraternal or similar organization. 
(2)  Any structure or device located outside a building designed for visual communication intended to convey information to the public in written or pictorial form. 
    Temporary sign means any sign constructed of cardboard, cloth, canvas, fabric, wood or other temporary material, with or without a structural frame, and intended for a limited period of display, including, but not limited to, flags, balloons, banners, pennants, and portable signs. 
    Traffic signs on private property means signs for traffic directions, parking restrictions or notices of hazards are permitted on private property in any zoning district. 
    Wall sign means any sign painted or attached to the outside of a building, erected parallel to the wall to which it is attached. 
(Code 2008, § 17.520; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.520), 11-2-2009; Ord. No. 13-19, § I, 10-21-2013) 
Sec. 78-573. - Enforcement; penalties. 
    The city administrator is authorized and directed to administer and enforce all the provisions of this chapter. Whenever necessary, the officials of other departments of the city shall give such assistance as is consistent with the usual duties of their respective departments; 
(1)  Upon presentation of proper credentials, the building inspector, city administrator or his duly authorized representative may enter at reasonable times any premises when necessary to perform any duty imposed upon him by this article. 
(2)  Whenever it shall appear to the building inspector that any sign has been constructed or erected, or is being maintained in violation of any of the terms of this chapter; or after a permit for a sign has been revoked or becomes void; or that a sign is unsafe or in such condition as to be a menace to the safety of the public, the city administrator shall issue a notice in writing to the owner or lessee of the sign or owner of the premises upon which the sign is erected or maintained. The notice shall inform this person of the violation and shall direct him to make such alteration, repair, or removal as is necessary to secure compliance with this article, within a reasonable period of time, which reasonable period of time shall be as follows: 
a.  If a sign is erected without first obtaining the necessary permit, then a reasonable period of time within which to apply for the necessary permit shall be 24 hours from and after the receipt of the notice; 
b.  Where a sign has been constructed or erected or is being maintained in violation of any of the terms of this chapter, then a reasonable period of time within which to abate the violation shall be 14 days from and after the receipt of the notice; and 
c.  Where a sign is unsafe or in such a condition as to be a menace to the safety of the public, then a reasonable period of time within which to abate the violation shall be 14 days from and after the receipt of the notice. 
(3)  Upon failure of the sign owner to comply with the terms of the notice of violation, the administrator is authorized and empowered to have removed, alter, or repair the sign in question so as to make it conform with this chapter and charge the expenses for such work to the person named in the notice. 
(4)  Except as otherwise provided, the building inspector may remove or cause to be removed a sign immediately and without notice if, in his opinion the condition of the sign is such as to present an immediate threat to the safety of the public. 
(5)  A sign shall be removed by the owner or lessee of the premises upon which the sign is located when the business which the sign advertises no longer is conducted on the premises. If the owner or lessee fails to remove the sign, the building inspector shall notify the owner or lessee in writing, and allow 30 days for removal of such sign. Upon failure of the owner or lessee to comply with the notice, the administrator may remove the sign at cost and expense to the owner or lessee. 
(6)  Signs may be inspected periodically by the building inspector for compliance with this chapter, and with other ordinances of the city. All signs and their component parts are to be kept in good repair, and in safe condition. 
(7)  In addition to the other remedies and penalties provided in section 1-8, the city attorney is authorized to file appropriate civil actions for a temporary restraining order, temporary injunction, permanent injunction, or for damages against any person, firm, or corporation violating the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 2008, § 17.700; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.700), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-574. - Sign permit required; exemption. 
(a)  No sign may be constructed, erected, remodeled, relocated, or expanded until a sign permit is obtained in accordance with this article. 
(b)  No sign permit shall be issued for any sign unless the sign is accessory to a permitted use and the sign is permitted by, and complies with the regulations of this article. However, the following types of signs are exempt from the permit requirements and from the regulations of this article: 
(1)  Flags or emblems of a government or of a political, civic, philanthropic, educational, or religious organization, displayed on private property; 
(2)  Signs of a duly constituted governmental body, including traffic or similar regulatory devices, legal notices, and warnings at railroad crossings; 
(3)  Address numerals and other signs required to be maintained by law or governmental order, rule, or regulation; provided that the content and size of the sign do not exceed the requirements of such law, order, rule, or regulation; 
(4)  Small signs, not exceeding two square feet in area, displayed on private property for the convenience of the public, including signs to identify restrooms, freight entrances, and the like; 
(5)  Flags, streamers, placards, pennants not exceeding six square feet in area, and small balloons not exceeding five cubic feet in volume. 
(6)  Temporary signs, banners, and displays for special church, school, institutional, civic, or community events that are erected outside public rights-of-way for a period no more than 60 days prior and three days after the scheduled event. 
(7)  Welcome signs erected outside public rights-of-way near major community entrances that contain no advertising other than participating groups or organizations. Such signs shall be subject to the review and approval of the city council prior to construction. 
(Code 2008, § 17.530; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.530), 11-2-2009) 
Secs. 78-575-78-596. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS 

Sec. 78-597. - Application for permit. 
    Application for a sign permit shall be filed by the owner of the sign or his agent with the building inspector. The application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name, address, and telephone number of the owner of the sign, and agent, if any; 
(2)  Location of building, structure, or lot to which or upon which the sign is to be attached or erected: 
(3)  Position of the sign in relation to nearby buildings or structures; 
(4)  Two prints or drawings of the plans and specifications indicating the method of construction and attachment to the buildings or in the ground except for banner, inflatable, and temporary sign permits; 
(5)  Name of person, firm, corporation, or association erecting sign; 
(6)  Evidence of written consent of the owner of the building, structure, or land to which or on which the sign is to be erected; and 
(7)  Such other information as the building inspector shall require showing full compliance with this and all other laws and ordinances of the city. 
(Code 2008, § 17.540; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.540), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-598. - Permits. 
    A permit shall be issued for each sign by the building inspector relative to the provisions of this chapter. 
(1)  Sign permits granted under the terms of this chapter are not transferable. 
(2)  If the work authorized under a sign permit to build has not been substantially completed within six months after the date of issuance, the permit shall become void and a new permit is required. 
(3)  The changing of the advertising copy or message on an approved painted sign or on changeable letter panels or bulletin boards specifically designed for the use of replaceable copy and painting, repainting, cleaning and other normal maintenance and repair of a sign structure shall not be considered as creating a sign and shall not require a sign permit. 
(4)  The building inspector is authorized and empowered to revoke any permit issued by him if the holder of the permit fails to comply with any provision of this chapter. 
(Code 2008, § 17.550; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.550), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-599. - Fees. 
    For each sign requiring a permit under this chapter, a fee shall be paid at the time of the issuance of a permit. The fee charged for all signs requiring a permit shall be $25.00 and then an additional $2.50 per $1,000.00 or fraction thereof for the actual cost of the sign and installation. 
(Code 2008, § 17.560; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.560), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-600. - Inspection upon completion. 
    The applicant who has been issued a permit for construction, installation, erection, relocation, or alteration of a sign shall, upon completion of the work, notify the city administrative office who shall notify the building inspector to inspect the condition of the sign with respect to its safety and location. 
(Code 2008, § 17.570; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.570), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-601. - Appeals. 
    Any person aggrieved by a decision of the building inspector relative to the provisions of this chapter may appeal such decision to the planning and zoning commission board of appeals. 
(Code 2008, § 17.580; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.580), 11-2-2009) 
Secs. 78-602-78-620. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - STANDARDS 

Sec. 78-621. - General standards. 
    All signs hereafter painted, constructed, erected, remodeled, relocated, or expanded shall comply with the following standards: 
(1)  No sign shall be constructed on or project into the public right-of-way except signs installed by public governmental agencies and those signs specifically permitted in this chapter. 
(2)  All signs and their supporting structures must be properly maintained and must be kept in good repair, and must, where applicable, be easily readable from the nearest public right-of-way. 
(3)  Illuminated signs. Illuminated signs shall be shaded wherever necessary to avoid casting bright light upon property located in any residential district or upon any public street or park. Illuminated signs shall not be lighted in an obtrusive manner or create a nuisance. All illuminated signs shall first be approved by the planning and zoning commission. 
(4)  Flashing or moving signs. No flashing or moving signs shall be permitted unless specifically allowed in this chapter. No sign shall flash or move in an obtrusive manner or create a nuisance. No rotating beam, beacon, strobe, or similar types of illumination devices shall be allowed. 
(5)  Sidewalk signs. Sandwich board signs, A-frame signs, easel signs, and similar sidewalk signs may be temporarily placed near the public right-of-way without a permit. Where a storefront meets the sidewalk, such signs may be placed on the sidewalk immediately adjacent to the main entrance. All sidewalk signs must satisfy the following requirements: 
a.  The sign is accessory to an existing business, commercial, or industrial use; 
b.  The sign shall not exceed six square feet in size and four feet above ground level; 
c.  The sign is displayed during business hours only; 
d.  The sign does not impede pedestrian movement or vehicular visibility. 
(6)  Signs in access ways. No sign shall block any required access way. 
(7)  Signs on vacant property. No sign shall be located on vacant property except a sign advertising the premises for sale or lease which meets the standards of this chapter. 
(8)  Signs on trees or utility poles. No sign shall be attached to a tree or utility pole whether on public or private property. 
(9)  Building and electrical codes applicable. All signs must conform to the regulations and design standards of the applicable building codes. Wiring of all electrical signs must also conform to the applicable electrical codes. 
(10)  Traffic safety. No sign shall be maintained at any location where, by reason of its position, size, shape, or color, it may obstruct, impair, obscure, interfere with the view of traffic, or be confused with any traffic control sign, signal, or device, or where it may interfere with, mislead, or confuse traffic. Signs erected or constructed on a corner must observe the sight triangle requirements. 
(11)  Obsolete and off-premises signs. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no sign shall be permitted which advertises a business which is not being conducted on or immediately adjacent to premises on which the sign is located. 
(12)  Portable signs. Portable signs except banners and flags will only be permitted or allowed if such portable sign satisfies all of the following requirements: 
a.  The business must have a permanent sign in order to permit or allow a portable sign; 
b.  The area of a portable sign may not exceed 18 square feet; 
c.  No flashing lights will be permitted or allowed on or in connection with the portable signs but said portable sign may be backlit; 
d.  There must be a message displayed on the portable sign; 
e.  No more than one portable sign may be displayed on a single lot or parcel with a frontage of 500 feet or less. Lots or parcels with frontage over 500 feet that have multiple businesses on the same lot or parcel may have a total of two portable signs. 
(13)  Banners. Banners will only be permitted or allowed if such banners satisfy all of the following requirements: 
a.  Banners displayed on the ground are not permitted. 
b.  Banners attached to poles, fences, buildings, light poles, sign poles, or any combination thereof, shall meet the following requirements: 
1.  The business or shopping center maintains a permanent sign that complies with the provisions of the city's sign ordinance; 
2.  No more than one banner may be displayed on a single lot or parcel with a frontage of 500 feet or less. Lots or parcels with frontage over 500 feet that have multiple businesses on the same lot or parcel may have a total of two banners; and 
3.  The area of the banner may not exceed 60 square feet. 
c.  Banners displayed on the walls or roof of the business or shopping center are not permitted unless all of the following requirements are met: 
1.  The business or shopping center has a permanent sign that complies with all of the provisions of the sign ordinance of the city. 
2.  The area of the banners may not exceed 16 percent of the wall or roof surface to which such banners are attached, and the total combined area of the banners and all other permanent signs on that wall or roof surface may not exceed 25 percent of the area of the wall or roof surface to which the banners are attached. 
3.  Where a single building is devoted to two or more businesses, commercial, or industrial uses, the operator of each such use may install such a banner; provided, however, the maximum area of each such banner shall be determined by determining the proportionate share of the building face (including doors and windows) of the principal building occupied by each such use and applying such proportion to the total sign area permitted on the wall of the building according to subsection (13)c.2 of this section. 
d.  With regard to all permissible banners, each banner may be temporarily removed or replaced with a banner with a new message thereon from time to time without the necessity of obtaining a new sign permit therefor, provided that the area of the banner may not exceed the area of the banner for which the original sign permit was obtained and issued. 
(14)  Flags. Flags do not require a permit, however, will only be permitted or allowed if such flags satisfy all of the following requirements: 
a.  Flags are not permitted, unless all of the following conditions are met: 
1.  The business or shopping center maintains a permanent sign that complies with the provisions of the city's sign ordinance; 
2.  No more than two such flags may be displayed on a single lot or parcel with a frontage of 200 feet or less. Lots or parcels with frontage between 201 and 500 feet may have a total of four flags. Lots or parcels with frontage between 501 and 1,000 feet may have a total of six flags. Lots or parcels with frontage over 1,000 feet may have a total of eight flags; and 
3.  The area of each flag may not exceed 30 square feet. 
b.  With regard to all permissible flags, each flag may be temporarily removed or replaced with a flag with a new message thereon from time to time, provided that the flags meet the above requirements. 
(15)  Inflatable. Inflatables shall only be allowed to remain on the site for no more than 30 calendar days per year. 
(16)  Political signs. Temporary political signs shall not exceed 12 square feet in residential districts and 50 square feet in agricultural, commercial and industrial districts. Political signs may be placed only on private property with permission of the landowner or person in control of said property and do not require a permit. All political signs must be removed within 14 days after the election. 
(Code 2008, § 17.590; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.590), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-622. - Signs accessory to residential uses. 
    Each sign accessory to residential uses shall be set back from the street right-of-way line a distance at least half of the required minimum setback specified in the district regulations, except for street number identification signs and signs permitted under subsections (2) and (3) of this section. No sign accessory to any residential use shall be permitted except in compliance with the following regulations: 
(1)  Name plate and identification signs shall be permitted subject to the following regulations: 
a.  For each single-family dwelling there shall be permitted one name plate not exceeding one square foot in area (excluding the area of the house number) indicating the name or address of the occupant and, where applicable, a professional status, but not to indicate a product or business; 
b.  For each multiple-family dwelling there shall be permitted one non-illuminated identification sign not exceeding five square feet in area located near the main entrance to the building and indicating only the name and address of the building and name of the owner or manager thereof; and 
c.  In connection with the construction or remodeling of a building there shall be permitted no more than two non-illuminated signs, each such sign not exceeding 32 square feet in area, indicating the names of any or all of the architects, engineers, and contractors engaged in the construction thereof, on corner lots four such signs, two facing each street, shall be permitted. No such sign may be placed or located within five feet of the lot line or property line of the lot, block, or parcel of property upon which such sign is located. Any signs permitted under this subsection shall be removed by the person erecting the same within 14 days after the completion of the structure indicated. 
(2)  "For sale" and "for rent" signs shall be permitted subject to the following regulations: 
a.  For the sale or rental of real property, there may be no more than one "for sale" or "for rent" sign per lot, except that on a corner lot two such signs will be permitted, one facing each street. No such "for sale" or "for rent" sign may exceed 12 square feet in area, and no such sign shall be illuminated. Each such sign must be devoted solely to the sale or rental of the property being offered and must be removed within seven days following the sale or rental of the property. 
b.  In addition to one "for sale" or "for rent" sign, there may be no more than one "open house" sign per lot, except that on a corner lot, two such signs will be permitted, one facing each street. Each such "open house" sign may not exceed 12 square feet in area and no such sign may be illuminated. Each such "open house" sign must be devoted solely to the property being offered for sale and must be removed immediately upon the conclusion of the open house for that property. 
c.  In addition to one "open house" sign being permitted per lot, additional "open house" signs may be placed at intersections leading to the subject house for up to four days prior to the open house. All such "open house" signs shall be placed on private property after the consent and permission of the owner thereof has been obtained, and no such sign shall be placed in city right-of-way. Such sign shall be removed immediately upon the conclusion of the open house. 
d.  Where more than six dwelling units (or lots for dwelling purposes) are offered for sale or rental by the same party there shall be permitted one sign facing each public street providing access to the property being offered. Each such sign shall not exceed 100 square feet in area and must be devoted solely to the sale or rental of the property being offered, and must be removed within seven days following the sale or rental of the last property offered at that location. 
e.  In addition, one "directional" sign may be placed per property which is for sale/rent/lease. Permission must be obtained from the owner of the property on which the sign is placed. The address for the sale/rent/lease property must be clearly listed. No flags, balloons or other adornments may be added to the directional signs. No such sign shall be placed in a public right-of-way. 
(3)  Garage sale and yard sale signs shall be permitted subject to the following regulations: 
a.  For temporary sales of merchandise on private property, there may be no more than one "garage sale" or "yard sale" sign per lot or household, except that on a corner lot two such signs will be permitted, one facing each street. No such sign may exceed three square feet in area, and no such sign may be illuminated. 
b.  Additional "garage sale" or "yard sale" signs may be placed at street intersections leading to the subject house. All such signs shall be placed on private property after the consent and permission of the owner has been obtained, and no such sign shall be placed in public right-of-way. 
c.  All such "garage sale" or "yard sale" signs may be displayed no more than one day prior to the scheduled sale and must be removed immediately upon the conclusion of the sale. 
(4)  Subdivision or development identification signs shall be permitted subject to the following regulations: 
a.  For developing subdivisions, there may be no more than one off-premises sign directing vehicles to the subdivision from a major arterial road or street within the city. Such sign must not exceed 12 square feet in area and no such sign may be illuminated. Signs shall be placed on private property after the consent and permission of the owner thereof has been obtained. Each such sign must be devoted solely to directing persons and traffic to the subdivision being developed. 
b.  For subdivisions where a preliminary plat has been approved for ten or more residential lots or dwelling units, there may be no more than one permanent subdivision or development identification sign on each corner of each entry street not exceeding 50 square feet in size each. Said sign must be placed on private property outside the public right-of-way and must comply with all other standards contained in this chapter. 
c.  Signs must be removed within 14 days after the last residential lot is sold. 
(Code 2008, § 17.600; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.600), 11-2-2009; Ord. No. 13-19, § I, 10-21-2013) 
Sec. 78-623. - Signs accessory to business, commercial, or industrial uses. 
    No sign accessory to any business, commercial, or industrial use shall be permitted, except in compliance with the following: 
(1)  Wall signs. Wall signs shall be permitted subject to the following regulations: 
a.  Front wall signs are permitted on the front wall of any principal building. The total area of such sign or signs shall not exceed 25 percent of the area of the front face (including doors and windows) of the principal building; 
b.  Side wall signs shall not exceed more than ten percent of the side of the principal building, including doors and windows and shall not be painted directly on the side of any building; 
c.  Rear wall signs shall be permitted on the rear wall of any principal building. The total area of such signs shall not exceed 25 percent of the area of the rear face (including doors and windows) of the principal building; 
d.  Where a single principal building is devoted to two or more business, commercial, or industrial uses, the operator of each such use may install a wall sign. The maximum area of each sign shall be determined by determining the proportionate share of the front face (including doors and windows) of the principal building occupied by each such use and applying such proportion to the total sign area, permitted for the front wall of the building; 
e.  Wall signs shall not be projecting signs; 
f.  Signs constructed of metal and illuminated by any means requiring internal wiring or electrically wired accessory fixtures attached to a metal sign shall maintain a free clearance to grade of nine feet. Accessory lighting fixtures attached to a nonmetal frame sign shall maintain a clearance of nine feet to the ground. In the event that a metal sign structure or accessory fixture herein described as grounded by the use of a grounding conductor run with the circuit conductors and said structure of fixture is also grounded by being bonded to a grounding electrode at the sign site, no clearance to grade shall be mandatory; 
g.  Wall signs may be gaseous type or may be illuminated by interior means of lighting of an intensity to prevent excessive glare, or by indirect lighting designed to flood only the area of the sign with light and to prevent light from being directed on surrounding property; and 
h.  Illuminated wall signs shall have shielded silhouette lighting or shielded spot lighting but shall not have any lighting where the light source itself is visible or exposed on the face or sides of the characters. 
(2)  Ground signs. No more than one ground sign may be displayed on a single lot or parcel with a frontage up to 200 feet. Lots or parcels with frontage between 201 and 500 feet may have a total of two ground signs. Lots or parcels with frontage between 501 and 1,000 feet may have a total of three ground signs. Lots or parcels with frontage over 1,000 feet may have a total of four ground signs. All ground signs are subject to the following conditions: 
a.  All ground signs permitted by this section shall not project into the public right-of-way; 
b.  The total area of all ground signs shall not exceed one square foot per foot of frontage, however the area of any ground sign shall not exceed 160 square feet on either side; 
c.  No metal ground sign shall be located within eight feet vertically and four feet horizontally of electric wires or conductors in free air carrying more than 48 volts, whether or not these wires or conductors are insulated or otherwise protected; 
d.  The maximum height of the main body of any ground sign measured from the curb line or pavement edge shall not exceed the following limitations as applicable: 
1.  20 feet in any B-1 district or when located within 50 feet of any residential lot; 
2.  25 feet in any B-2 and industrial district; and 
3.  30 feet in any industrial district when adjacent to a four-lane divided roadway with a traffic speed limit posted at 45 miles per hour or greater. 
e.  Signs constructed of metal and illuminated by any means requiring internal wiring or electrically wired accessory fixtures attached to a metal sign shall maintain a free clearance to grade of nine feet. Accessory lighting fixtures attached to a non-metal frame sign shall maintain a clearance of nine feet to ground. In the event that metal sign or structure or accessory fixture herein described is grounded by the use of a grounding conductor run with the circuit conductors and this structure or fixture is also grounded by being bonded to a grounding electrode at the sign site, no clearance to grade shall be mandatory. 
f.  Business parks, retail plazas, or shopping centers may consolidate individual ground signs and erect an enlarged commercial center sign, subject to the following regulations. The sign must prominently display a common name for the entire shopping center, plaza, or business park. No individual tenant, lot, or business shall have a panel or portion of the sign exceeding 50 square feet on either side. 
1.  The sign may be placed on-premises or off-premises but shall be located no more than 400 feet from the advertised business park, retail plaza, or shopping center. 
2.  The business park, retail plaza, or shopping center must contain four or more individual businesses or lots that share one or more common entrances and are located on a site no smaller than ten acres in total land area. 
3.  The sign must be located in a B-1 and industrial district. 
4.  The sign shall not exceed 34 feet in height and 260 square feet in sign area on either side. The sign must also comply with any and all sign standards in this chapter, unless inconsistent with this section. 
5.  The sign must be placed no less than ten feet from any public right-of-way line, no less than 300 feet from any residential property, and no less than 500 feet from any other commercial center sign or billboard. 
6.  Each individual lot within a business park shall have or erect monument signs only. Sign size and quantity per lot shall be as permitted by this chapter; however, no monument sign shall exceed eight feet in height and 60 square feet in area on either side. 
(3)  Roof signs. Signs must be located wholly within the roof area of the structure and are permitted subject to the following conditions: 
a.  No roof sign shall be placed on the roof of any building in such manner as to prevent the free passage from one part of the roof to any other part thereof; 
b.  Every roof sign, including the upright supports and braces, shall be constructed entirely of non-combustible materials. However, combustible structural trim may be used thereon; 
c.  No roof sign shall have a surface exceeding 25 percent of the roof surface, nor have its highest point extended more than eight feet above the roof level; 
d.  No sign shall be painted directly upon the roof of any building; and 
e.  Every roof sign shall be thoroughly secured to the building by iron or other metal anchors or supports. 
(4)  Awning or canopy signs. Letters may be painted or otherwise affixed to any permissible awning or canopy subject to the following regulations: 
a.  Lettering or letters shall not project above, below, or beyond the physical dimensions of the awning or canopy; and 
b.  Lettering or letters shall not denote other than the name and address of the business conducted therein or products produced or sold or service rendered therein. 
(5)  Commercial or industrial district. Nameplates indicating the name and corporate insignia of the building owner or occupant, address or product may be located on gates, gate posts, or gate houses; provided that in the case of multiple occupancy, one name be utilized for identification purposes. 
(6)  Signs accessory to automobile service stations. The following signs accessory to automobile service stations are permitted, in addition to the signs permitted under this section: 
a.  Gasoline service stations shall be permitted one exterior rate or price sign for each street frontage. The area of each such sign shall not exceed eight square feet. Such signs shall not contain any advertising; 
b.  Each gasoline service station shall be permitted to display a maximum of seven signs or items of information; and 
c.  Signs accessory to service stations must conform to all other provisions in this section. 
(7)  For sale signs. Temporary for sale signs shall not exceed 20 square feet in area for lots or parcels less than five acres in size. Temporary for sale signs shall not exceed 50 square feet in area for lots or parcels greater than five acres in size. 
(8)  Off-premises ground signs for funeral homes, nursing homes and governmental facilities. A funeral home, nursing home or facility of any unit of government may erect one off-premises ground sign on another parcel located within 400 feet of its premises provided that such sign not exceed 50 square feet in size on either side or a maximum height of 25 feet. Such off-premises ground sign shall count toward the total number, and the maximum square foot area, of ground signs permitted on the parcel on which such off-premises sign is located. 
(9)  Projecting signs. No more than one projecting sign per storefront may be constructed, provided, however, that such sign: 
a.  Is a minimum of ten feet above ground level and does not extend above the parapet wall or roof line; 
b.  Is one square foot in area per linear foot of store frontage not to exceed 24 square feet, and is not more than six feet from the face of the building; and 
c.  Does not extend into the public right-of-way except where a storefront meets the sidewalk. In such instance, the sign shall not extend past the curb line or into any vehicular area. 
(10)  Electronic message boards. No more than one electronic message board per lot may be constructed; provided, however, that the message board: 
a.  Is attached and subordinate to a permitted wall or ground sign. 
b.  Does not exceed 60 square feet in area and does not exceed 40 percent of the total area of the sign. 
c.  Displays a copy for a minimum duration of three seconds before any change in copy. 
d.  Is not a flashing sign, does not display video or graphic animation, and does not utilize chasing, scintillating, or high intensity lighting. 
e.  Does not display any advertising other than references to the business conducted on the premises. Civic announcements, congratulatory remarks, personal salutations, and the time, date, and/or temperature shall also be allowed. 
f.  Is not located within 100 feet of any residential zoning district. 
(Code 2008, § 17.610; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.610), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-624. - Signs accessory to parking areas. 
    Signs accessory to parking areas are permitted subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  One sign may be erected to designate each entrance to or exit from a parking area. Each such sign shall be no more than two square feet in area; and 
(2)  One sign designating the conditions of use shall be permitted for each parking area. Each such sign shall be limited to a maximum area of nine square feet. In parking areas where the parking spaces are reserved, each space may have a sign designating the parking restrictions limited to a maximum area of two square feet. 
(Code 2008, § 17.620; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.620), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-625. - Signs accessory to churches, schools, or nonprofit institutions. 
    Signs accessory to churches, schools, or nonprofit institutions are permitted subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  In R-1, R-2, B-1 and B-2 zoning districts, there shall be not more than one sign per lot, except that on a corner lot two signs, one facing each street, shall be permitted. No such sign shall exceed 32 square feet in area. Such signs shall be set back from the right-of-way line a distance at least one-half of the minimum setback specified in the district regulations. 
(2)  Sign permit fees shall be waived for any tax supported unit or district. 
(Code 2008, § 17.630; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.630), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-626. - Agricultural district signs. 
    The following signs accessory to agricultural zoning districts are permitted subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  Nameplates not exceeding one square foot in area on either side for each dwelling unit; 
(2)  Bulletin boards for churches and identifications signs for schools or other permitted uses, not exceeding 50 square feet in area when located on the premises of agricultural zoning districts; 
(3)  Signs not exceeding 50 square feet in area offering for sale, land, lots, houses, or livestock; and 
(4)  Home occupation signs in conformance with this chapter 
(Code 2008, § 17.640; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.640), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-627. - Billboards. 
(a)  Billboards of the following three types shall be allowed: 
(1)  Poster panels or bulletins normally mounted on a building wall, roof, or freestanding structure with advertising copy in the form of pasted paper; 
(2)  Multiprism signs alternating advertising messages on one displayed area; and 
(3)  Painted bulletins, where the advertiser's message is painted directly on a wall-mounted, roof, or freestanding display area. 
(b)  Billboards are prohibited in the city, except under the conditions stated here. No billboard will be permitted which advertises a business which is not located and presently being conducted on the premises on which the billboard is located, except as follows: 
(1)  As may be permitted by applicable state and federal law, rules, and regulations along state and federal highways, or roads under the jurisdiction of the state or federal departments of transportation, and where the maximum permissible speed for vehicles traveling upon such highway or road is not less than 50 miles per hour; 
(2)  The maximum height above grade of such billboard shall not exceed 30 feet; 
(3)  The maximum surface area of such billboard shall not exceed 672 square feet; 
(4)  The lot, block, or parcel of real estate upon which said billboard is located must have an area of no less than 20,000 square feet, and must be zoned for commercial or industrial use; 
(5)  The location of said billboard shall be no less than 20 feet from the property line of the lot upon which the billboard is located; 
(6)  Said billboard may not be located or placed within 500 feet from the nearest lot line of any residential zoned lot, block or parcel, or any lot, block or parcel use for residential purposes; 
(7)  Said billboard may not be located any closer than 1,500 feet from another such billboard whether on the same side of the highway or road; and 
(8)  Said billboard may not be located in such a place or in such a manner so as to block the view of drivers of vehicles approaching an intersection. 
(Code 2008, § 17.650; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.650), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-628. - Signs advertising or offering for sale of any alcoholic liquor; view from street; lighting; posting prices. 
    The provisions of chapter 6 apply. 
(Code 2008, § 17.660; Ord. No. 16.02.1, § I(17.660), 1-18-2016) 
Sec. 78-629. - Signs not covered. 
    Signs not covered by the above provisions must be approved by the planning and zoning commission on a case by case basis. 
(Code 2008, § 17.670; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.670), 11-2-2009) 
Secs. 78-630-78-646. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - NONCONFORMING SIGNS AND VARIANCES 

Sec. 78-647. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)  Signs which do not conform to the provisions of this chapter as of the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, or any subsequent amendment, shall be nonconforming signs. 
(b)  A nonconforming sign may not be: 
(1)  Changed to another nonconforming sign; 
(2)  Structurally altered so as to prolong the life of the sign; 
(3)  Expanded in size; 
(4)  Reestablished after its removal for 30 days; 
(5)  Reestablished after damage or destruction if the estimated expenses of reconstruction exceed 50 percent of appraised replacement cost at the time of the damage or destruction; 
(6)  Routinely maintained where the costs of such repair or maintenance exceed 15 percent of the current replacement costs for any period of 12 consecutive months. However, nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any size or part thereof declared to be unsafe by the building inspector; or 
(7)  Continued following a change of business, for which the sign advertised. 
(Code 2008, § 17.680; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.680), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-648. - Variances. 
(a)  As described in this chapter may be permitted by the planning and zoning commission in appropriate cases, subject to the legislative intent specified in the zoning code, and the standards established by that code. In all cases the scope of authority which the planning and zoning commission shall have to grant sign variances from the provisions of this chapter is limited to those as permitted by state statute. 
(b)  In addition to any power herein granted to the planning and zoning commission the corporate authorities reserve and retain the power to determine and vary by ordinance the application to the sign regulations herein contained in harmony with their general purpose and intent in cases where there are practical difficulties or particular hardship in the way of carrying out the strict letter of any of those regulations. No such variance shall be made by the corporate authorities without a hearing before the planning and zoning commission. 
(Code 2008, § 17.690; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.690), 11-2-2009) 
Secs. 78-649-78-669. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - SATELLITE DISH ANTENNAS 

Sec. 78-670. - Conformance with regulations. 
    No satellite television antenna shall be erected, constructed, maintained, or operated except in conformance with the following regulations of this chapter. 
(Code 2008, § 17.810; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.810), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-671. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Satellite television antenna means an apparatus capable of receiving communications from a transmitter or a transmitter relay located in planetary orbit. 
    Usable satellite signal means a satellite signal which when viewed on a conventional television set, is at least equal in picture quality to that received from local commercial television stations or by way of cable television. To be considered usable, quality referred to above need only be present if 50 percent of the channels are available for satellite reception at optimum locations within the city. 
(Code 2008, § 17.820; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.820), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-672. - Location of satellite antenna. 
(a)  In any commercial, industrial, or multifamily residential zone, such antenna may be located anywhere on the lot or buildings thereon. 
(b)  In a noncommercial or single-family zone, subject to the provisions contained in this chapter, such antenna should be located only in the rear yard of any lot. 
(1)  If a usable satellite signal cannot be obtained from such rear yard, such antenna may be located on the side or front yard of the property. 
(2)  In the event that a usable satellite signal cannot be obtained by locating the antenna on the rear, side, or front yard of the property, such antenna may be placed on the roof of the dwelling structure. 
(c)  In no event shall such antenna be constructed on any historic district, site, building, structure or object included in, or eligible for inclusion on, the National Register of Historic Places, as set forth in the National Historic Preservation Act or Illinois State Agency Historic Resource Preservation Act without obtaining a permit from the city prior to the construction of any such antenna. 
(Code 2008, § 17.830; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.830), 11-2-2009; Ord. No. 17-02, § 2, 3-6-2017) 
Sec. 78-673. - Antenna size. 
(a)  A satellite television antenna shall not extend more than 12 feet in height above the roofline of the primary building or residence located on the lot or property, including any platform or structure upon which said antenna is mounted or affixed. In the event that it is necessary for such antenna to extend more than 12 feet in height above the roofline, such antenna may be constructed provided that a permit is obtained prior to such construction from the city. 
(b)  Such antenna may not exceed one meter (39.37 inches) in diameter. 
(c)  Except in a commercial, industrial, or multifamily residential zone, satellite television antennas shall be located and designed to reduce visual impact from surrounding properties at street level and from public streets. 
(d)  Not more than any one satellite television antenna should be constructed on any lot unless it is necessary to receive a usable satellite signal. 
(e)  All antennas and the construction and installation thereof shall conform to applicable city code regulations and requirements. 
(f)  Antennas shall meet all manufacturer's specifications, be of noncombustible and corrosive resistant material, and be erected in a secure, wind-resistant manner. 
(g)  Every antenna must be adequately grounded for protection against a direct strike of lightning. 
(Code 2008, § 17.840; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.840), 11-2-2009; Ord. No. 17-02, § 3, 3-6-2017) 
Secs. 78-674-78-704. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - AMATEUR RADIO/CITIZENS RADIO ANTENNA 

Sec. 78-705. - Amateur radio/citizens radio antenna; definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Antenna means the arrangement of wires or metal rods used in the sending and receiving of electromagnetic waves. 
    Antenna height means the overall vertical height above grade of the antenna support structure and antenna. 
    Antenna support structure means any structure, mast, pole, tripod, or tower utilized for the purpose of supporting an antenna for the purpose of transmission or reception of electromagnetic waves by federally licensed amateur radio or citizens band radio operators. 
(Code 2008, § 17.850; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.850), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-706. - Permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to install, construct or increase the height of any antenna support structure without first obtaining a building permit, except that no permit shall be required if the height of the antenna support structure (excluding the height of any building to which the antenna support structure is attached) is less than 12 feet. 
(Code 2008, § 17.860; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.860), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-707. - Application. 
    Applications for a building permit required in section 78-706 shall be made upon such forms requested by the city and shall have attached thereto the following items: 
(1)  A location plan for the antenna support structure. 
(2)  Manufacturer's specifications for the antenna support structure and details of footings, guys and braces. 
(3)  A copy of the applicant's homeowner or renter's insurance policy. 
(4)  A copy of a valid amateur radio operator's license in the name of the owner or occupant of the property for which the permit is being requested, except in the instance of a citizens radio antenna, where no license is required. 
(5)  A permit fee of $15.00. 
(Code 2008, § 17.870; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.870), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-708. - Height limitation. 
    Amateur radio antenna and citizens radio antenna heights shall be restricted to the following: 
(1)  Amateur radio antenna height: 
a.  Freestanding antenna support structure: 75 feet above grade; and 
b.  Antenna support structure attached to a building: 30 feet above the height of the building to which it is attached, not to exceed 75 feet above grade. 
(2)  Citizens radio antenna height: 
a.  Freestanding antenna support structure: 60 feet above grade; and 
b.  Antenna support structure attached to a building: 20 feet above the height of the building to which it is attached, not to exceed 60 feet above grade. 
(Code 2008, § 17.880; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.880), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-709. - Construction requirements and restrictions. 
(a)  Antenna support structures shall be designed and constructed in conformance with section 621 of the latest addition of the International Building Code, for freestanding antenna support structures and section 622 of the latest addition of the International Building Code, for antenna support structures attached to a building, except for those provisions in the latest addition of the International National Building Code, which conflict with this section, where this section shall prevail. 
(b)  Electrical requirements. All antenna support structures, whether ground or roof mounted, shall be grounded to adequately protect against a direct strike of lightning. In all instances, construction shall follow the manufacturer's requirements for grounding. 
(c)  No antenna shall protrude in any manner upon the adjoining property; and no antenna shall protrude upon the public right-of-way. 
(d)  Ground mounted antenna support structures may be erected only in a rear or side yard and must maintain a setback of five feet from the rear and side property lines. 
(Code 2008, § 17.890; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.890), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-710. - Exemptions. 
    This article shall not affect any existing antenna support structure, utilized by federally licensed amateur radio or federally authorized citizens band radio service stations, which has been constructed and which is in place prior to the date of the passage of the ordinance from which this article is derived; provided, however, that such antenna support structures must comply with the grounding requirements of section 78-709; and further provided that owners of existing antenna support structures submit to the city, within 90 days of the date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, the documentation required by section 78-707, less the required fee. 
(Code 2008, § 17.900; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.900), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-711. - Inspection. 
    The building inspector is hereby empowered to inspect or re-inspect any antenna installation for violation of this code and, if such installation is found in violation, shall notify the person owning or operating such antenna and shall require the correction of the condition within 48 hours. 
(Code 2008, § 17.910; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.910), 11-2-2009) 
Secs. 78-712-78-735. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITY, TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS AND TOWERS FOR POWER GENERATION 

Sec. 78-736. - Title. 
    This article shall be known as the "Personal Wireless Service Facility (PWSF), Telecommunications Towers and Personal Wind Towers or Any Device to Generate Electricity or Any Power Generating Source," hereinafter referred to as "facilities." 
(Code 2008, § 17.1210; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.1210), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-737. - Purpose. 
    The primary intent of this article is to regulate facilities to be located within the city. This article is not intended to, nor does it apply to, amateur radio communications and amateur radio antennas. Therefore, the purpose of this article shall be to: 
(1)  Comply with all federal and state regulations regarding the placement, use, and maintenance of facilities. 
(2)  Encourage the continued improvement of facility service in the city. 
(3)  Minimize, to the extent permitted by law, the proliferation of visual and safety impacts of facilities throughout the city. 
(4)  Promote both proper maintenance and renovation of facilities. 
(5)  Encourage the use of co-location of facilities by multiple providers so as to reduce the number of facilities needed within the city. 
(6)  Recognize the commercial communication requirements of all sectors of the business and residential community. 
(Code 2008, § 17.1220; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.1220), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-738. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    ANSI means the American National Standards Institute, a non-profit, privately funded membership organization that coordinates the development of U.S. voluntary national standards. 
    Above ground level (AGL) means the actual height of the facility from the sidewalk level or equivalent established grade to the highest part of the mount or the antenna, whichever is higher. 
    Alternative tower structure means and includes, but is not limited to, manmade trees, clock towers, bell steeples, light poles and similar alternative design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of commercial communications towers and antennas. 
    Antenna means a whip (omni-directional antenna), panel (direction antenna), disc (parabolic antenna), or similar device used for transmission and/or reception of radio frequency signals. 
    Antenna array means an antenna array is one or more whips, panels, discs, or similar devices used for the transmission or reception of radio frequency signals, which may include omni-directional antennas (whips), directional antennas (panels), and parabolic antennas (discs). The term "antenna array" does not include the mount as defined herein. 
    Applicant means a person or entity with an application before the city planning and zoning commission for a permit for a facility. 
    Avoidance sites means floodprone areas, as mapped by the Federal Emergency Management Agency on a flood insurance rate map. Wetlands, water bodies, and watercourses, as mapped by the state department of natural resources. Visual and community entrance corridors, including any location within 250 feet of the following arterial roads: Business Route 24 and Route 117 - R-1, and R-2 zoning districts, except in the case of public property. 
    Camouflage means a way of painting and mounting a facility that requires minimal changes to the host structure in order to accommodate the facility. 
    Carrier means a company licensed by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) that provides facility services. For purposes of this article, a tower builder shall not be considered a carrier. 
    Cell site means a generic term for a PWSF. 
    Cellular. A cellular telephone is a system providing portable telephone service to specific subscribers. A cellular telephone may also be referred to as a wireless telephone. 
    Co-applicant means any person and/or entity joining with an applicant in an application for a permit for a facility, including the owner of the facility, owner of the subject property, and any proposed tenant for the facility. 
    Co-location means the use of a common tower or structure by two or more wireless license holders or by one wireless license holder for more than one type of communications technology for purposes of maintaining two or more facilities. 
    Commercial communications antenna means any device used for the transmission or reception of radio, television, wireless telephone, pager, commercial mobile radio service or any other wireless communications signals, including without limitation omni-directional or whip antennas and directional or panel antennas, owned or operated by any person or entity licensed by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to operate such device. This includes any mounted satellite dishes or television antennas or amateur radio equipment including without limitation ham or citizen band radio antennas. 
    Commercial communications tower means any device used for the transmission or reception of television, radio or communications tower which is not a facility designed or used for the provision of personal wireless services, as defined by section 704 of the Telecommunications Act of 1996. Commercial communications towers do not include amateur radio/citizens radio antennas, which shall meet the requirements of article III of this chapter. 
    Commercial mobile radio services (CMRS) means, per section 704 of the Telecommunications Act of 1996, any of several technologies using radio signals at various frequencies to send and receive voice, data, and video. According to the FCC, these services are "functionally equivalent services." Section 704 of the Telecommunications Act prohibits unreasonable discrimination among functionally equivalent services. 
    Conceal means to enclose a facility within a natural or manmade feature resulting in the facility being either invisible or made part of the feature enclosing it. 
    Design means the appearance of the facility such as their materials, colors, and shape. 
    Disguise means to design a facility to appear to be something other than a facility. 
    Enhanced specialized mobile radio (ESMR) means private land mobile radio with telephone services. 
    Equipment cabinet/equipment shelter means an enclosed structure at the base of the mount within which are housed the cabinet or equipment for the facility such as batteries and electrical equipment. Information shall be provided detailing the contents of the proposed equipment shelter servicing the proposed facility. The information shall include, but not be limited to, the type and quantity of oil, gasoline, batteries, propane, natural gas or any other fuel stored within the shelter. Information shall also be submitted which demonstrates that any hazardous materials stored on site, including, but not limited to, fuel sources shall be housed to minimize the potential for any adverse impact on adjacent land uses. "Materials safety data sheets" for any hazardous material stored or utilized in the equipment shelter shall be submitted to the municipality. The use of fuels and hazardous materials shall also be consistent with any municipal requirements regarding the same. 
    Fall zone means the area on the ground within a prescribed radius from the base of a facility. The fall zone is the area within which there might be a potential hazard from falling debris or collapsing material. The fall zone shall be determined by the applicant's engineer and reviewed by the municipal engineer. Towers shall be 110 percent of the overall height of the tower from any property line. 
(1)  Self-supportive lattice towers. For a self-supportive lattice tower it is a one-third and two-third of design. Example: 195-foot self-supportive tower. Tower is designed to collapse at the north leg at approximately 65 feet at grade level. The remaining tower above 65 feet at grade level falls 130 feet out. Thus the tower would fall approximately up to 130 feet away from the centerline of the tower. 
(2)  Guyed lattice towers typically fail at the guy wire anchoring system, and in this case, these fall like a tree. The height of the tower is the collapse zone for this type of structure. To ensure safety, add ten percent of the overall height to the calculation and no development should happen within this area. Example: a tower 300 feet above grade level with failure on a set of guy wires will fall in the opposite direction. Add ten percent equals to 30 feet total collapse zone: 330-foot radius. 
(3)  Monopole towers are steel cylinder welded or molded to a base plate that is bolted to a concrete foundation. In high winds, ice loading and overloading of the structure itself with antennas and equipment, the failure typically happens at the joint at the ground level and base plate. Example: 150-foot monopole falls, it will fall at the base and thus the danger area would be 150 feet in a radius from the base. A factor of safety of ten percent is typically added for safety. In this example, the overall collapse area is 150 feet plus 15 feet equals 165 feet. 
    Federal Communications Commission (FCC) means an independent federal agency charged with licensing and regulating wireless communications at the national level. 
    Functionally equivalent services means cellular, enhanced specialized mobile radio, specialized mobile radio, and paging. Section 704 of the Telecommunications Act prohibits unreasonable discrimination among functionally equivalent services. 
    Guyed tower means a monopole or lattice tower that is anchored to the ground or to another surface by diagonal cables. 
    Height of tower means the overall height of the tower or pole from the base of the tower to the highest point of the tower any facility, including, but not limited to, antennas, transmitters, satellite dishes, solar devices or any other structures affixed to or otherwise placed on the tower. If the base of the tower is not on ground level, the height of the tower shall include the base of the building or structure to which the tower is attached. 
    Lattice tower means a type of mount that is usually ground-mounted and self-supporting with multiple legs and cross-bracing of structural steel. 
    Licensed carrier means a company authorized by the FCC to construct and operate a commercial mobile radio services system. A licensed carrier must be identified for every PWSF application. 
    Location means the area where a facility is located or proposed to be located. 
    Microcell means any facility that is designed to generate lower power density than that limited by the FCC "Guidelines for Evaluating the Environmental Effects of Radio Frequency Radiation." 
    Mitigation means the reduction or elimination of visual impacts by the use of one or more methods: 
(1)  Concealment. 
(2)  Camouflage. 
(3)  Disguise. 
    Modification means the changing of any portion of a facility from its description in a previously approved permit. The FCC definitions for the term "modification" are different from local government rules. 
    Monopole means a steel cylinder welded or molded to a base plate that is bolted to a concrete foundation. The mount is self-supporting with a single antenna or facility at the top and/or along the shaft. 
    Mount means the structure or surface upon which antennas are mounted. 
    Ground-mounted means mounted on the ground. 
    Roof-mounted means mounted on the roof of a building. 
    Side-mounted means mounted on the side of a building. 
    Personal means any personal wireless service defined in the Federal Telecommunications Act which includes FCC licensed commercial wireless telecommunications services. 
    Personal wind tower means any mechanical device used to generate power or store power for personal or commercial use. 
    Personal wireless service means any personal wireless service defined in the Federal Telecommunications Act which includes FCC-licensed commercial wireless telecommunications services including cellular, personal communications services (PCS), specialized mobile radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobile radio (ESMR), paging as well as unlicensed wireless services, and common carrier wireless exchange access services. The term "personal wireless service" shall hereinafter include facilities such as, but not limited to, antennas, mounts, equipment, personal wind towers, solar or any facility placed within the city receiving or sending a signal, and/or providing any other power source. 
    Personal wireless service facility (PWSF) means a facility for the transmission or reception of personal wireless services, as defined by section 704 of the Telecommunications Act of 1996. A PWSF includes any un-staffed facility for the transmission or reception of personal wireless services, usually consisting of an antenna array, transmission cables, equipment shelter, and a mount. 
    Power generating source means any device set on a foundation for use in a non-emergency situation to generate power larger than one-KWH. 
    Preferred sites means rooftops on any building other than single- and two-family dwellings. Utility poles, including telephone poles, utility distribution and transmission poles, street, and traffic signal poles. Other kinds of poles, including civil defense mounts, public field light standards, and private parking or storage lot light standards. Wooded areas where the height above ground level of the facility does not exceed the tree line by more than ten feet. Steeples on churches already having steeples or on newly constructed steeples. 
    Public property means a site or property owned or controlled by the City of Eureka, Unit 140 School Districts, Woodford County, Eureka District Library, Eureka Fire and Rescue Department, Olio and Cruger Township or any property owned by a public taxing body. 
    Public utility transmission tower means a structure, owned and operated by a public utility electric company regulated by the state utility commission, designed and used to support overhead electricity transmission lines. 
    Radio frequency (RF) engineer means someone with a background in electrical engineering or microwave engineering who specializes in the study of radio frequencies. 
    Radio frequency radiation (RFR) means the emissions from facilities that can, in excessive amounts, be harmful to humans. RF emissions are byproducts of the RF signal (RFR). 
    Radio frequency signal means the actual beam or radio waves sent and received by a PWSF. A signal is the deliberate product of a PWSF. 
    Security barrier means a locked, impenetrable wall, fence, or berm that completely seals an area from unauthorized entry or trespass. 
    Separation means the distance between one carrier's antenna array and another carrier's antenna array. 
    Short mounts means alternatives to monopoles or guyed and lattice towers, such as masts or poles. For example, two poles or three masts might be an alternative to one lattice tower. 
    Signal processing worksystem (SPW) provides the tools for interactive simulations, tests, and implementations for communication systems, and other systems such as digital signal processing (DSP) designs. Typical design applications include digital communication systems, image processing, multimedia, radar systems, control systems, digital audio, and high-definition television. Used for the design, implementation, and performance evaluation of digital communication systems. 
    Site means that portion of a subject property where a PWSF is to be placed. Any acceptable location may have several potential sites within it. 
    Siting means the method and form of placement of PWSF on a specific area of a subject property. 
    Standards means rules or measures by which acceptability is determined. Facilities are measured by visibility or safety. Wireless planning regulates facilities based on location (or where the facility's site can go), siting (or how the facility is placed within its setting), and design (or what the facility looks like). 
    Tower means any ground, roof, pole mounted, spire, antenna, antenna array, mount, structure, or combination thereof which exceeds 35 feet in height. The height of an antenna or antenna array shall not include the height of any existing structure or equipment constructed pursuant to a valid building permit. 
    Unlicensed wireless services means commercial mobile services that can operate on public domain frequencies and therefore need no FCC license for their sites. 
    Wireless communications means any form of signaling by wireless, including personal wireless services that require a transmitter, a receiver, and a path, sometimes straight, sometimes indirect, between them. 
(Code 2008, § 17.1230; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.1230), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-739. - Location requirements. 
    All facilities erected, constructed, or located within the city shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Proposals for a facility shall not be approved unless the planning and zoning commission finds that the facilities planned for the proposed site cannot be accommodated on an existing or approved tower or structure within a one-mile radius of the proposed facility due to one or more of the following reasons: 
a.  The planned equipment, if installed, would exceed the structural capacity of any existing or approved towers or structures, as documented by a qualified licensed structural engineer, and all the existing and approved facilities cannot be reinforced, modified or replaced to accommodate the planned or equivalent equipment at a reasonable cost. 
b.  The planned equipment would cause interference materially impacting the usability of other existing or planned equipment at a tower or structure as documented by a qualified licensed professional engineer and interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost. 
c.  Existing or approved facilities and the structures within a one-mile radius cannot accommodate the planned equipment at a height necessary to function reasonably as documented by a qualified licensed professional engineer. 
d.  Other unforeseen reasons that make it unfeasible to locate the planned equipment on an existing or approved tower or structure. 
e.  The planned equipment does not in the opinion of the planning and zoning commission create a safety hazard or unsightly appearance. 
(2)  Any proposed facilities shall be designed, structurally, electrically, in all respects, to accommodate both the applicant's antenna and equipment and comparable antenna and equipment for at least two additional users if the tower is over 100 feet in height, or at least one additional user if the tower is from 60 to 100 feet in height. Towers must be designed to allow for future rearrangement of antennas upon a tower and to accept antennas mounted at varying heights. 
(Code 2008, § 17.1240; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.1240), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-740. - Pre-existing personal wireless service facilities. 
(a)  A facility for which a permit has been issued prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall be deemed a permitted use, subject to the conditions of that permit. When a facility for which no permit has been obtained (un-permitted facility) is identified by the city to be attached to a mount approved for another use or facility, the un-permitted facility must apply for a separate permit, even when: 
(1)  Sharing a legal mount; 
(2)  Already in operation; and 
(3)  Duly licensed by the Federal Communications Commission. 
The issuance of permit renewals or other new permits for such facilities shall be in accordance with the provisions of this section. Un-permitted facilities will be considered out of compliance with this section and subject to abatement. 
(b)  Any facility or mount hereafter damaged or destroyed due to any reason or cause whatsoever may be repaired and restored to its former use, location, and physical dimensions upon obtaining a building permit therefor, but without otherwise complying with this section unless the cost of repairing the facility or mount to its former use, physical dimensions, and location would be 50 percent or more of the cost of a new mount of like kind and quality, then the mount may not be repaired or replaced, except in full compliance with this code. 
(c)  Placement of an attached array or a micro cell on a legally non-conforming structure shall not be considered an expansion of the non-conforming structure. However, placement of any attached array, micro cell, or any other portions of a facility on an existing structure, whether legally nonconforming or in, as well as out of, compliance, shall require a permit to be obtained for the facility under the terms of this code. 
(d)  Un-permitted facilities, mounts or equipment ineligible for co-location. No issuance of any permit under this section shall occur for a request to co-locate, attach, or share an existing facility's site, mount, or facility, when such existing site, mount, or facility is found to have one or more facilities without permits required by the city. 
(Code 2008, § 17.1250; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.1250), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-741. - Specification of land use classifications. 
    Notwithstanding anything in the zoning code to the contrary, facilities shall be a permitted use or a special use in all zoning districts, provided that such facilities comply with the standards of this section and the permits under which facilities are regulated. 
(Code 2008, § 17.1260; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.1260), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-742. - Permit process and permit procedure. 
(a)  Permit requirement. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to erect, construct, place or re-erect, replace, or repair any CMRF (commercial mobile radio frequency), including the listed facilities without first making application to the city and securing a permit. Permits shall be issued to the owner of the property on which the tower is located. 
(b)  Tower permit application. The applicable property owner shall submit an application for a tower permit to the planning and zoning commission. The application shall be on forms provided by the planning and zoning commission and shall include the following information: 
(1)  The name, address, telephone number, and original signature of the property owner. 
(2)  A site plan, drawn at a scale that produces a clearly legible drawing, showing: 
a.  Scale and north arrow. 
b.  The parcel boundaries, including the length and bearings of the boundaries. 
c.  The tax parcel number. 
d.  Tower location. 
e.  Tower support facilities location. 
f.  Location of tower support facilities in relation to all property lines or leased parcel boundaries and edge of all public rights-of-way. 
g.  Access points. 
h.  Location of all buildings within a distance at least equal to the height of the proposed tower plus 100 feet from the center of the proposed tower. 
i.  Scale drawings of two elevation views of all proposed tower support facilities. 
j.  Show any lighting with wattage. 
(3)  A lease agreement, in the case of a leased site. Additionally, the lease agreement shall show that the tower owner may enter into agreement with competing providers for antenna space on the tower. 
(4)  An alternative analysis that identifies all feasible alternative locations and alternative support structures that could provide the proposed service. The purpose of the alternative analysis is to seek alternative solutions in order to minimize the number of towers by using existing towers and alternative support structures, if feasible, to provide the needed services to the city. The analysis shall address the potential for co-location of antennas. It shall explain the rationale for selection of the proposed site in view of the relative merits of any of the feasible alternatives. It shall also explain the rationale for not utilizing co-location opportunities. 
(5)  A report prepared by an engineer certifying to the adequacy of the structural strength of the tower and/or its ability to accommodate additional antennas. 
(6)  An affidavit that commits the applicant to making available space on the proposed tower for at least four providers, even for those providers providing competing services if a commercial tower. 
(7)  Calculations for fall zone radius for tower proposed. 
(8)  Residential towers or structures for personal use are exempt from subsections (b)(3) through (6) of this section. 
1.  Required written opinion from property owners adjacent to property where permit is being requested. 
2.  Drawing of proposed construction must be distributed to adjacent land owners. 
(9)  The planning and zoning commission may accept, deny or modify any permit application. 
(c)  Technical review. After determining that all application materials have been satisfactorily submitted, the planning and zoning commission shall review the submitted materials. The commission shall have the authority to request an outside consultant to review the plans. The applicant shall pay all the costs of such review. 
(d)  Permit for towers not exceeding 200 feet in height. The planning and zoning commission shall grant preliminary approval of a tower permit if the planning and zoning commission determines that a need for a new tower has been demonstrated. Supporting evidence of need for a new tower shall consist of any of the following situations: 
(1)  That no existing suitable towers or alternative support structures are located within the geographic area required to meet the applicant's engineering requirements. 
(2)  That the applicant's proposed system would cause electromagnetic interference with the system on an existing tower or alternative support structure, or that an existing system would cause electromagnetic interference with the applicant's proposed system. 
(3)  That the fees, cost, or contractual provisions required by the applicant to share an existing tower or to use an alternative support structure or to adapt an existing tower or alternative support structure for sharing are unreasonable. 
(4)  That the applicant demonstrates that existing towers or alternative support structures are unsuitable because of other limiting factors. 
(e)  Permit grant for towers exceeding 200 feet in height. The planning and zoning commission shall determine the granting or denial of a tower permit for such towers. The following information shall be submitted in addition to the requirements under the permit process and procedure. 
(1)  Before determination, the planning and zoning commission shall conduct a public hearing. Notice of such public hearing shall be given by publishing in a locally distributed newspaper. The notice shall specify the time and place of such hearing. 
(2)  That a need for a new tower has been demonstrated. Supporting evidence of need for a new tower shall consist of any of the following situations: 
a.  That no existing suitable towers or alternative support structures are located within the geographic area required to meet the applicant's engineering requirements. 
b.  That the applicant's proposed system would cause electromagnetic interference with the system on an existing tower or alternative support structure, or that an existing system would cause electromagnetic interference with the applicant's proposed system. 
c.  That the fees, cost, or contractual provisions required by the applicant to share an existing tower or to use an alternative support structure or to adapt an existing tower or alternative support structure for sharing are unreasonable. Costs are considered unreasonable if they do not conform to contractual term standard in the industry. 
d.  That the applicant demonstrates that existing towers or alternative support structures are unsuitable because of other limiting factors. 
e.  That the requirements of section 78-743 are met. 
(3)  The planning and zoning commission may attach to the tower permit such conditions as necessary to further the purpose of this chapter. 
(4)  Submittals required following preliminary approval. The applicant shall submit the following before a tower permit will be issued: 
a.  A copy of a determination of no hazard to air navigation from the Federal Aviation Administration. 
b.  A statement of non-objection from the state bureau of aeronautics. 
c.  Proof of a performance bond as security for removal. 
(f)  Tower permit expiration. Tower permits shall expire one year after issuance if the tower for which the permit was issued is not constructed and actively energized and operating. Failure to complete construction before permit expiration shall require submittal of a new application for a tower permit or removal of the telecommunications tower as specified in this article. 
(g)  Permit for facility support services. 
(1)  If the application for a tower permit includes provisions for tower support facilities, the tower permit shall also extend to the associated tower support facilities, provided they comply with all applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  If tower support facilities are proposed subsequent to construction of the associated tower, a permit shall be required for the proposed tower support. Application for such permit shall include all applicable information as requested by the planning and zoning commission. A permit shall be issued for the associated tower support facilities, provided they comply with all applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 2008, § 17.1270; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.1270), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-743. - Location standards. 
(a)  Preferred sites. The listed preferred sites shall be considered as preferred by the city and used by the applicants in seeking to erect a facility in the city shall make a good faith effort to locate the equipment at a preferred site. Prior to making application to erect a facility at a site other than a preferred site, the applicant shall discuss potential sites with the city administrator to determine whether any preferred sites are feasible. The application to erect a facility at a site other than a preferred site shall include a signed affidavit from the applicant indicating that no preferred sites are feasible for this proposed facility. If the city administrator recommended specific preferred sites, the affidavit shall set forth all reasons that each preferred site proposed by the city administrator is not feasible. Preferred sites shall mean the following: 
(1)  Rooftops on any building other than single- and two-family dwellings. 
(2)  Utility poles, including telephone poles, utility distribution and transmission poles, street, and traffic signal poles. 
(3)  Other kinds of poles, including civil defense mounts, public field light standards, and private parking or storage lot light standards. 
(4)  Wooded areas where the height above ground level of the PWSF does not exceed the tree line by more than ten feet. 
(5)  Steeples on churches already having steeples or on newly constructed steeples. 
(6)  On public property as defined in section 78-738. 
(7)  In I industrial zoning districts. 
(b)  Avoidance sites. A facility shall not be located in an avoidance site unless the applicant can demonstrate that this regulation "has the effect of prohibiting service" as that term is defined in the Telecommunications Act of 1996. The term "avoidance sites" means the following: 
(1)  Floodprone areas, as mapped by the Federal Emergency Management Agency on a flood insurance rate map. Wetlands, water bodies, and watercourses, as mapped by the state department of natural resources. 
(2)  Visual and community entrance corridors, including any location within 250 feet of the following arterial roads: Business Route 24 and Route 117, R-1, and R-2 zoning districts, except in the case of public property. 
(3)  Prohibited sites. No tower with a height exceeding 35 feet above ground level shall be permitted in the area bounded by the point furthest north, south, east or west of the corporate city limits. 
(4)  Use or lease of property for facilities shall not be subject to the requirements of the subdivision code. A plat of survey shall accompany permit applications where the applicant proposes to lease the property. 
(5)  For purposes of determining whether the application complies with zoning district development regulations, the dimensions of the entire lot shall control. 
(c)  Siting standards. Facilities shall meet the following siting standards: 
(1)  To the greatest extent possible, facilities shall be concealed within existing structures or located where camouflaged conditions surround them, or located on inconspicuous mounts. 
(2)  Wherever possible, facilities shall be placed within trees, but no antenna should extend higher than ten feet above the average tree height. 
(3)  Placement on existing roofs or non-wireless structures shall be favored over ground-mounted facilities. 
(4)  Wherever possible, roof-mounted facilities shall not project more than ten additional feet above the height of a legal building with a maximum of 35 feet combined height. 
(5)  Wherever possible, side-mounted facilities shall not project more than 20 inches from the face of the mounting structure. 
(d)  Design standards. 
(1)  Color. All facilities shall be painted or be complementary with trees, sky and other surroundings. 
(2)  Size. The silhouette of the facilities shall be reduced to minimize visual impact. 
(3)  Facilities near residences shall either: 
a.  Provide underground vaults for equipment shelters; or 
b.  Place equipment shelters within enclosed structures. 
(4)  Equipment. The following types of equipment are discouraged and may not be utilized unless the applicant demonstrates that this regulation has the "effect of prohibiting service" as that term is defined in the Telecommunications Act of 1996: 
a.  Roof-mounted monopoles, lattice towers, or guyed towers; 
b.  Ground-mounted lattice towers; and 
c.  Ground-mounted guyed towers. 
(5)  Metal towers shall be constructed of, or treated with, corrosive resistant material. Wood poles shall be impregnated with rot-resistant substances. 
(6)  Height of facilities shall be kept to a minimum and shall not exceed 35 feet above ground level unless the applicant obtains a variance of height in addition to any required special use permit. 
(e)  Safety standards. Facilities shall meet the following safety standards: 
(1)  All facilities shall comply with tornado design standards as contained in the city building code or EIA-TIA 222 Energy Information Administration (EIA) Federal Energy Management Program (FEMP) (structural standard for antenna supporting structures and antennas) (latest version), whichever is stricter. 
(2)  Roof mounts on buildings shall have railings to protect workers. 
(3)  All transmission cables and cable trays deployed horizontally above the ground between a mount and a structure, or between mounts, shall be at least eight feet above the ground at all points. 
(4)  All construction of facilities shall be in compliance with the National Electrical Code. 
(Code 2008, § 17.1280; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.1280), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-744. - Fall zone; setback requirements. 
(a)  Fall zone. No facilities shall be located any closer to a habitable structure or outdoor area where people congregate than its fall zone. For purposes of this section, the fall zone shall be 110 percent of the height of the facilities. 
(b)  Setback. 
(1)  All facilities including mounts and equipment shelters shall comply with the minimum building and landscape/screening setback requirements of the applicable zoning district as set forth in the city zoning code; provided, however, that the following setbacks apply to the height of the tower above ground level or, if the tower is attached to a building, the height from the point of attachment: 
a.  At a preferred site, no facility shall be set back a distance less than its height, unless the applicant provides an affidavit from a professional engineer that the facility is designed to break at a point no lower than the midpoint of the facility, in which case the tower shall be set back a distance not less than half its height. 
b.  At any site except a preferred site, no facility shall be set back a distance less than its height. 
c.  No facility shall be set back a distance less than its height from the nearest overhead electrical power line which serves more than one dwelling or place of business. 
(2)  Structural elements such as peripheral anchors, guy wires, or other supporting devices shall be located no closer than ten feet from any property line. 
(3)  The antenna array for an attached facility is exempt from the setback requirements of this code and from the setback requirements for the zoning district in which they are located, provided that no such antenna array shall extend more than five feet horizontally from the attachment structure at the point of attachment. 
(4)  On parcels with a principal building housing a principal use, all components of the facility shall be located behind the rear building line. 
(Code 2008, § 17.1290; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.1290), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-745. - Fees. 
    The city shall charge reasonable fees to evaluate applications. Such fees shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Application fee. The basic application fee shall be $500.00. 
(2)  Special fee. The city may retain independent technical consultants and experts as it deems necessary to properly evaluate applications for individual facilities. The fee shall include, but shall not be limited to, the hourly rate of the independent technical consultant or expert the city deems necessary to properly evaluate applications for facilities. 
(3)  Other fee. Any other fee imposed under the provisions of this code. 
(Code 2008, § 17.1300; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.1300), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-746. - Facility which exceeds 35 feet additional application requirements. 
(a)  In addition to the application requirements listed in section 78-742, a facility which exceeds 35 feet, the applicant must demonstrate that no existing tower or other structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed facility by providing a written statement from an Illinois-licensed engineer certifying that the applicant will be prohibited from providing services unless the proposed facility is constructed. The application must also demonstrate that the fees, costs, or contractual provisions imposed by the owner of the structure in order to share an existing tower or other mount or to adapt an existing tower or other mount for sharing are unreasonable, based on market information provided with the application. Costs exceeding new tower development are presumed to be unreasonable. In addition, applications shall contain the following information: 
(1)  A report from a qualified Illinois-licensed professional engineer, including: 
a.  Written findings evidencing compliance with each provision of this Code as well as the applicable zoning regulations; 
b.  Description of the tower height and design, including a cross section in elevation; 
c.  Height above ground level for all potential mounting positions for co-located antennas and the minimum separation distances between antennas; 
d.  Description of the facility's capacity, including the number and type of facility that it can accommodate; 
e.  Documentation of the steps the applicant will take to avoid interference with established public safety telecommunications; 
f.  Engineer's stamp and registration number; and 
g.  Other information as necessary to evaluate the request. 
(2)  Architectural drawings depicting the constructed facility with camouflaging treatment set in the surrounding area. These drawings shall include a perspective from each of the north, south, east and west. 
(3)  An overhead map of the city showing the subject facility's location as well as the location of each of the applicant's existing and planned future tower sites. 
(4)  An agreement committing the facility's owner and his successors to allow the shared use of the facility if an additional user agrees in writing to meet reasonable terms and conditions for shared use. For purposes of this requirement, the applicant shall sign an agreement available at the office of the city. A copy of this agreement shall be presented for recording by the county recorder of deeds. 
(5)  A certificate of liability insurance demonstrating minimum liability coverage of $2,000,000.00 per accident. 
(6)  Before the issuance of a building permit, the following supplemental information shall be provided: 
a.  A statement demonstrating that the proposed facility complies with regulations administered by the Federal Aviation Administration; 
b.  A statement demonstrating that the proposed facility complies with the emission standards promulgated by the Federal Communications Commission; and 
c.  Report from a qualified Illinois licensed professional engineer that demonstrates the tower's compliance with all other applicable structural and electrical standards. 
(b)  Each application for a facility shall also contain at least two alternative proposals for the facility proposed in the application. The alternatives need not be totally different from the proposed facility; however, the alternatives should contain measurable differences, such as: 
(1)  Height. An alternative can be identical to the proposed facility except to be for a shorter height. 
(2)  Number. An alternative could be for two or more facilities that are shorter than the proposed facility. 
(3)  Location. An alternative could be located on a different property than the proposed facility. 
(4)  Siting. An alternative could be in a different place on the same property as the proposed facility. 
(5)  Design. An alternative could be of the same height, location, and siting as the proposed facility, but be designed to appear differently. 
(c)  Submittal requirements for alternatives. The materials submitted for each alternative should show only the differences between each of the alternatives and the proposed facility. 
(d)  Comparison of proposed facility and alternatives. The city administrator shall compare the proposed facility to the alternatives on the basis of the standards of sections 78-539 and 78-743. The city administrator shall submit each application and the alternatives to the planning and zoning commission for review. The planning and zoning commission shall consider the alternatives along with the proposed facility. 
(Code 2008, § 17.1310; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.1310), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-747. - Modifications. 
    All modifications to facilities must be reviewed and approved by the city. 
(1)  Types of modification. A modification of a facility is any of the following: 
a.  Change of ownership of the facility or of the subject property. 
b.  Change in technology used for the facility such as an "overlay." 
c.  Addition or replacement of any equipment in the facility, excluding direct, like-for-like substitutions. 
d.  Change in design of the facility. 
e.  Addition to any facility for the purposes of co-location. 
(2)  Application. Applicants for modifications shall submit an application to the city for a modified facility. The application shall be reviewed in the same manner as any application for a facility. 
(Code 2008, § 17.1320; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.1320), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-748. - Registry; abandonment. 
(a)  Registry. Each carrier maintaining at least one facility shall file the following information with the city by December 31 on an annual basis: 
(1)  Owner/lessee/intermediary/agent and carrier at each facility site in the city. 
(2)  Location by address and parcel number. 
(3)  Co-location status and capability, including if a former co-location has been removed. 
(4)  A certificate of liability insurance demonstrating minimum liability coverage of $2,000,000.00 per accident. 
(5)  $2,000,000.00 performance bond for the total amount of the construction. 
(b)  Abandonment and removal. Any facility that is not operated for a continuous period of 18 months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such facility and the owner of the property upon which the facility is located shall remove same within 90 days of notice from the city that the facility is abandoned. If such facility is not removed within said 90 days, the city may have the facility removed at the facility owner's or the property owner's expense. 
(Code 2008, § 17.1330; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.1330), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-749. - Radio frequency radiation emissions. 
(a)  A statement certifying that, as proposed, the entire combined facility will comply with the current FCC rules and guidelines concerning human exposure to radio frequency radiation emissions shall be provided at the time of building permit application or when a request is made by the city. 
(b)  No contravention of FCC guidelines. A facility that meets the FCC guidelines shall not be conditioned or denied on the basis of radio frequency impacts. 
(Code 2008, § 17.1340; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.1340), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-750. - Commercial communications towers. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to erect, construct, place, re-erect, replace or repair any commercial communications facility without first making application to the city and securing a permit to do so. 
(b)  All applications to erect, construct, place, re-erect, replace or repair a facility shall be subject to all the rules and regulations outlined in this code. 
(Code 2008, § 17.1350; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.1350), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-751. - Lighting; security. 
(a)  Lighting. A facility shall not be artificially lighted, except for: 
(1)  Security and safety lighting of equipment buildings if such lighting is appropriately down-shielded to keep light within the boundaries of the site; and 
(2)  Such lighting of the facility as may be required by the FCC, Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), or other applicable authority installed in a manner to minimize impacts on adjacent residences. "Dual lighting" (red at night/strobe during day) shall be utilized unless otherwise recommended by FAA guidelines. 
(b)  Security barriers. A security barrier shall be required around the perimeter of the mounts or equipment structure, and any anchor points. In the case of a roof-mounted facility, the security barrier need only be around the antenna. The security barrier shall be maintained by the operator of the facility or mount for the life of the installation No security barrier is needed around side-mounted facilities, but distances from windows and balconies should conform to subsection (c)(2) of this section. 
(c)  Security barriers for certain populations. The security barriers around all facilities shall be reviewed by the SPW (signal processing work system) and found to be acceptable for: 
(1)  Controlled population. Those persons who are trained in procedures for working near or around radio frequency radiation. 
(2)  General population. All other persons, some of whom have no concept of what radio frequency radiation is or how it can cause harm. Members of the general population should not be allowed nearer than 35 to 45 feet to the nearest part of an antenna. 
(Code 2008, § 17.1360; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.1360), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-752. - Signs/identification plaques. 
    No signage shall be permitted on any facility other than that required for public safety purposes or by the FCC or FAA, except that each facility shall have a weather-proof plaque mounted at eye level identifying the carrier, frequency, and date of permit approval. 
(Code 2008, § 17.1370; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.1370), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-753. - Screening; landscaping. 
(a)  Natural vegetation. Existing natural vegetation shall be undisturbed to the greatest extent practicable. 
(b)  Landscaping. Landscaping of disturbed areas of the facility's site and security barriers shall be required as follows: 
(1)  At least one row of evergreen shrubs capable of forming a continuous hedge at least five feet in height within two years of planting shall be spaced not more than five feet apart within 15 feet of the site boundary. 
(2)  At least one row of evergreen trees or shrubs, at least four feet in height when planted and spaced not more than 15 feet apart, located interior to the perimeter of the shrubs required in subsection (b)(1) of this section. 
(3)  For ground mounts greater than 200 feet tall, at least one row of deciduous trees, not less than 1.5-inch diameter measured three feet above grade, and spaced not more than 20 feet apart, and located within the perimeter of the evergreen trees or shrubs as required in this section. 
(4)  All security barriers for guy wire anchor points shall be screened from view by at least one row of evergreen shrubs spaced not more than five feet apart and capable of forming a continuous hedge at least five feet in height within two years of planting. 
(5)  Existing vegetation, topography, walls and fences combined with shrubs, or other features may be substituted for the required buffers if the planning and zoning commission finds they: 
a.  Achieve the same degree of screening as the required buffer; or 
b.  Affect the stability, security, or maintenance of guy wires. 
(6)  Landscaping materials shall be maintained by the operator of the facility for the life of the installation. 
(c)  Waiver by the planning and zoning commission. The above standards may be waived by the planning and zoning commission for those property lines or site boundary lines of a proposed facility that are located adjacent to un-developable lands, for facility sites not in public view, or for facility sites located within areas designated for industrial land use by the city Comprehensive Plan. 
(Code 2008, § 17.1380; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.1380), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-754. - Access; parking. 
(a)  Parking shall be provided for maintenance. The type and configuration of parking may be approved by the planning and zoning commission. 
(b)  Private access. A copy shall be provided to the city zoning officer of any road maintenance agreement for any site accessed by private easement. 
(Code 2008, § 17.1390; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.1390), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-755. - Aircraft hazard; FAA acknowledgement. 
    For facilities that exceed 125 feet, the applicant shall provide acknowledgment from the FAA that the proposed facility does not exceed obstruction standards. 
(Code 2008, § 17.1400; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.1400), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-756. - Review of permit. 
    Special use permits issued under the terms of this article shall be reviewed by the city planning and zoning commission every five years from the date of issuance for compliance with this article and any special terms or conditions of approval. Such permits are subject to suspension or revocation at any time if it is determined that the terms of the permit and any conditions contained therein, or any rules or regulations adopted by the state or federal government concerning the use of such facilities, are being violated. 
(Code 2008, § 17.1410; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.1410), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-757. - Interference with public safety facilities. 
(a)  No new or existing facilities shall interfere with public safety telecommunications. 
(b)  All applications for new facilities shall be accompanied by an inter-modulation study that provides a technical evaluation of existing and proposed transmissions and indicates all potential interference problems. 
(c)  An inter-modulation study shall also be submitted prior to the introduction of new services or new frequencies or changes in existing service. The city shall be notified by the service provider at least ten business days prior to the introduction of new services or new frequencies or changes in existing service and allow the city to monitor interference levels during the testing process for the inter-modulation study. 
(d)  The city reserves the right to retain its own expert to study potential interference impacts. The cost of such an expert would be recovered under the provisions of this article. 
(Code 2008, § 17.1420; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.1420), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-758. - Noise. 
    No equipment shall be operated at a facility so as to produce noise in excess of the applicable noise standards under the city noise ordinance, except for emergency situations requiring the use of a back-up generator, where the noise standards may be exceeded on a temporary basis until such emergency has passed. 
(Code 2008, § 17.1425; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.1425), 11-2-2009) 
Secs. 78-759-78-784. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - HOME OCCUPATIONS 

Sec. 78-785. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Family day care means the keeping for part-time care and/or instruction, of six or less children or adults at any one time within a dwelling, not including members of the family residing on the premises. 
    Home occupation means an accessory use of a dwelling unit for gainful employment which: 
(1)  Is clearly incidental and subordinate to the use of the dwelling unit as a residence; 
(2)  Is carried on solely within the main dwelling or accessory structure and does not alter or change the exterior character or appearance of the dwelling; and 
(3)  Is located in a residential district. 
(Code 2008, § 17.1030; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.1030), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-786. - Permit required. 
    No home occupation shall be conducted, operated or established until a home occupation permit has been issued and obtained in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 2008, § 17.1040; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.1040), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-787. - Application for permit. 
(a)  An application for a home occupation permit shall be filed by the owner of the property upon which the proposed home occupation is to be conducted. The application must be filed with the city. 
(b)  The application must contain the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the applicant; 
(2)  A correct legal description and parcel identification number for the property upon which the proposed home occupation is to be conducted; 
(3)  A detailed description of the proposed home occupation which the applicant desires to operate; 
(4)  Such other or additional information as shall be required by the city. 
(Code 2008, § 17.1050; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.1050), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-788. - Conditions for use. 
    All home occupations shall be subject to the following conditions and limitations: 
(1)  There may not be any persons, other than immediate family members of the family residing in the dwelling unit engaged therein, and there shall be no on-site employment or employment of persons not residing in the dwelling unit. 
(2)  The home occupation must be wholly operated and contained within the dwelling unit or an accessory structure. 
(3)  No materials or equipment may be stored outside the dwelling unit or the accessory structure. 
(4)  Not more than six customers or clients may be permitted on the property during any period of 60 consecutive minutes, nor more than 16 persons in any given 24-hour period. 
(5)  Sufficient parking must be provided on the same lot as the dwelling unit for all home occupation customers and clients, and other business visitors. 
(6)  Commercial deliveries related to the home occupation, other than the United States Postal Service and private package and letter delivery services, shall not be permitted. This prohibition of commercial deliveries includes, but is not limited to, commercial deliveries by semi-trailer trucks. 
(7)  No pedestrian or vehicular traffic generated by the home occupation shall be permitted on the premises between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(8)  The appearance of the structure may not be altered, nor the occupation within the residence be conducted in a manner that would cause the premises to differ from its residential character. 
(9)  No noise, vibration, glare, heat, smoke, dust, electromagnetic, or electrical interference, nor odor detectable beyond the confines of the dwelling unit shall be permitted or allowed, including transmittal through vertical or horizontal party walls. 
(10)  No more than one commercial vehicle shall be used in conjunction with the home occupation, not to exceed one-ton maximum load weight and owned by a resident of the dwelling. Such vehicle must be parked in a garage or residential drive on-site, and in accordance with all other provisions of this code. Said vehicle may indicate thereon the name, address, and telephone numbers of the home occupation being conducted within the dwelling unit or accessory structure. 
(11)  No more than one home occupation may be conducted upon any property. 
(12)  The home occupation must not exceed the limitations imposed by the provisions of all applicable building, fire, health, safety, and housing codes and shall conform with all applicable requirements for business and occupational licensing. 
(Code 2008, § 17.1060; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.1060), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-789. - Issuance of permits. 
(a)  Administrative granted permits. 
(1)  Home occupation permits for those home occupations listed below may be granted and issued by the city, upon a proper application being filed: 
a.  Dealer sales, including vitamins, cosmetics, crafts, and home products; 
b.  Craft shop, making and selling crafts; 
c.  Internet advertising; 
d.  Vending machines; 
e.  Music instructions; provided, however, not more than one pupil shall be permitted on the property at any one time; 
f.  Professional office; 
g.  Family day care; 
h.  Sewing service; 
i.  Pet grooming; 
j.  Furniture refinishing/construction; 
k.  Art studio, desktop publishing; 
l.  Mail order sales; 
m.  Administrative offices for building trade businesses (including plumbing, electrical, HVAC, carpentry, and general contracting); provided, however, no building trade work of any kind shall be conducted on the property; 
n.  Beauty parlors and barber shops. 
(2)  A permit shall be issued administratively if the following requirements are met: 
a.  The applicant has notified the residents of all parcels of land adjoining the property, in writing, that a permit to operate a home occupation has been requested, and that any objection to the issuance of the home occupation permit must be filed with the applicant and the city offices within seven days of the date of the notice. The applicant must notify the residents of all parcels of land adjoining and adjacent to the property under consideration for the home occupation permit by personally delivering the written notice or by depositing the written notice in the United States Postal Service mail, addressed to the resident of the adjoining property, with postage prepaid. Notification will be deemed to have been made when personally delivered or when properly deposited in the United States mail; 
b.  An application containing the name, address, and telephone number of the applicant; and 
c.  A detailed description of the proposed home occupation, together with a comprehensive list of any and all conditions placed on the operation or maintenance of the home occupation. 
(b)  All other permits. No application for a home occupation permit to conduct a home occupation, other than the home occupations listed in subsection (a) of this section, shall be granted until a public hearing has been held, pursuant to notice thereof, and a decision to issue a home occupation permit has been made by the planning and zoning commission, and received by the building inspector. 
(1)  Notice of hearing. Notice of the public hearing on the application for a home occupation permit must be published not less than 15, nor more than 30 days prior to the date of the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation with the city. In addition to the publication of notice, the applicant must notify the residents of all parcels of land adjoining and adjacent to the property under consideration for the home occupation permit in writing of the public hearing. Proof of notification must be filed with the city not less than 15 days prior to the date of the hearing. Failure to file the required proof of notification shall result in the denial of the application for the home occupation permit. 
(2)  Service of notice. The city shall notify the residents of all parcels of land adjoining and adjacent to the property under consideration for the home occupation permit by personally delivering the written notice or by depositing the written notice in the United States Postal Service mail, addressed to the resident of the adjoining and adjacent property, with postage prepaid. Notification will be deemed to have been made when personally delivered or when properly deposited in the United States mail. 
(3)  Notice requirements. The notice of the public hearing shall contain the following information: 
a.  The name and address of the applicant; 
b.  The legal description of the property upon which the proposed home occupation is to be conducted; 
c.  A detailed description of the proposed home occupation; 
d.  The time, place and date of the public hearing; 
e.  A statement that all interested persons may appear at the hearing and be heard as the advisability of allowing or permitting the proposed home occupation to be conducted on the property. 
(4)  Public hearing. The public hearing shall be held by and in front of the planning and zoning commission of the city. At the hearing, the planning and zoning commission shall hear testimony and receive evidence from the applicant that the proposed home occupation qualifies as a home occupation under section 78-785, and, if so, that the applicant can comply with each and every provision of section 78-788. The planning and zoning commission shall hear and receive testimony and evidence from the building inspector of the city, and from all other interested parties who appear and wish to be heard. After the conclusion of the testimony, the planning and zoning commission will make and issue its written decision issuing or denying the requested home occupation permit. 
(c)  Appeals of administratively granted permits. All decisions of the building inspector to issue or deny a home occupation permit, under the provisions allowing the administrative granting of permits, may be appealed to the planning and zoning commission pursuant to the provisions of section 78-46. 
(Code 2008, § 17.1070; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.1070), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-790. - Penalty. 
(a)  Administration and enforcement. The building inspector is authorized and directed to administer and enforce all of the provisions of this chapter. Whenever necessary, the officials of other departments of the city will give such assistance as is consistent with the usual duties of their respective departments. 
(b)  Entry onto premises. Upon presentation of proper credentials, the building inspector or his duly authorized agent, may enter at all reasonable times any premises when necessary to enforce the provisions of this chapter, or to determine whether there has been compliance with the provisions of this chapter. The issuance of a home occupation permit by the city shall be deemed to be consent by the applicant to any such entry by the building inspector. 
(c)  Notice to abate violations. Whenever it shall appear to the building inspector that a violation of any condition of a home occupation permit, or a violation of the provisions of this chapter, has occurred or is occurring, or after a home occupation permit has been revoked or becomes void, the building inspector shall issue a notice, in writing, to the original applicant to immediately correct the violation. The notice shall inform the original applicant of the violation and shall direct him to abate the violation and to secure compliance with the provisions of the home occupation permit and the provisions of this chapter within 24 hours. 
(d)  Failure to abate violations. Upon the failure of the original applicant to abate all violations and fully comply with all of the conditions of the home occupation permit and the provisions of this chapter within the period stated in the notice, the building inspector shall revoke the home occupation permit. 
(e)  Subsequent violations. The violation of any condition of a home occupation permit or any of the provisions of this chapter more than one time shall result in the immediate revocation of the home occupation permit. 
(f)  Injunction. In addition to the other remedies and penalties provided in this Code, the city attorney is authorized to file appropriate civil actions for a temporary restraining order, temporary injunction, permanent injunction, or for damages against any persons violating the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 2008, § 17.1080; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.1080), 11-2-2009) 
Secs. 78-791-78-818. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 78-819. - Purpose. 
(a)  The city council hereby finds that it is in the best interests of the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the city that minimum standards be established for landscaping and screening within the city. 
(b)  It is the specific intent of the city to: 
(1)  Achieve the community wide goal of developing the visual appeal of public and private open space through landscaping improvements; 
(2)  Provide buffering between single-family and two-family land uses and multiple-family, office, commercial, industrial, and other land uses; 
(3)  Safeguard and enhance property values and to protect public and private investment; 
(4)  Preserve and protect the unique identity and environment of the city and preserve the economic base attracted to the city; 
(5)  Provide for the preservation of larger existing trees which are a valuable amenity to the urban environment, and, once destroyed, can only be fully replaced after generations; 
(6)  Ensure that the local stock of trees and other vegetation is replenished; 
(7)  Provide ground water recharge and stormwater runoff retardation, shade, and air purification, while at the same time reducing noise, glare, wind, and heat; and 
(8)  Reduce soil erosion and thereby reduce sedimentation of waterways. 
(Code 2008, § 17.1110; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.1110), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-820. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abutting means sharing an adjacent property boundary or separated only by an alley, but not separated by a public street. 
    Alternative compliance procedure means a method by which a property owner may comply with the terms and provisions of this article relating to landscaping and screening by submitting a landscape plan that does not comply with the primary landscaping requirements of the landscaping and screening chapter of the zoning code. Such method involves development and submission of a comprehensive landscape plan for review and approval by the city planning and zoning commission. The method allows for an alternative to the application of the point system hereinafter provided. 
    Berm means a mound of earth with a maximum slope of 4:1, and a minimum height of three feet. Berms shall be planted with grass and/or other landscaping material. 
    Deciduous shrub means a lower story plant that generally will not attain a mature height of more than 25 feet and usually has a dense branching pattern which is close to the ground level. Such plants shed their leaves and are dormant during the winter. Any plant that will not attain a mature height of more than one foot will not be regarded as a deciduous shrub. 
    Evergreen shrub means a lower story plant that generally will not attain a mature height of more than 25 feet and usually has a dense branching pattern which is close to the ground level. Such plants retain their foliage throughout the year. Any plant that will not attain a mature height of more than one foot will not be regarded as an evergreen shrub. 
    Evergreen tree means a tree that retains its foliage throughout the year, generally develops a pyramidal shape, and grows to a mature height and spread that is greater than any pyramidal shaped evergreen shrubs such as upright Junipers and upright Arborvitae. 
    Landscape area means an area where trees, shrubs, flowers, lawn or other plantings are provided. 
    Parkway trees means trees which are planted in the public right-of-way. 
    Residential district means any of the zoning districts designated as residential. 
    Shade tree means a deciduous plant which generally creates a tall and wide overhead canopy under natural growing conditions. Shade trees will usually have a single trunk. Such plants will shed their leaves and are dormant during winter. 
    Transitional buffer yard means a landscaped yard which provides increased compatibility between abutting incompatible land uses. 
(Code 2008, § 17.1120; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.1120), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-821. - Applicability. 
(a)  Landscaping and/or screening shall be required and plans must be submitted to the city planning and zoning commission for review and approval as follows: 
(1)  At the time of application for any and all building permits for new construction of any structure to be used for other than single-family or two-family dwelling units; 
(2)  Upon a change in use of property from single-family or two-family residential use to any other use; 
(3)  At the time of application for any and all special use permits; 
(4)  Upon the submission of a final plat for a commercial or industrial subdivision, which final plat includes thereon and therein one or more new public streets or other public rights-of-way; and 
(5)  At the time of application for any and all building permits for the expansion of existing uses, other than single-family and two-family dwelling unit uses. 
(b)  The provisions of this article shall apply to all zoning districts, as provided from time to time under the city's zoning code. 
(Code 2008, § 17.1130; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.1130), 11-2-2009) 
Secs. 78-822-78-850. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 78-851. - Primary landscaping requirements. 
(a)  Performance standards. All landscape plans, submitted under this section shall fully meet the following performance standards: 
(1)  Landscaping and landscaping materials shall not hinder the vision of motorists and pedestrians necessary for safe movement into, out of, and within the site; 
(2)  Landscaping materials must be selected and placed in such a manner that they do not interfere with or damage existing utilities; 
(3)  Landscaping materials must be selected and placed so as not to affect the safe and enjoyable use of surrounding properties; 
(4)  Landscaping materials must be selected and placed taking into account the ultimate size that will be achieved over time by the landscaping materials selected; 
(5)  Landscaping materials with thorns, berries, and other undesirable plant characteristics must be placed to avoid potential harm to persons or property on- and off-site; 
(6)  Weak wooded trees may only be used where limb breakage will not cause harm to persons or property. 
(b)  Calculation of minimum requirements. Unless otherwise permitted by the alternative compliance procedures of this article, every landscape plan shall include therein street-side landscaping, parking lot landscaping, and traditional buffer yard landscaping as hereinafter provided. The landscaping materials and the quantities and types thereof shall be calculated and determined as follows: 
(1)  Street-side landscaping shall be so designed and constructed that the total of all points assigned to the landscaping materials utilized must equal or exceed the number obtained by dividing the lot frontage on the street, measured in linear feet, by two. 
(2)  All street-side landscaping must be located in the area between the front lot line (adjacent to the street) and the nearest point of any parking lot, access drive or road, or building on the property. The above described area must be not less than ten feet in depth, notwithstanding the required minimum front yard under the provisions of the particular zoning district. 
(3)  Existing parkway trees may comprise up to one-half of the total points that must be obtained through trees where the existing parkway trees are located within ten feet of the front lot line (adjacent to the street). 
(4)  Parking lot landscaping shall be so designed and constructed that the total of all points assigned to parking lot landscaping used must equal or exceed the number of parking spaces provided on the property; provided, however, the following additional requirements shall also apply: 
a.  Fewer than 100 parking spaces. If the parking lot has fewer than 100 parking spaces, the parking lot landscaping may be placed within an interior curbed parking island and/or within ten feet of the perimeter of the parking lot. 
b.  100 or more parking spaces. If the parking lot has 100 or more parking spaces, one-half of the required points assigned to the landscaping materials used must consist of shade trees planted in curbed parking islands within the interior of the parking lot. Parking islands must be protected with concrete curbs, or a functionally equivalent material that has received the prior approval of the city. Landscape timbers, railroad ties, and wood or lumber are not functionally equivalent to concrete curbs, and are not acceptable hereunder. 
(c)  Minimum area for planting trees. The minimum area for planting all types of trees within parking lots will be not less than 180 square feet. Shade trees and intermediate trees may not be planted in any area with a width of less than five feet. Evergreen trees may not be planted in any area with a width of less than ten feet. Shrubs may not be planted in any area with a width of less than two feet. The widths of all plantings within curbed parking islands must be measured from the back of the curb. 
(d)  Location of parking lot landscaping. The location of the parking lot landscaping will be subject to review and approval by the city. 
(e)  Transitional buffer yard. Transitional buffer yards shall be so designed and constructed so that the total of all points assigned to the landscaping materials used therein must equal or exceed the number of linear feet of the length of the transitional buffer yard as measured along the property line separating the residential district or residential use from the property subject to this article. The following additional requirements shall apply to a transitional buffer yard: 
(1)  Evergreen materials. One-half of the total points assigned to the landscaping materials used in the transitional buffer yard shall be comprised of evergreen or broadleaf evergreen plantings. 
(2)  Depth of yard. The depth of the transitional buffer yard shall be not less than ten percent of the lot width or depth, whichever is applicable, provided that in no event may the transitional buffer yard be less than ten feet. No transitional buffer yard will be required to be more than 25 feet in width or depth. 
(3)  Prohibited materials. No aisle ways, driveways, parking areas, refuse containers, service vehicle maneuvering areas, storage, towers, or structures of any form may be located within any transitional buffer yard, except as specifically permitted by this article. If an emergency exit is required by code to be located within the transitional buffer yard, a concrete pad of no more than 23 square feet may be placed at grade level immediately outside of the required emergency exit. 
(4)  Utility structures. Utility structures or units are permitted in a transitional buffer yard if properly screened from the adjacent residential property, subject to the review and approval by the city planning and zoning commission. The utility structure must be visually screened with a fence, wall, berm, evergreen planting, or combination thereof, which achieves a substantially solid six-foot visual barrier. 
(5)  Screening of activity areas. A visual barrier will be required when all or a portion of the subject site immediately adjacent to the transitional buffer yard is planned to be used for the following activities: 
a.  Loading, unloading, or storage of refuse containers/dumpsters; 
b.  Storage or display of materials or merchandise; 
c.  Loading or unloading of passengers or goods; and 
d.  Parking of vehicles. 
The above referred to visual barrier shall consist of a fence, wall, berm, evergreen planting, or combination thereof which achieves a substantially solid six-foot visual barrier. If a fence or wall is used to meet this requirement, it must be located between the activity area and the transitional buffer yard. 
All plantings used to meet the screening of activity area requirements must be capable of achieving a substantially solid six-foot visual barrier within two years of the date of the issuance of the certificate of occupancy by the city. 
(f)  Expansion of existing structures. Where an existing structure, other than a one-family or two-family dwelling, is expanded, the landscaping plan shall include such landscaping materials as are required for new construction, provided that the number of points that must be obtained by the landscaping materials used may be reduced as follows: 
If Expansion Square Footage Divided by Pre-Expansion Square Footage is: Then Percentage of Points Required is: 0%-25% 0% 26%-50% 50% 51% or more 100%  
(g)  Point system classification. The following points shall be assigned to and shall apply for all required landscaping and landscaping materials: 
Shade trees 18 points Evergreen trees 18 points Intermediate trees 12 points Evergreen shrubs 3 points Deciduous Shrubs 2 points  
(h)  Incentive for preserving existing landscaping. Existing landscaping that is in a vigorous growing condition and is not specifically prohibited by this article may be used to meet the point requirements of this article. Furthermore, the following landscaping materials will be awarded five additional points (added to base value) per tree when preserved: 
Shade Trees 12 inch diameter trunk or greater Intermediate Tree 15 feet height or taller Evergreen Tree 15 feet height or taller  
(i)  Incentive for planting larger landscaping. Planting of landscaping materials which are larger than the minimum required sizes specified herein will be rewarded with five additional points (added to base value) per tree when the proposed sizes are as follows: 
Shade Tree 4 inches diameter (5 inches in transitional buffer yards) or greater Intermediate Tree 10 feet height or taller Evergreen Tree 10 feet height or taller  
(j)  Landscaping material. 
(1)  Selection. All landscaping materials must be in a healthy, vigorous growing condition. All landscaping materials must be capable of withstanding the extremes of the particular site microclimates. 
(2)  Minimum size. All landscaping materials required herein must, at the time of planting, be of the following minimum size: 
a.  Shade trees: trunk caliper (diameter) of 21/2 inches. 
b.  Evergreen trees: six feet in height. 
c.  Intermediate trees: single-stem varieties shall have a trunk caliper (diameter) of 11/2 inches. Multi-stem varieties shall have a minimum height of six feet. 
d.  Shrubs (all): two feet in height or spread. 
e.  Trunk caliper shall be measured two feet above the ground. 
(3)  Prohibited trees. The following trees may not be used in meeting any of the requirements of this article: 
a.  Ailanthus (Tree of Heaven); 
b.  Box Elder; 
c.  European Mountain Ash; 
d.  European White Birch; 
e.  Mulberry; 
f.  Poplar; 
g.  Purple Ash; 
h.  Purple-leaf Plum; 
i.  Russian Olive; 
j.  Siberian Elm; 
k.  Silver Maple; 
l.  White Ash; 
m.  Willow. 
(k)  Ground cover and mulching requirements. 
(1)  All landscape areas must be planted and maintained with a vegetative ground cover such as sod or seed. Other low growing plants (evergreen or broadleaf plants with a mature height of one foot or less) may also be utilized. 
(2)  If low growing broadleaf evergreen plants such as Pachysandra, Vinca Minor, and Purple Leaf Winter creeper are utilized to meet the ground cover requirements, such must be planted together in continuous beds, mulched with shredded hardwood bark or cypress mulch and spaced in such a way that they achieve a substantially continuous ground cover within two years from the date a certificate of occupancy is issued by the city. 
(3)  Creeping Junipers must be mulched with shredded hardwood bark, cypress, or gravel mulch and must achieve a substantially continuous ground cover within two years from the date a certificate of occupancy is issued by the city. 
(4)  All required shrubs and trees must be mulched and maintained with shredded hardwood bark, cypress, or gravel mulch. Plant groups must be mulched in a continuous bed in which the edge of the mulching bed does not extend any more than four feet beyond the edge of the plantings. 
(5)  When required shrubs or trees are planted individually and away from nearby plants, they must be encircled in a mulched area with a diameter of no more than five feet. Evergreen trees may be mulched in a circle with a diameter large enough to accommodate the spread of the tree and up to four additional feet of mulch beyond the edge of the tree. 
(6)  All mulch proposed to be placed within or directly adjacent to a parking lot shall be shredded hardwood bark or cypress mulch. Gravel mulch will not be permitted within or directly adjacent to parking lots. 
(Code 2008, § 17.1140; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.1140), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-852. - Alternative compliance procedures. 
(a)  Application. In lieu of complying with the point system for determining the nature and extent of landscaping and screening required on any property, a comprehensive landscaping plan may be submitted where practical difficulties or a particular hardship exists that renders strict compliance with the point system impossible or impractical. 
(b)  Practical difficulty or particular hardship. A practical difficulty or particular hardship exists only where one or more of the following conditions is found to exist: 
(1)  The view of the landscaping will be blocked by a change in grade, natural vegetation, or manmade features; 
(2)  An existing building or a concrete or asphalt parking lot occupies the area where the landscaping would otherwise be required (except for parking lot landscaping); 
(3)  In the case of a transitional buffer yard, the adjacent residentially zoned property has previously been developed with a use other than residential, and the city planning and zoning commission determines that a reduction in the nature and extent of the landscaping and screening will not have a negative impact on the adjacent property; 
(4)  In the case of a transitional buffer yard, the adjacent residentially zoned property is vacant and is not proposed to be used for residential purposes in the city's comprehensive plan. 
(5)  Economic hardship, standing alone, will not be considered a practical difficulty or a particular hardship. 
(c)  Satisfaction of performance standards. Comprehensive landscaping plans submitted under this section must fully achieve the performance standards as contained in section 78-851(a). 
(d)  Minor adjustments to existing special uses. Where the holder of an existing special use plans or proposes to make a change to the existing landscape plan, or to its existing landscaping, the owner or holder of the special use may follow the provisions of this subsection: 
(1)  Plan submission. When a minor adjustment to the landscaping of an existing special use is planned or proposed, the holder of the special use may either request a public hearing before the planning and zoning commission as to the proposed modification of the existing landscaping plan, or may submit an amended plan to the city for review as provided in this section. 
(2)  City authority. The city shall determine whether the proposed adjustment to the landscaping or landscaping plan will have any impact on the special use or surrounding property, other than on the landscaping itself. The city may approve the proposed amendment, or may state that the request must be processed through the planning and zoning commission and city council. 
(3)  Planning and zoning commission. Where the holder of a special use elects to request a public hearing before the planning and zoning commission, or where the city requests that the proposed change be processed through the planning and zoning commission, the planning and zoning commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed change to the landscaping or landscaping plan. 
(4)  Public hearing. The planning and zoning commission shall, when requested by the holder of a special use or the city, hold a public hearing on any proposed modification of the landscaping or landscaping plan to an existing special use. The hearing shall be open to the public, and shall be held after notice of such hearing is given by one publication in the city at least 15 days before the time of the hearing. The notice of public hearing shall state the time, place, and date of the public hearing, the purpose of the public hearing, and contain a correct description of the property that is subject to the existing special use. 
(5)  Planning and zoning commission recommendation. After the conclusion of the public hearing, the planning and zoning commission shall make its recommendation as to the granting or denying of the proposed change to the existing landscaping plan or landscaping of an existing special use to the city council. That recommendation shall be made in writing and forwarded to the city council by the planning and zoning commission. The recommendation shall contain findings of fact and shall contain an explicit recommendation for approval or denial of the proposed change to the landscaping or landscaping plan for the existing special use. 
(6)  City council action. The city council shall have final authority to approve or deny the change to the landscaping or landscaping plan for an existing special use. The city council, at a regularly or specially held meeting thereof, shall approve or deny the request for the change after having considered the planning and zoning commission's recommendation. 
(Code 2008, § 17.1150; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.1150), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-853. - Landscape maintenance. 
(a)  Responsibility. The owner of property subject to a landscaping plan shall be responsible for the maintenance, repair, and replacement of all landscaping, landscaping materials, fences, and other visual barriers, including, but not limited to, refuse disposal area screens. 
(b)  Plant materials. All required landscaping materials must be maintained in a healthy, vigorous growing condition, and neat and orderly appearance. Landscaping materials must be replaced as necessary, and must be kept free of refuse and debris. 
(c)  Fences and walls. All fences, walls, and other barriers must be maintained in good repair, such that same are at all times structurally sound and attractive in appearance. All fences must have the finished face directed toward residential property, where a residential property is adjacent to or separated only by a public or private street or right-of-way. 
(Code 2008, § 17.1160; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.1160), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-854. - Other screening. 
(a)  Refuse disposal area screens. All refuse disposal areas must be landscaped and otherwise screened on four sides (including a gate for access) by a solid, commercial-grade wood fence, wall, or equivalent material with a minimum height of six feet. 
(b)  Mechanical equipment screens. All rooftop and ground level mechanical equipment and utilities must be fully landscaped or otherwise screened from view of any street or residential zoning district as seen from six feet above ground level. 
(c)  Screening for scrap, junk, salvage, reclamation, or similar yards. Any scrap, junk, salvage, reclamation or similar yard, or any auto salvage yard must provide a solid fence or wall with only such openings as are necessary for ingress or egress. Said fence or wall shall be located as otherwise required in this code unless same is located adjacent to a nonresidential property, in which case it shall be located as near to the lot line separating the properties as shall be possible. Said fence or wall shall be maintained in good repair and in a neat and orderly appearance and shall be of such height that any materials stored within the confines of the fence cannot be seen above a line of sight established between a point 41/2 feet above the centerline of the street nearest to that fence, and the top of said fence. 
(Code 2008, § 17.1170; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.1170), 11-2-2009) 
Secs. 78-855-78-871. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PROCEDURE 

Sec. 78-872. - Landscaping plan submission and review. 
    The landscaping plan must contain all of the information required in this article. Landscaping and screening must be completed prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, unless an escrow agreement is approved by the city. 
(1)  Content of landscaping plan. The following information must be shown on all landscaping plans: 
a.  North arrow, scale, date of preparation and date of revisions, name and address of designer or drafter; 
b.  Location of all buildings, structures, and pavement that are proposed or will remain on the site; 
c.  Location of all existing or proposed watercourses, ponds, lakes, or other bodies of water; 
d.  Location, size, and common name of any existing trees or shrubs that are to be preserved; 
e.  Location of all landscaping and landscaping materials that are proposed for the site, including any trees, shrubs, ground cover, ornamental grasses, and flower beds, identifying thereon the name and type of each such tree, shrub, ground cover, or ornamental grass; 
f.  Location of any existing or proposed signs, walls, fences, berms at one-foot contour intervals), site furniture, lights, fountains, and sculptures; 
g.  Location of all property lines; 
h.  Location of all curb lines for existing and proposed streets, alleys, and parking lots; 
i.  Location of all sidewalks, existing or proposed for the site, or that currently adjoin the site; 
j.  Comprehensive plant list that describes the common name, quantity, and size for each proposed plant that is shown or described in the landscaping plan; 
k.  Such other additional information as may be required by the city planning and zoning commission to adequately review the landscaping plan. 
(2)  Alternative compliance procedure. The landscaping plan must clearly indicate on the face thereof that the landscaping plan is being submitted under the alternative compliance procedures of this code, or the landscaping plan will be reviewed for compliance with the primary landscaping requirements. 
(3)  Installation of landscaping. All landscape plans must be approved as provided in this Code prior to the installation of the landscaping or landscaping materials. 
(Code 2008, § 17.1180; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.1180), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-873. - Review. 
(a)  Variances as described in this chapter may be permitted by the planning and zoning commission in appropriate cases, subject to the legislative intent specified in the zoning code, and the standards established by that code. In all cases the scope of authority which the planning and zoning commission shall have to grant landscaping and screening variances from the provisions of this chapter is limited to those as permitted by state statute. 
(b)  In addition to any power herein granted to the planning and zoning commission, the corporate authorities reserve and retain the power to determine and vary by ordinance the application to the landscaping and screening regulations herein contained in harmony with their general purpose and intent in cases where there are practical difficulties or particular hardship in the way of carrying out the strict letter of any of those regulations. No such variance shall be made by the corporate authorities without a hearing before the planning and zoning commission. 
(Code 2008, § 17.1190; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.1190), 11-2-2009) 
Sec. 78-874. - Penalty. 
(a)  In addition to other remedies and penalties provided, the city attorney is authorized to file appropriate civil actions for temporary restraining order, temporary injunction, permanent injunction, or for damages against any person violating this article. 
(b)  When the existence of a violation of this article is brought to the attention of the city administrator, he shall cause an inspection investigation to be made by the appropriate agencies to determine whether or not a violation has occurred, and the nature and extent of the violation. 
(1)  If, after inspection and investigation, the city determines that a violation of this article has occurred, the city shall cause a notice in writing to be served upon the person who is responsible for the existence of the violation. Notice may be served by mailing a copy thereof to the last known address of the person who is responsible for the existence of the violation, return receipt requested, or may be personally delivered by a representative of the city. The notice shall indicate the date of the inspection and investigation, and the nature and extent of the violation. 
(2)  The notice shall grant a reasonable period of time within which to restore or replace the landscaping material, and/or correct any violation found to exist. If said violation is not corrected within the given period of time, the violation may be abated or corrected by the city under the direction of the building inspector, and the cost of so doing shall be collected from the person who is responsible for the violation, with a penalty of ten percent of such costs in an appropriate court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 2008, § 17.1200; Ord. No. 09-15, § I(17.1200), 11-2-2009) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 2008 CODE 
    This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 2008 Code, as updated through October 3, 2016, which are included herein. Sections of the 2008 Code, as updated, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
2008 Code 
Section Section 

this Code 1.04.010 1-2 1.04.050 1-9 1.04.060 1-10 1.04.080 1-2 1.04.090 1-11 1.08.010 2-1 1.12.010 2-2 1.16.010 1-8 2.04.010 2-28 2.04.050 2-29 2.04.060 2-29 2.04.070 2-29 2.04.090 2-29 2.04.100 2-29 2.04.110 2-29 2.04.120 2-29 2.04.130 2-29 2.04.140 2-29 2.04.150 2-29 2.08.010 2-27 2.08.020 2-30 2.08.040 2-31 2.08.060 2-53 2.08.070 2-54 2.08.080 2-55 2.08.090 2-55 2.08.100 2-55 2.08.120 2-56 2.08.130 2-57 2.08.140 2-58 2.08.150 2-59 2.08.160 2-60 2.08.170 2-60 2.08.180 2-60 2.08.190 2-60 2.08.200 2-60 2.08.210 2-60 2.08.220 2-60 2.08.230 2-60 2.08.240 2-60 2.08.250 2-60 2.08.260 2-60 2.08.270 2-60 2.08.280 2-60 2.08.290 2-60 2.08.300 2-60 2.08.310 2-60 2.08.320 2-60 2.08.330 2-60 2.08.340 2-61 2.08.350 2-32 2.08.360 2-60 2.12.010 2-112 2.12.020 2-113 2.12.030 2-114 2.12.040 2-115 2.12.050 2-116 2.12.060 2-117 2.12.070 2-118 2.12.080 2-119 2.12.090 2-120 2.12.100 2-121 2.12.110 2-122 2.12.120 2-123 2.12.130 2-124 2.12.140 2-125 2.12.150 2-250 2.12.160 2-251 2.12.170 2-126 2.12.180 2-127 2.13.010 2-153 2.13.020 2-154 2.13.030 2-155 2.16.010 2-180 2.16.020 2-181 2.16.030 2-182 2.16.040 2-183 2.16.050 2-184 2.16.060 2-185 2.16.070 2-186 2.16.080 2-187 2.16.090 2-188 2.16.100 2-189 2.20.010 2-219 2.20.020 2-220 2.20.030 2-221 2.20.040 2-222 2.20.050 2-223 2.20.060 2-224 2.20.070 2-225 2.28.010 2-244 2.28.020 2-245 2.28.030 2-246 2.28.040 2-247 2.28.050 2-248 2.28.060 2-249 2.40.010 2-409 2.40.020 2-410 2.40.030 2-411 2.40.040 2-412 2.40.050 2-413 2.40.060 2-414 2.40.070 2-415 2.40.080 2-416 2.56.010 2-366 2.68.010 22-1 2.68.020 22-2 2.68.030 22-3 2.68.040 22-4 2.68.050 22-5 2.68.060 22-6 2.68.070 22-7 2.68.080 22-8 2.68.090 22-9 2.68.100 22-10 2.68.110 22-11 2.72.010 62-266 2.72.020 62-267 2.74.010 2-81 2.74.020 2-82 2.74.030 2-83 2.74.040 2-84 3.04.010 2-335 3.08.010 2-361 3.08.020 2-362 3.08.030 2-363 3.08.040 2-364 3.08.050 2-365 3.12.010 2-336 5.04.010 18-19 5.04.020 18-20 5.04.030 18-21 5.04.040 18-22 5.04.050 18-23 5.04.060 18-24 5.04.070 18-25 5.04.080 18-26 5.04.090 18-27 5.04.120 18-28 5.04.130 18-29 5.04.140 18-30 5.04.150 18-31 5.08.010 18-52 5.08.020 18-53 5.08.030 18-54 5.08.040 18-55 5.08.050 18-56 5.08.070 18-57 5.08.130 18-58 5.08.140 18-59 5.10.010 18-78 5.10.020 18-77 5.10.030 18-79 5.11.010 6-1 5.11.020 6-21 5.11.030 6-22 5.11.040 6-48 5.11.050 6-49 5.11.060 6-50 5.11.070 6-51 5.11.080 6-52 5.11.082 6-53 5.11.090 6-54 5.11.100 6-55 5.11.110 6-56 5.11.120 6-57 5.11.130 6-58 5.11.140 6-59 5.11.150 6-60 5.11.160 6-61 5.11.170 6-62 5.11.180 6-63 5.11.190 6-64 5.11.210 6-66 5.11.220 6-67 5.11.230 6-68 5.11.240 6-69 5.11.250 6-70 5.11.260 6-71 5.11.270 6-72 5.11.280 6-73 5.11.290 6-74 5.11.310 6-75 5.11.320 6-76 5.11.330 6-77 5.11.350 6-78 5.11.360 6-79 5.11.370 6-80 5.11.380 6-81 5.11.390 6-82 5.11.400 6-83 5.11.410 6-84 5.11.420 6-85 5.11.430 6-86 5.11.430.1 6-87 5.12.010 18-102 5.12.020 18-103 5.12.030 18-104 5.12.040 18-105 5.12.050 18-106 5.12.060 18-107 5.17.010 42-110 5.17.020 42-111 5.17.030 42-112 5.17.040 42-113 5.17.050 42-114 5.17.060 42-115 5.18.010 18-128 5.18.020 18-129 5.18.030 18-130 5.18.040 18-131 6.04.010 10-12 6.04.030 10-2 6.04.050 10-1 6.04.060 10-13 6.04.070 10-3 6.04.080 10-4 6.04.100 10-5 6.04.110 10-6 6.04.120 10-7 6.04.130 10-8 6.04.140 10-9 6.04.150 10-10 6.04.160 10-11 6.10.010 10-45 6.10.020 10-46 6.10.030 10-47 6.10.040 10-48 6.10.050 10-49 8.04.010 46-58 8.04.020 30-24 8.12.010 46-59 8.12.030 46-59 8.16.010 50-19 8.16.020 50-20 8.16.030 50-21 8.16.040 50-22 8.16.050 50-23 8.16.060 50-24 8.16.070 50-25 8.16.080 50-26 8.16.090 50-27 8.16.100 50-28 8.16.110 50-29 8.16.120 50-30 8.16.130 50-31 8.16.140 50-32 8.16.150 50-33 8.16.160 50-34 8.16.170 50-35 8.16.180 50-36 8.16.190 50-37 8.16.200 50-38 8.16.210 50-39 8.16.215 50-40 8.20.010 42-1 8.20.030 42-2 8.20.050 42-3 8.20.060 42-4 8.20.080 42-27 - 42-28 - 42-29 - 42-30 - 42-31 - 42-32 8.28.010 42-78 8.28.020 42-79 8.28.030 42-80 8.28.040 42-81 8.28.050 42-82 8.28.060 42-83 8.32.010 54-1 8.32.011 54-2 8.32.020 54-3 8.32.030 54-4 8.32.040 54-5 8.36.010 26-19 8.36.020 26-42 8.36.030 26-43 8.36.040 26-44 8.36.050 26-45 8.36.060 26-46 8.36.070 26-47 8.36.080 26-70 8.36.090 26-71 8.36.100 26-72 8.36.110 26-73 8.36.120 26-74 8.36.130 26-75 8.36.140 26-77 8.36.150 26-76 8.36.160 26-78 8.36.170 26-79 8.36.180 26-80 8.36.190 26-48 9.100 38-19 9.110 38-20 9.115 38-21 9.120 38-22 9.130 38-23 9.140 38-24 9.150 38-25 9.160 38-26 9.180 38-27 9.190 38-28 9.24.010 46-52 9.24.030 46-53 9.24.040 46-54 9.24.050 46-55 9.24.060 46-56 9.24.070 46-57 9.40.010 46-23 9.40.040 46-24 9.54.010 46-97 - 46-98 9.60.010 46-125 10.010 70-105 10.020 70-106 10.030 70-107 10.040 70-109 10.04.010 70-2 10.050 70-110 10.060 70-111 10.070 70-114 10.080 70-108 10.08.010 70-67 10.08.020 70-68 10.08.030 70-69 10.08.040 70-70 10.08.050 70-71 10.08.060 70-72 10.08.070 70-73 10.090 70-113 10.100 70-112 10.12.030 70-142 10.20.010 70-3 10.20.020 70-4 10.20.090 70-178 10.24.012 70-27 10.24.040 70-35 10.24.050 70-36 10.24.060 70-37 10.24.070 70-38 10.24.080 70-39 10.24.15 70-28 10.24.16 70-29 10.24.17 70-30 10.24.18 70-31 10.24.19 70-32 10.24.20 70-33 10.24.31 70-34 10.28.010 70-143 10.28.020 70-144 10.28.030 70-145 10.28.040 70-146 10.28.045 70-147 10.36.020 70-179 10.36.040 70-180 10.40.030 70-199 10.46.010 70-222 10.46.020 70-223 10.46.030 70-224 10.46.35 70-225 12.04.020 62-23 12.04.030 62-24 12.04.040 62-25 12.04.050 62-26 12.04.070 62-27 12.08.010 62-58 12.08.020 62-59 12.08.030 62-60 12.12.010 62-79 12.12.020 62-80 12.12.030 62-81 12.12.040 62-82 12.16.010 62-128 12.16.020 62-129 12.16.030 62-130 12.16.040 62-131 12.18.010 62-161 12.18.020 62-162 12.20.010 62-193 12.20.020 62-194 12.20.030 62-195 12.20.040 62-196 12.20.042 62-197 12.20.044 62-198 12.20.046 62-199 12.20.050 62-200 12.24.010 62-1 12.28.010 62-224 12.28.020 62-225 12.28.030 62-226 12.28.040 62-227 12.28.050 62-228 12.28.060 62-229 12.28.070 62-230 12.28.080 62-231 12.28.090 62-232 12.28.100 62-233 12.28.110 62-234 12.28.120 62-235 12.28.130 62-236 12.32.020 62-2 12.36.010 62-298 12.36.020 62-299 12.36.030 62-300 12.36.040 62-301 12.36.050 62-302 12.36.060 62-303 12.36.070 62-304 12.36.080 62-305 12.36.090 62-306 12.36.100 62-307 12.36.110 62-308 12.36.120 62-309 12.36.130 62-310 12.36.140 62-311 12.36.150 62-312 12.36.160 62-313 12.36.170 62-314 12.36.180 62-315 13.02.010 74-1 13.02.020 74-2 13.02.030 74-3 13.02.040 74-4 13.04.055 74-66 13.04.010 74-27 13.04.020 74-28 13.04.030 74-29 13.04.040 74-32 13.04.050 74-65 13.04.080 74-125 13.04.082 74-91 13.04.084 74-92 13.04.085 74-93 13.04.086 74-94 13.04.088 74-95 13.04.090 74-96 13.04.092 74-97 13.04.094 74-98 13.04.095 74-126 13.04.096 74-31 13.04.098 74-127 13.04.060 74-30 13.04.070 74-30 13.04.112 74-167 13.04.114 74-168 13.04.116 74-169 13.04.150 74-170 13.04.160 74-194 13.04.170 74-195 13.04.175 74-196 13.04.180 74-197 13.04.190 74-198 13.04.200 74-199 13.04.205 74-200 13.04.210 74-201 13.04.215 74-202 13.04.220 74-203 13.04.230 74-204 13.04.250 74-205 13.04.260 74-33 13.04.270 74-34 13.04.280 74-35 13.04.290 74-36 13.04.300 74-37 13.04.320 74-38 13.08.010 74-260 13.08.020 74-261 13.08.030 74-262 13.08.040 74-263 13.08.050 74-264 13.08.060 74-265 13.08.070 74-266 13.08.080 74-267 13.08.090 74-268 13.08.100 74-269 13.08.110 74-270 13.08.120 74-271 13.08.130 74-272 13.08.140 74-273 13.08.160 74-295 13.08.170 74-296 13.08.200 74-297 13.08.210 74-298 13.08.220 74-299 13.08.230 74-300 13.08.270 74-301 13.08.280 74-302 13.08.310 74-303 13.08.320 74-325 13.08.330 74-326 13.08.340 74-327 13.08.350 74-328 13.10.010 74-360 13.10.020 74-361 13.10.030 74-362 13.10.040 74-363 13.10.050 74-364 13.11.005 74-418 13.11.010 74-419 13.11.015 74-420 13.11.020 74-421 13.11.025 74-422 13.11.030 74-423 13.11.035 74-424 13.11.040 74-425 13.11.045 74-426 13.11.050 74-427 13.11.060 74-428 13.11.065 74-429 13.11.075 74-430 13.11.080 74-431 13.11.090 74-432 13.11.100 74-463 13.11.110 74-464 13.11.120 74-465 13.12.010 74-484 13.12.020 74-485 13.12.030 74-486 13.12.040 74-487 13.12.050 74-488 13.12.060 74-489 13.12.070 74-490 13.12.080 74-491 13.12.090 74-492 13.12.100 74-493 13.12.110 74-494 13.12.120 74-495 13.12.130 74-496 13.14.010 74-516 13.14.020 74-517 13.14.030 74-518 13.14.040 74-519 13.14.050 74-520 13.16.010 58-56 13.16.020 58-57 13.16.030 58-58 13.16.040 58-59 13.16.050 58-60 13.16.060 58-61 13.16.070 58-62 13.16.080 58-63 13.16.090 58-64 13.16.100 58-65 13.16.110 58-66 13.16.120 58-67 13.16.130 58-68 13.16.131 58-69 13.4.100 74-128 13.4.101 74-157 13.4.102 74-158 13.4.103 74-159 13.4.104 74-160 13.4.105 74-161 13.4.106 74-162 13.4.107 74-163 13.4.108 74-164 13.4.109 74-165 13.4.110 74-166 15.04.010 42-144 15.04.020 42-145 15.04.025 42-146 15.04.050 42-148 15.04.060 42-149 15.04.080 42-150 15.04.090 42-151 15.06.010 14-1 15.06.020 14-2 15.06.030 14-3 15.06.040 14-4 15.06.050 14-5 15.06.060 14-6 15.06.080 14-8 15.08.010 30-1 15.08.020 30-21 15.08.030 30-22 15.08.040 30-23 title 16, § 1-1 66-1 title 16, § 1-10 66-7 title 16, § 1-11 66-8 title 16, § 1-2 66-2 title 16, § 1-3 66-3 title 16, § 1-4 66-4 title 16, § 1-5 66-5 title 16, § 1-9 66-6 title 16, § 2-1 66-35 title 16, § 2-2 66-36 title 16, § 2-3 66-37 title 16, § 2-4 66-38 title 16, § 3-1 66-65 title 16, § 3-10 66-74 title 16, § 3-11 66-75 title 16, § 3-12 66-76 title 16, § 3-12 66-77 title 16, § 3-13 66-77 title 16, § 3-15 66-78 title 16, § 3-16 66-79 title 16, § 3-17 66-80 title 16, § 3-19 66-81 title 16, § 3-2 66-66 title 16, § 3-20 66-82 title 16, § 3-3 66-67 title 16, § 3-4 66-68 title 16, § 3-5 66-69 title 16, § 3-6 66-70 title 16, § 3-7 66-71 title 16, § 3-8 66-72 title 16, § 3-9 66-73 title 16, § 4 66-108 title 16, § 5-1 66-136 title 16, § 5-2 66-137 title 16, § 5-3 66-138 title 16, § 6-1 66-160 title 16, § 6-2 66-161 title 16, § 6-3 66-162 title 16, § 6-4 66-163 title 16, § 6-5 66-164 title 16, § 6-6 66-165 title 16, § 6-7 66-166 - 66-109 - 66-110 - 66-111 17.000 34-6 17.10 78-1 17.20 78-2 17.30 78-3 17.40 78-5 17.50 78-4 17.60 78-66 - 78-67 17.70 78-68 17.80 78-69 17.90 78-70 17.100 78-99 17.110 78-100 17.120 78-101 17.130 78-102 17.140 78-103 17.150 78-198 17.160 78-104 17.170 78-105 17.180 78-124 17.190(M) 78-125 17.200(intro. ¶) 78-151 17.200(A) 78-152 17.200(B) 78-153 17.200(C) 78-154 17.200(D) 78-155 17.200(E) 78-156 17.200(F) 78-157 17.200(G) 78-158 17.200(H) 78-159 17.200(I) 78-160 17.210(intro. ¶) 78-189 17.210(A) 78-190 17.210(B) 78-191 17.210(C)(1) 78-192 17.210(C)(2) 78-192 17.210(C)(3) 78-192 17.210(C)(4) 78-192 17.210(C)(4)(a) 78-193 17.210(C)(4)(b) 78-194 17.210(C)(4)(c) 78-195 17.210(C)(4)(d) 78-196 17.210(C)(4)(e) 78-197 17.210(C)(5) 78-197 17.210(C)(6) 78-197 17.210(C)(7) 78-197 17.210(C)(8) 78-197 17.210(C)(9) 78-197 17.210(C)(10) 78-197 17.210(C)(11) 78-197 17.210(C)(12) 78-197 17.230(A) 78-220 17.230(B) 78-221 17.230(C) 78-222 17.230(D) 78-222 17.230(E) 78-222 17.230(F) 78-222 17.230(G) 78-223 17.240 78-126 17.250 78-255 17.260 78-256 17.270 78-257 17.280 78-258 17.290 78-259 17.300 78-260 17.310 78-261 17.320 78-262 17.330 78-288 17.340(intro. ¶) 78-310 17.340(A) 78-311 17.340(B) 78-312 17.340(C) 78-313 17.340(D) 78-314 17.340(E) 78-315 17.340(F) 78-316 17.340(G) 78-317 17.340(H) 78-318 17.340(I) 78-319 - 78-350 17.350(intro. ¶) 78-342 17.350(A) 78-343 17.350(B) 78-344 17.350(C) 78-345 17.350(D) 78-346 17.350(E) 78-347 17.350(G)(1) 78-348 17.350(G)(2) 78-348 17.350(G)(3) 78-349 17.360 78-374 17.370 78-392 17.380(A) 78-413 17.380(B) 78-414 17.380(C) 78-415 17.380(D) 78-416 17.380(E) 78-417 17.380(F) 78-418 17.380(G) 78-419 17.390(A) 78-437 17.390(B) 78-438 17.390(C) 78-439 17.390(D) 78-440 17.390(E) 78-441 17.390(F) 78-442 17.390(G) 78-443 17.410(A) 78-470 17.410(B) 78-471 17.410(C) 78-472 17.410(D) 78-473 17.410(E) 78-474 17.410(F) 78-475 17.410(G) 78-476 17.410(H) 78-477 17.420 78-539 17.430 78-540 17.440 78-541 17.450 78-542 17.460 78-7 17.470 78-543 17.480 78-544 17.490 78-545 17.500 78-546 17.510 78-571 17.520 78-572 17.530 78-574 17.540 78-597 17.550 78-598 17.560 78-599 17.570 78-600 17.580 78-601 17.590 78-621 17.600 78-622 17.610 78-623 17.620 78-624 17.630 78-625 17.640 78-626 17.650 78-627 17.660 78-628 17.670 78-629 17.680 78-647 17.690 78-648 17.700 78-573 17.710 78-508 17.720 78-509 17.730 78-510 17.740 78-511 17.745 78-512 17.747 78-513 17.749 78-514 - 78-515 17.750 34-1 17.760 34-3 17.770 34-4 17.780 34-10 17.800 34-11 17.810 78-670 17.820 78-671 17.830 78-672 17.840 78-673 17.850 78-705 17.860 78-706 17.870 78-707 17.880 78-708 17.890 78-709 17.900 78-710 17.910 78-711 17.930 78-45 17.940 78-46 17.970 78-8 17.980 78-9 17.990 78-10 17.1000 78-11 17.1010 78-13 17.1030 78-785 17.1040 78-786 17.1050 78-787 17.1060 78-788 17.1070 78-789 17.1080 78-790 17.1110 78-819 17.1120 78-820 17.1130 78-821 17.1140 78-851 17.1150 78-852 17.1160 78-853 17.1170 78-854 17.1180 78-872 17.1190 78-873 17.1200 78-874 17.1210 78-736 17.1220 78-737 17.1230 78-738 17.1240 78-739 17.1250 78-740 17.1260 78-741 17.1270 78-742 17.1280 78-743 17.1290 78-744 17.1300 78-745 17.1310 78-746 17.1320 78-747 17.1330 78-748 17.1340 78-749 17.1350 78-750 17.1360 78-751 17.1370 78-752 17.1380 78-753 17.1390 78-754 17.1400 78-755 17.1410 78-756 17.1420 78-757 17.1425 78-758 17.1440 78-6 17.1440(A) 14-7 17.1440(B) 14-7 17.1440(C) 74-387 17.1440(D) 74-387 17.1440(E) 74-387 17.1440(F) 66-8 17.1440(H) 14-7 20.010 58-19 20.020 58-20 20.030 58-21 20.040 58-22 20.050 58-23 20.060 58-24 20.070 58-25 20.080 58-26  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - LEGISLATION 
    This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances which are included herein. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Legislation Date Section Section 
this Code Ord. No. 2 1912 div. 1, § 1 2-112 div. 1, § 2 2-113 div. 1, § 3 2-114 div. 1, § 4 2-115 div. 1, § 5 2-116 div. 1, § 7 2-117 div. 1, § 8 2-119 div. 1, § 9 2-120 div. 1, § 10 2-121 div. 1, § 11 2-122 div. 1, § 12 2-123 div. 1, § 13 2-124 div. 1, § 14 2-125 div. 1, § 15 2-250 div. 1, § 16 2-251 div. 1, § 17 2-126 div. 2, § 9 2-29 div. 2, § 10 2-29 div. 2, § 11 2-29 div. 3, § 10 2-55 div. 3, § 16 2-336 div. 3, § 19 2-57 div. 4, § 1 2-219 div. 4, § 3 2-221 div. 4, § 4 2-222 div. 4, § 5 2-223 div. 4, § 6 2-224 div. 4, § 7 2-225 div. 7, § 1 2-244 div. 7. § 2 2-245 - 2-249 div. 7, § 3 2-246 div. 7, § 5 2-247 div. 7, § 6 2-248 Ord. No. 4 1912 div. 1, § 9 10-2 div. 1, § 13 10-12 div. 3, § 10 42-1 div. 5, § 6 46-52 div. 5, § 10 46-53 div. 5, § 11 46-54 div. 5, § 12 46-55 div. 5, § 15 46-57 div. 5, § 18 46-56 div. 5, § 23 46-23 div. 6, § 1 62-128 div. 6, § 2 62-79 div. 6, § 3 62-80 div. 6, § 5 46-24 div. 6, § 14 62-130 div. 6, § 15 62-58 div. 6, § 16 62-59 div. 6, § 17 62-60 div. 6, § 22 62-81 div. 6, § 24 62-1 div. 7, § 3 46-58 Ord. No. 8 1912 1 30-1 Ord. No. 10 1912 1 2-1 Ord. No. 11 1912 2 62-23 3(part) 62-24, 62-25 4 62-26 7 62-27 Ord. No. 12 1912 1 62-193 2 62-194 3 62-195 4 62-196 5 62-200 Ord. No. 13 1912 1 2-366 Ord. No. 26 1913 (part) 2-244-2-249 Ord. No. 76 1920 1 62-233 2 62-234 3 62-235 Ord. No. 101 1924 2 70-179 Ord. No. 114 1926 1 62-82 Ord. No. 128 1927 1 62-232 Ord. No. 163 1935 1 62-231 Ord. No. 168 1935 11 70-142 Ord. No. 173 1936 1 70-143 2 70-144 Ord. No. 185 1939 1 62-230 Ord. No. 190 1940 1 62-229 Ord. No. 200 1940 3 74-298 4 74-299 5 74-300 9(3) 74-301 10 74-302 12 74-303 Ord. No. 204 1941 10 70-199 27 70-180 34 70-33 36 70-35 37 70-36 38 70-37 Ord. No. 227 1946 1 62-228 Ord. No. 252 1951 1 62-224 2 62-225 3 62-226 4 62-227 Ord. No. 260 1952 401 74-125 409 74-170 505 74-205 Ord. No. 273 1955 1 74-30 2 74-30 Ord. No. 299 1959 2 42-2 Ord. No. 2-60 1960 1 70-33 Ord. No. 3-60 1960 1 74-30 2 74-30 Ord. No. 3-66 1966 1 2-409 2 2-410 3 2-411 4 2-412 5 2-413 6 2-414 7 2-415 8 2-416 Ord. No. 5-70 1970 1 70-145 2 70-146 Ord. No. 2-76 1976 3 62-2 Ord. No. 6-76 1976 1 54-1 2 54-3 3 54-3 4 54-4 6 54-5 Ord. No. 3-77 3-14-1977 - 2-2 Amend. Ord. No. 2 5-1-1978 - 2-53 Ord. No. 8-78 - 74-1 Ord. No. 2-79 1979 1 42-3 2 42-3 3 42-3 4 42-4 5 42-4 Ord. No. 6-79 1979 1 70-39 2 70-39 3 70-39 Ord. No. 8-79 1979 (part) 62-198 1 62-199 2 62-197 Ord. No. 10-79 1979 3 74-167 4 74-168 5 74-169 Ord. No. 2-80 1980 1 70-147 2 70-147 3 70-147 Ord. No. 5-80 1980 1 70-38 Ord. No. 8-81 1981 3 62-266 4 62-267 Ord. of 7-23-1981 7-23-1981 (part) 74-1-74-4 Ord. No. 1-82 1982 ch. 1, § 1 18-19 ch. 1, § 2 18-20 ch. 1, § 3 18-21 ch. 1, § 4(part) 18-22 ch. 1, § 4(A) 18-23 ch. 1, § 5 18-24 ch. 1, § 6 18-25 ch. 1, § 7 18-26 ch. 1, § 8 18-27 ch. 1, § 11 18-28 ch. 1, § 12 18-29 ch. 1, § 13 18-30 ch. 1, § 14 18-31 ch. 2, art. 1, § 1 18-52 ch. 2, art. 1, § 2 18-53 ch. 2, art. 1, § 3 18-54 ch. 2, art. 1, § 4 18-55 ch. 2, art. 1, § 5 18-56 ch. 2, art. 1, § 7 18-57 ch. 2, art. 1, § 13 18-58 ch. 2, art. 1, § 14 18-59 ch. 2, art. 2, § 1 18-77 ch. 2, art. 2, § 2 18-78 ch. 2, art. 2, § 3 18-79 Ord. No. 6-82 1982 1 70-28 2 70-28 Amd. of 6-7-1982 6-7-1982 - 18-79 Ord. No. 4-83 1983 1 70-29 2 70-29 Ord. No. 5-83 1983 3 62-266 4 62-267 Ord. No. 7-83 1983 1 62-162 (part) 62-161 Ord. No. 9-83 1983 (part) 2-153, 2-154 Ord. No. 10-83 1983 2 50-19 3 50-20 5 50-22 6 50-23 9 50-26 10 50-27 11 50-28 12 50-29 15 50-32 16 50-33 17 50-34 20 50-36 21 50-37 22 50-38 24 50-39 Ord. No. 11-83 1983 (part) 74-427-74-432 Ord. No. 13-83 1983 1 26-19 2 26-42 3 26-43 4 26-44 5 26-45 6 26-46 8 26-70 9 26-71 10 26-72 11 26-73 12 26-74 13 26-75 14 26-77 16 26-78 17 26-79 18 26-80 19 26-48 Council action of 2-7-1983 2-7-1983 - 2-53 Ord. No. 1-84 1984 1 2-361 2 2-362 3 2-363 4 2-364 5 2-365 Ord. No. 2-84 1984 1 70-30 3 70-30 Ord. No. 3-84 1984 2 14-1 3 14-2 4 14-3 Ord. No. 1-85 1985 1 70-29 3(part) 70-178 Ord. No. 10-85 1985 (part) 74-302 1 74-360 2 74-361 3 74-362 4 74-363 5 74-364 Ord. No. 11-83 1983 (part) 74-27-74-29 - 74-31-74-38 - 74-65 - 74-91-74-98 - 74-126-74-128 - 74-158-74-165 - 74-194-74-197 - 74-199-74-204 - 74-418-74-420 - 74-422, 74-423 - 74-425 - 74-198 Ord. No. 1-86 1986 1 18-78 Ord. No. 3-86 1986 1 62-236 Ord. No. 1-87 1987 1 74-260 2 74-261 3 74-262 4 74-265 5 74-263 6 74-264 - 74-266 8 74-268 10 74-269 11 74-270 12 74-271 13 74-272 14 74-273 Ord. No. 7-87 1987 1 70-32 3 30-22 4 30-23 Ord. No. 8-87 1987 1 70-178 Ord. No. 8-91 1991 - 74-494 1(part) 74-484-74-486 2 74-487 3 74-488 4 74-489 6 74-491 7 74-492 8 74-493 10 74-495 11 74-496 Ord. No. 2-93 1993 3 74-465 4 74-263 5 74-363 Ord. No. 1-95 1995 (part) 74-516-74-520 Ord. No. 4-95 1995 (part) 42-78-42-83 42-110-42-115 - 42-145 - 42-148-42-150 - 70-67-70-73 Ord. No. 9-96 1996 - 50-22 Ord. No. 9-97 1997 - 70-34 Ord. No. 97-38 6-16-1997 2 42-28 Ord. No. 300 2000 1(part) 2-182 Ord. No. 3-00 2000 1(part) 2-180, 2-181 - 2-183-2-189 Ord. No. 12-00 2000 1-2 70-27 Ord. No. 13-00 2000 1 70-3 Ord. No. 5-01 2001 2(part) 46-97, 46-98 Ord. No. 19-01 2001 2 74-265 3 74-295, 74-296 Ord. No. 02-04 7-15-2002 1-1 66-1 1-2 66-2 1-3 66-3 1-4 66-4 1-5 66-5 1-9 66-6 1-10 66-7 1-11 66-8 2-1 66-35 2-2 66-36 2-3 66-37 2-4 66-38 3-1 66-65 3-2 66-66 3-3 66-67 3-4 66-68 3-5 66-69 3-6 66-70 3-7 66-71 3-8 66-72 3-9 66-73 3-10 66-74 3-11 66-75 3-12 66-76 3-13 66-77 3-15 66-78 3-16 66-79 3-17 66-80 3-19 66-81 3-20 66-82 4 66-108-66-111 5-1 66-136 5-2 66-137 5-3 66-138 6-1 66-160 6-2 66-161 6-3 66-162 6-4 66-163 6-5 66-164 6-6 66-165 6-7 66-166 7 66-186-66-193 Ord. No. 9-02 2002 1 70-28 Ord. No. 20-03 2003 1(part) 10-1 - 10-3, 10-4 - 10-6-10-11 - 10-13 Ord. No. 21-03 2003 1(part) 46-59 Ord. No. 22-03 2003 1 46-59 Ord. No. 23-03 2003 1 62-128 Ord. No. 25-03 2003 1(part) 46-125 Ord. No. 26-03 2003 2 14-1 Ord. No. 27-03 2003 2 70-4 Ord. No. 2-04 2004 2 14-1 3 14-2 4 14-4 5 14-5 6 14-6 8 14-8 Ord. No. 04-13 12-6-2004 - 74-422 Ord. No. 5-04 2004 2(part) 2-81, 2-82 - 2-84 Ord. No. 7-04 2004 2(part) 74-325-74-327 Ord. No. 07-06 6-4-2007 - 50-31 Ord. No. 07-14 9-14-2007 - 1-8 Ord. No. 07-19 12-3-2007 - 42-144-42-146 - 42-148-42-151 Ord. No. 08-02 2-4-2008 1 38-19-38-28 Ord. No. 08-17 12-1-2008 I 10-6 Ord. No. 08-18 12-1-2008 - 70-105-70-114 Ord. No. 08-20 12-15-2008 I 6-1 II 6-50 III 6-51 Ord. No. 09-06 5-4-2009 I 14-7 - 66-8 - 74-387 - 78-6 Ord. No. 09-11 9-21-2009 I 6-69 Ord. No. 09-15 11-2-2009 I(17.10) 78-1 I(17.20) 78-2 I(17.30) 78-3 I(17.40) 78-5 I(17.50) 78-4 I(17.60) 78-66, 78-67 I(17.70) 78-68 I(17.80) 78-69 I(17.90) 78-70 I(17.100) 78-99 I(17.110) 78-100 I(17.120) 78-101 I(17.130) 78-102 I(17.140) 78-103 I(17.150) 78-198 I(17.160) 78-104 I(17.170) 78-105 I(17.180) 78-124 I(17.190(M)) 78-125 I(17.200(intro. ¶)) 78-151 I(17.200(A)) 78-152 I(17.200(B)) 78-153 I(17.200(C)) 78-154 I(17.200(D)) 78-155 I(17.200(E)) 78-156 I(17.200(F)) 78-157 I(17.200(G)) 78-158 I(17.200(H)) 78-159 I(17.200(I)) 78-160 I(17.210(intro. ¶)) 78-189 I(17.210(A)) 78-190 I(17.210(B)) 78-191 I(17.210(C)(1)-(4)) 78-192 I(17.210(C)(4)(a)) 78-193 I(17.210(C)(4)(b)) 78-194 I(17.210(C)(4)(c)) 78-195 I(17.210(C)(4)(d)) 78-196 I(17.210(C)(4)(e)) 78-197 I(17.210(C)(5)) 78-197 I(17.230(A)) 78-220 I(17.230(B)) 78-221 I(17.230(C)) 78-222 I(17.230(D)) 78-222 I(17.230(E)) 78-222 I(17.230(F)) 78-222 I(17.230(G)) 78-223 I(17.240) 78-126 I(17.250) 78-255 I(17.260) 78-256 I(17.270) 78-257 I(17.280) 78-258 I(17.290) 78-259 I(17.300) 78-260 I(17.310) 78-261 I(17.320) 78-262 I(17.330) 78-288 I(17.340(intro. ¶)) 78-310 I(17.340(A)) 78-311 I(17.340(B)) 78-312 I(17.340(C)) 78-313 I(17.340(D)) 78-314 I(17.340(E)) 78-315 I(17.340(F)) 78-316 I(17.340(G)) 78-317 I(17.340(H)) 78-318 I(17.340(I)) 78-319 I(17.350(intro. ¶)) 78-342 I(17.350(A)) 78-343 I(17.350(B) 78-344 I(17.350(C)) 78-345 I(17.350(D)) 78-346 I(17.350(E)) 78-347 I(17.350(G)(1)) 78-348 I(17.350(G)(2)) 78-348 I(17.350(G)(3)) 78-349 I(17.350(I)) 78-350 I(17.360) 78-374 I(17.370) 78-392 I(17.380(A)) 78-413 I(17.380(B)) 78-414 I(17.380(C)) 78-415 I(17.380(D)) 78-416 I(17.380(E)) 78-417 I(17.380(F)) 78-418 I(17.380(G)) 78-419 I(17.390(A)) 78-437 I(17.390(B)) 78-438 I(17.390(C)) 78-439 I(17.390(D)) 78-440 I(17.390(E)) 78-441 I(17.390(F)) 78-442 I(17.390(G)) 78-443 I(17.410(A)) 78-470 I(17.410(B)) 78-471 I(17.410(C)) 78-472 I(17.410(D)) 78-473 I(17.410(E)) 78-474 I(17.410(F)) 78-475 I(17.410(G)) 78-476 I(17.410(H)) 78-477 I(17.420) 78-539 I(17.430) 78-540 I(17.440) 78-541 I(17.450) 78-542 I(17.460) 78-7 I(17.470) 78-543 I(17.480) 78-544 I(17.490) 78-545 I(17.500) 78-546 I(17.510) 78-571 I(17.520) 78-572 I(17.530) 78-574 I(17.540) 78-597 I(17.550) 78-598 I(17.560) 78-599 I(17.570) 78-600 I(17.580) 78-601 I(17.590) 78-621 I(17.600) 78-622 I(17.610) 78-623 I(17.620) 78-624 I(17.630) 78-625 I(17.640) 78-626 I(17.650) 78-627 I(17.660) 78-628 I(17.670) 78-629 I(17.680) 78-647 I(17.690) 78-648 I(17.700) 78-573 I(17.710) 78-508 I(17.720) 78-509 I(17.730) 78-510 I(17.740) 78-511 I(17.745) 78-512 I(17.748) 78-514 I(17.750) 34-1 I(17.760) 34-3 I(17.770) 34-4 I(17.810) 78-670 I(17.820) 78-671 I(17.830) 78-672 I(17.840) 78-673 I(17.850) 78-705 I(17.860) 78-706 I(17.870) 78-707 I(17.880) 78-708 I(17.890) 78-709 I(17.900) 78-710 I(17.910) 78-711 I(17.930) 78-45 I(17.940) 78-46 I(17.970) 78-8 I(17.980) 78-9 I(17.990) 78-10 I(17.1000) 78-11 I(17.1010) 78-13 I(17.1030) 78-785 I(17.1040) 78-786 I(17.1050) 78-787 I(17.1060) 78-788 I(17.1070) 78-789 I(17.1080) 78-790 I(17.1110) 78-810 I(17.1120) 78-811 I(17.1130) 78-812 I(17.1140) 78-851 I(17.1150) 78-852 I(17.1160) 78-853 I(17.1170) 78-854 I(17.1180) 78-872 I(17.1190) 78-873 I(17.1200) 78-874 I(17.1210) 78-736 I(17.1220) 78-737 I(17.1230) 78-738 I(17.1240) 78-739 I(17.1250) 78-740 I(17.1260) 78-741 I(17.1270) 78-742 I(17.1280) 78-743 I(17.1290) 78-744 I(17.1300) 78-745 I(17.1310) 78-746 I(17.1320) 78-747 I(17.1330) 78-748 I(17.1340) 78-749 I(17.1350) 78-750 I(17.1360) 78-751 I(17.1370) 78-752 I(17.1380) 78-753 I(17.1390) 78-754 I(17.1400) 78-755 I(17.1410) 78-756 I(17.1420) 78-757 I(17.1425) 78-758 Ord. No. 09-08 11-16-2009 I 14-7 - 66-8 - 74-387 - 78-6 Ord. No. 10-01 1-18-2010 I 50-32 Ord. No. 10-02 2-15-2010 1 2-4 Ord. No. 10-03 3-1-2010 - 50-25 Ord. No. 10-07-01 5-3-2010 4 34-5 5 34-6 6 34-41 7(A) 34-73 7(B) 34-74 7(C) 34-75 7(D) 34-76 7(E) 34-77 7(F) 34-78 8 34-7 9 34-42 10 34-8 11 34-9 12 34-10 13 34-11 14 34-2 - 34-1 - 34-3 Ord. No. 10-11 7-6-2010 I 18-102-18-107 Ord. No. 10-10 8-16-2010 I 50-35 Ord. No. 10-13 11-1-2010 I 78-545 Ord. No. 11-02 2-21-2011 I 14-7 - 66-8 - 74-387 - 78-6 - 78-103 Ord. No. 11-04 3-21-2011 I 74-266, 74-267 Ord. No. 11-05 4-18-2011 I 74-66 Ord. No. 11-09 9-6-2011 - 66-78 Ord. No. 11-11 10-3-2011 1 66-8 Ord. No. 11-15 10-3-2011 I 66-82 Ord. No. 11-19 10-17-2011 I 6-56 Ord. No. 11-10 11-7-2011 - 78-125 Ord. No. 11-23 12-5-2011 I 78-198 Ord. No. 12-07 5-7-2012 I 50-25 Ord. No. 12-08 6-4-2012 I 42-27-42-32 Ord. No. 12-10 5-20-2012 - 66-8 Ord. No. 12-11 5-21-2012 I 66-82 Ord. No. 12-12 7-2-2012 I 14-7 - 66-8 - 74-387 - 78-6 Ord. No. 12-14 7-16-2012 1 74-421 2 74-464 Revised Ord. No. 12 8-20-2012 - 66-82 Ord. No. 12-16 8-20-2012 I 66-82 Ord. No. 12-21 11-5-2012 I 14-7 - 66-8 - 74-387 - 78-6 - 78-103 Ord. No. 13-04 3-18-2013 I 78-259 Ord. No. 13-07 5-6-2013 I 50-25 Ord. No. 13-08 5-6-2013 I 50-30 Ord. No. 13-10 5-6-2013 I 70-2 Ord. No. 13-13 8-5-2013 I 46-56 Ord. No. 13-14 8-5-2013 I 62-131 Ord. No. 13-19 10-21-2013 I 78-572 - 78-622 Ord. No. 14-04 5-5-2014 I 50-21 Ord. No. 14-10 10-6-2014 1 66-3 I 42-145 - 58-19-58-26 - 66-8 - 66-37 - 66-66, 66-67 - 66-71 - 66-77 Ord. No. 14-11 10-20-2014 - 18-102-18-107 Ord. No. 14-12 11-17-2014 I 50-20 Ord. No. 14-16 12-15-2014 I 70-105-70-114 Ord. No. 15-01 1-5-2015 I 14-7 - 66-8 - 74-387 - 78-6 Ord. No. 15-04 4-6-2015 I 78-510 Ord. No. 15-05 4-6-2015 I 78-10 Ord. No. 15-07 4-20-2015 I 78-513 Ord. No. 15-08 4-20-2015 13.16.010 58-56 13.16.020 58-57 13.16.030 58-58 13.16.040 58-59 13.16.050 58-60 13.16.060 58-61 13.16.070 58-62 13.16.080 58-63 13.16.090 58-64 13.16.100 58-65 13.16.110 58-66 13.16.120 58-67 13.16.130 58-68 13.16.131 58-69 Ord. No. 15 6-1-2015 I 6-78 Ord. No. 15-11 6-1-2015 I 6-87 Ord. No. 15-12 6-1-2015 I 18-128-18-131 Ord. No. 15-13 6-1-2015 I 6-68 Ord. No. 15-14 6-1-2015 1 46-96-46-98 Ord. No. 15-15 7-20-2015 I 78-513 Ord. No. 15-16 7-20-2015 I 78-515 Ord. No. 15-17 8-17-2015 I 74-262 Ord. No. 15-20 12-7-2015 I 42-78, 42-79 Ord. No. 12-01 1-16-2016 I 2-446 II 2-447 III 2-448 IV 2-449 Ord. No. 16-01 1-18-2016 2(12.36.010) 62-298 2(12.36.020) 62-299 2(12.36.030) 62-300 2(12.36.040) 62-301 2(12.36.050) 62-302 2(12.36.060) 62-303 2(12.36.070) 62-304 2(12.36.080) 62-305 2(12.36.090) 62-306 2(12.36.100) 62-307 2(12.36.110) 62-308 2(12.36.120) 62-309 2(12.36.130) 62-310 2(12.36.140) 62-311 2(12.36.150) 62-312 2(12.36.160) 62-313 2(12.36.170) 62-314 2(12.36.180) 62-315 Ord. No. 16-02 1-18-2016 I 6-70 Ord. No. 16.02.1 1-18-2016 I 78-628 Ord. No. 16-03 1-18-2016 I 66-82 Ord. No. 16-07 7-5-2016 1 54-1-54-5 Ord. No. 16-10 10-3-2016 2 42-3 Ord. No. 17-02 3-6-2017 2 78-672 3 78-673 Ord. No. 17-04 4-3-2017 2 74-463 3 74-421 Ord. No. 17-05 5-15-2017 2 14-1 3 14-4  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
    This table shows the location within this Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Illinois Compiled Statutes (ILCS). 
ILCS 
Chapter Section Section 
this Code 5 70/1.01 et seq. 1-2 140/1 et seq. 2-3 315/3 2-81 10 5/1-3 2-81 5/9-1.4 2-81 5/9-3 2-81 20 3305/1 et seq. Ch. 22 (note) - 22-1 - 22-3 65 5/1-2-1 1-8 - 34-1 5/1-2-1.1 1-8 5/1-2-3 1-1 5/1-5-3 46-52 5/2-2-12 2-1 5/3.1-20-15 2-2 5/3.1-35-5 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. II 5/3.1-40-5 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. II 5/3.1-40-20 2-58 5/3.1-40-45 2-57 5/7-4-2 74-516 5/8-1-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. VII, Div. 2 5/8-2-9.1-5/8-2-9.10 2-361-2-363 5/8-5-1 2-336 5/11-12-4 et seq. 2-409 - 2-413 - Ch. 66 (note) 5/11-12-12 34-1 5/11-15-1 Ch. 66 (note) 5/11-19-1 et seq. Ch. 42, Art. III, Div. 3 5/11-19.2-1 et seq. Ch. 42, Art. IV 5/11-20-9 Ch. 10 (note) 5/11-30-2 34-1 5/11-30-8 34-1 5/11-31-2 34-1 5/11-40-3 Ch. 70, Art. III 5/11-42-1 Ch. 18, Art. III 5/11-42-1 et seq. Ch. 18, Art. II 5/11-42-5 Ch. 18, Art. III 5/11-60-1 Ch. 18, Art. II 5/11-60-2 Ch. 42, Art. IV 5/11-80-9 Ch. 18, Art. III 5/11-84-1 et seq. Ch. 62, Art. II 5/11-125-4 74-516 220 50/1 et seq. 62-308 225 2/1 et seq. Ch. 18, Art. II 345 et seq. 74-327 230 40/1 et seq. 18-128 235 5/1-1 et seq. Ch. 6 (note) - 6-21 - 42-28 5/4-7 6-52 5/6-11 6-52 415 5 34-41 5/1 et seq. Ch. 42, Art. IV - 74-517 5/14.2 74-516 5/14.3 74-516 5/20 et seq. Ch. 42, Art. III, Div. 3 5/21 et seq. Ch. 42, Art. III, Div. 3 5/53 et seq. Ch. 42, Art. III, Div. 3 10/1 et seq. Ch. 42, Art. III, Div. 3 15/1 et seq. Ch. 42, Art. III, Div. 3 20/1 et seq. Ch. 42, Art. III, Div. 3 30 et seq. 74-327 35 et seq. 74-327 55/1 et seq. 74-517 105/1 et seq. Ch. 42, Art. III, Div. 3 - Ch. 42, Art. IV 513.28 66-3 425 35/1 et seq. 46-59 35/2 et seq. 46-59 35/5 46-59 605 5/1-101 et seq. 62-299 5/7-101 et seq. Ch. 62, Art. VI 610 115/0.01 et seq. Ch. 62, Art. III 625 5/1-100 et seq. 70-1 5/4-200 et seq. Ch. 70, Art. III 5/6-101 70-105, 70-106 5/6-303 70-105, 70-106 5/11-501 70-105 5/11-1413 Ch. 42, Art. III, Div. 3 5/18c-7401 Ch. 62, Art. III 720 5/11-9 et seq. 42-28 5/11-14 et seq. 42-28 5/12-1 et seq. 42-28 5/12-15 et seq. 42-28 5/21-1 et seq. 42-28 5/24-1 et seq. 42-28 5/24-1 70-105 5/24-1.2 42-28 5/24-1.5 42-28 5/25-1 42-28 5/26-1 42-28 - 46-52 5/28-1 42-28 5/47-25 Ch. 42, Art. IV 505/0.01 Ch. 42, Art. IV 550/1 et seq. 42-28 550/1 70-105 570/201 et seq. 70-105 570/401 et seq. 42-28 600/2 70-105 740 55/221 Ch. 42, Art. IV 765 205/0.01 et seq. Ch. 66 (note) 205/1.1(b)9 66-3 205/2 34-7  
