Fairbury Code Ch. 1 Page - 1 Dec-11
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF FAIRBURY, LIVINGSTON
COUNT, ILLINOIS, AS FOLLOWS:
CITY OF FAIRBURY CHAPTER 1 CITY CODE
GENERAL PROVISIONS
.01 FAIRBURY MUNICIPAL CODE OF 1982.
(a) Title. This code of ordinances may be known and cited as the Fairbury Municipal Code of 1982.
(b) Amendments. Any additions or amendments to this code are incorporated in this code so that a
reference to the Fairbury Municipal Code of 1982 includes such additions and amendments.
(c) Numbering of chapters and sections. Each section number of this code shall consist of two
component parts separated by a period; the figure before the period referring to the chapter number,
and the figure after the period referring to the section within the chapter.
(d) Numbering additions. The decimal system shall be used for all additions and amendments to this
code. When a chapter or section is added, the new chapter or section shall be given a decimal
character.
.02 DEFINITIONS.
(a) Terms used in this code, unless specifically defined in this code, have the meanings prescribed by
the Illinois Revised Statutes for the same terms.
(b) Terms used in this code have the following meanings:
City: City of Fairbury, Illinois
County: Livingston County
State: State of Illinois
Council or City Council: The Mayor and City council of the City of Fairbury.
City Clerk: The City Clerk of the City of Fairbury and similarly any reference to any officer, council or
commission means such officer, council or commission of the City of Fairbury unless otherwise
stated.
Mayor: Mayor of the City of Fairbury; and the President of the City Council of the City of Fairbury.
Person: Any natural individual, firm, partnership, trust, estate, club, association or corporation. As
applied to partnerships or associations the word includes the partners or members thereof; as applied
to corporations it includes the officers, agents, or employees thereof who are responsible for the act
referred to. The singular includes the plural, and the plural includes the singular. The masculine
gender includes the feminine and neuter genders.
Illinois Revised Statutes: The Illinois Revised Statutes (1982 State Bar Association Edition), and
when later editions are published the latest publication thereof.
Illinois Municipal Code: Chapter 24 of the Illinois Revised Statutes.
This Code: Fairbury Municipal Code of 1982.
.03 REPEAL OF ORDINANCES.
(a) All general ordinances or parts thereof hereto fore adopted by the Mayor and City Council and not
included in this code are repealed, except the following which are hereby continued in full force and
effect.
Fairbury Code Ch. 1 Page - 2 Dec-11
1. Ordinances authorizing contracts or the issue of municipal notes or bonds;
2. Ordinances levying taxes or making special assessments;
3. Ordinances appropriating funds or establishing salaries;
4. Ordinances granting franchises or rights to corporations;
5. Ordinances related to the establishment, dedication, opening, grading, naming, improvement,
altering, widening or vacating of any streets, alleys, sidewalks, parks or public grounds;
6. Ordinances respecting the annexation of territory to the city, or the conveyance or acceptance of
real property or easements in real property;
7. Ordinances authorizing or relating or particular public improvements;
8. Ordinance relating to zoning, subdivisions and building codes;
9. Ordinances related to traffic control signs or devices;
10. Any other special ordinances not in conflict with the provisions of this code.
(b) The provisions of this code, so far as they are the same in substance as those of heretofore existing
ordinances are continuations of such ordinances and not new enactments. Any act done, offense
committed, or right accruing or acquired, or liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred prior
hereto shall not be affected, but may be enjoyed, asserted, enforced, prosecuted or inflicted as fully
and to the same extent as if the repeal had not been effected.
.04 ORDINANCES REPEALED NOT REENACTED.
No ordinance or part of any ordinance heretofore repealed shall be considered reordained or reenacted
by virtue of this code, unless specifically reenacted. The repeal of any curative or validating ordinance
does not impair or affect any cure or validated already effected thereby.
.05 JURISDICTION.
Unless otherwise provided in this code, this code applies to acts performed within the corporate limits of
the City. Provisions of this code also apply to acts performed outside the corporate limits and up to the
limits prescribed by law where the law confers power on the City to regulate such particular acts outside
the corporate limits.
.06 PENALTIES.
(a) Standard penalty. Unless another penalty is specifically provided by this code for violation of any
particular provision, section or chapter, any person violated any provision of this code shall be
considered guilty of a Class C Misdemeanor as provided in Illinois Revised Statutes, and penalized
accordingly.
(b) Commitment. The person upon whom any fine or penalty is imposed for volition of any provision of
this code or any ordinance of the City, upon order of the court before whom the conviction is had,
may be committed to the county jail as provided by law, or to any other place provided by ordinance
for the incarceration of offenders until the fine, penalty, and costs are fully paid. No imprisonment,
however, shall exceed six months for any one offense.
(c) Each day of violation. Each act or violation and each day upon which a violation occurs or continues
constitutes a separate offense.
(d) Applicability. The penalty provided by this section applies to the amendment of any section of this
code or a code adopted herein by reference whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the
amendatory ordinance.
(e) Reference to sections. Reference to a section of this code shall be understood also to refer to and
include the penalty section relating thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided.
(f) Failure of officers to perform duties. The failure of an officer or employee of the City to perform an
official duty imposed by this code shall not subject such officer or employee to the penalty imposed
for violation of this code, unless a penalty is specifically provided in the section creating the duty.
(g) Charges for returned checks. Any person who issues a check or other draft which is not honored
upon presentment because the drawer does not have an account with the drawee, or because the
drawer does not have sufficient funds in this account, or because the drawer does not have sufficient
credit with the drawee, shall be liable to the City of Fairbury for a service charge of $10.00 for each
such check issued to the City of Fairbury, which service charge shall be in addition to the amount of
Fairbury Code Ch. 1 Page - 3 Dec-11
such check. If it is necessary for the City to institute legal proceedings to enforce payment of any
such check, the City Attorney shall seek to collect, in addition to the amount of such check and said
$10.00 service charge, all costs, expenses, damages, interest, and attorneys’ fees that are authorized
to be collected in any such action under the Statues of the State of Illinois. (1986-1)
.07 RESPONSIBILITY FOR ACTS.
Every person concerned in the commission of an act prohibited by this code, whether he directly commits
the act, or prosecutes, counsels, aids or abets in its commission, may be prosecuted and on conviction is
punishable as if he had directly committed such act.
.08 SEVERABILITY OF PROVISIONS.
Each Section, paragraph, sentence, clause and provision of this code is separable and if any provision is
held unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, such decision shall not affect the remainder of this code
nor any part thereof, other than that part affected by such decision.
.09 EFFECTIVE DATE.
This code of ordinances shall take effect 10 days after passage and publication under the authority of the
Mayor and City Council, as provided by law.
.10 COPIES ON FILE.
Copies of this code shall be kept available at the City Clerk’s office for public inspection at all reasonable
hours.
.11 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
The revocation of a license or permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any
penalty being enforced.
Fairbury Code Ch. 2 Page - 1 Dec-11
CHAPTER 2
CITY COUNCIL
.01 GOVERNMENT OF CITY.
The City of Fairbury shall be governed by a City Council which shall be elected by wards and shall consist
of a Mayor and eight aldermen. The boundaries of the wards in the City of Fairbury shall be as follows:
Ward No. 1: All that part of the City of Fairbury lying south of Locust St. and east of Third St.
Ward No. 2: All that part of the City of Fairbury lying south of Locust St. and west of Third St.
Ward No. 3: All that part of the City of Fairbury lying north of Locust St. and west of Third St.
Ward No. 4: All that part of the City of Fairbury lying north of Locust St. and east of Third St.
(1986-15)
.02 ELECTION, TERM AND POWERS.
The City Council shall be elected and serve for a four year term, and until their successors are elected
and qualified, as provided by law. The terms of the Aldermen shall commence at the first regular or
special meeting of the corporate authorities during the month of May following the proclamation of the
results of the regular municipal election at which such Aldermen were elected. The City Council shall be
the legislative department of the municipal government, and shall perform such duties and have such
powers as provided by law and by ordinance. (1989-3)
.03 REGULAR MEETING.
All regular meetings of the Mayor and City Council shall be held on the first and third Wednesday of each
and every month in the City of Fairbury at 6:30 P.M., except whenever the regular meeting date shall fall
on a legal holiday, such regular meeting shall be held on the next succeeding secular day at the same
hour and place. Said meetings may be held in any public building within the City of Fairbury as the City
Council may from time to time designate by resolution. If the City Council fails to designate a location, the
meeting shall be held in the City Hall in Fairbury. (2010-1)
.04 SPECIAL MEETINGS.
Special meetings of the City Council may be called by the Mayor or any three members of the City
Council, provided that written notice of such meetings shall be given to each member of the City Council
no less than 24 hours before the time set for such meetings. Whenever all of the members of the City
Council are present at any special meeting, the requirement of notice of such special meeting shall be
deemed waived.
.05 PRESIDING OFFICER.
The Mayor shall be presiding officer of the regular and special meetings of the City Council, and of other
meetings when the City Council convenes as committee of the whole. In the absence of the Mayor, the
council, by quorum, shall elect a mayor pro-tem from among its members to serve during such absence.
.06 QUORUM.
A majority of the elected members of the City Council shall constitute a quorum thereof, but no ordinance
shall be passed except upon the affirmative vote of a majority of the elected members of the City Council
or according to law.
Fairbury Code Ch. 2 Page - 2 Dec-11
.07 RULES OF ORDER.
(a) Order of Business. The order of business at all meetings of the City Council shall be as follows:
1. Roll call of members.
2. Approval of minutes of previous meeting of the City Council.
3. Presentation of reports of Finance Committee and of City Clerk.
4. Reading of the bills and accounts against the City.
5. Reports of appointed officers.
6. Reports of standing committees.
7. Unfinished business.
8. Presentation of petitions or communications to the City Council.
9. New Business.
10. Miscellaneous business.
11. Adjournment.
(b) Motions, resolution and ordinances. All motions, resolutions and ordinances submitted to the City
Council shall be reduced to writing before being voted upon. Where such are adopted and entered
upon the minutes of the proceedings of the City Council, the name of the member moving the
adoption, and the name of the member seconding same shall be entered in the minutes. On each
matter submitted to the City Council upon which a vote is taken, the vote of each member voting, as
well as the vote of the Mayor when he is required by law or by ordinance to vote, shall also be
entered in the minutes.
(c) Addressing meetings. No person other than the Mayor, member of the City Council, or City officer
shall address the City Council at any regular or special meeting except upon consent of a majority of
the members of the City Council present.
(d) Suspension of rules. The rules of order, other than those provided by law, may be suspended at any
time by the affirmation vote of a majority of the members present at any meeting of the City Council.
(e) Robert’s Rules of Order. Robert’s Rules of Order, 75th Anniversary Edition, shall govern the
deliberations of the City Council, except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance.
.08 RECORDS.
The City Clerk shall keep the minutes and records of the proceedings of the City Council.
.09 COMMITTEES.
(a) Standing Committees. There shall be the following standing committees of the City Council:
Committee on Streets and Alleys; Committee on Water and Sewer; Committee on Public Building;
Committee on Police and Fire Protection; Committee on Parks and Lights; Committee on Finance;
Committee on Ordinances, Permits and Insurance; Committee on Alcohol/Tobacco; and Committee
on Administration and Technology. (2001-4)
(b) Membership. The Mayor shall appoint the members of all standing committees and shall designate
the chairmen and vice chairmen thereof. Each standing committee shall consist of three members of
the City Council, except as the City Council shall otherwise provide.
(c) Special committees. The Mayor shall appoint such special committees as shall be deemed
necessary, or as the City Council shall direct.
.10 DUTIES OF STANDING COMMITTEES.
The Duties of the standing committees shall be as follows:
(a) Committee on Streets and Alleys. The Committee on Streets and Alleys shall have charge of all
grading, graveling, paving, digging, trenching, cleaning, clearing, vacating or opening of all streets,
alleys, curbing and sidewalks in the City, and shall recommend to the City Council any purchase,
change, or disposition of machinery of equipments, and shall perform such other duties as may be
provided for by law or by ordinance.
Fairbury Code Ch. 2 Page - 3 Dec-11
(b) Committee on Water and Sewer. The Committee on Water and sewer shall investigate, examine,
inspect and report to the City Council on all installations, proposed installations, and all matters
pertaining to water and sewer within the City, and to obtain, preserve and maintain all records, plats,
sketches, drawings and all other papers relating to such installations, proposed installations, and all
other matters pertaining to water and sewer within the City.
(c) Committee on Public Buildings. The Committee on Public Buildings shall recommend to the City
Council all matters concerning the use and maintenance of City power, lights and City owned building
including addition thereto.
(d) Committee on Police and Fire Protection. The Committee on Police and Fire Protection shall
recommend to the city Council all procedures, regulation, restriction and conditions proper for the
police and fire protection of the inhabitants of the City, for maintenance of law and order in the City,
for the enforcement of the ordinances of the City, and for the performance of other such duties and
functions usually performed by police departments.
(e) Committee on Parks and Lights. The committee on Parks and Lights shall have charge of all park
areas owned by or controlled by the City and shall recommend to the City Council all regulations
proper for the care and management of such areas, and shall perform such other duties as may be
provided for by law or by ordinance.
(f) Committee on Finance. The Committee on Finance shall audit all bills and accounts, approve the
treasurer’s monthly report, approve the reports of and City Collectors, manage and protect the
various funds of the City; recommend to the City Council the annual appropriation and tax levy
ordinance, report to the City Council when requested to do so concerning the finances of the City,
and to perform such other duties as may be provided for by law or by ordinance.
(g) Committee on Ordinances, Permits, and Insurance. The committee on Ordinances, Permits and
Insurance shall recommend to the City Council all procedures proper for the licensing of all activities,
subject to mandates of Illinois law, carried on within the City limits. Said Committee shall recommend
to the City Council and amount deemed proper as a fee for licensure subject to regulation by the
United States or the State of Illinois. Said Committee shall also recommend to the City Council all
additions or modifications to City ordinances as well as suggesting the procedure for modifying same.
Said Committee shall also recommend proper insurance coverages and carriers to the Council.
Fairbury Code Ch. 3 Page - 1 Sep-16
CHAPTER 3
CITY ADMINISTRATION
.01 THE MAYOR.
(a) Election and term. The Mayor shall be elected for a four year term, and shall serve until his
successor is elected and qualified, as provided by law.
(b) Duties. The Mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the City, and shall perform such duties as
may be required by law or by ordinance. The Mayor shall have supervision over all executive officers
and employees of the City, and shall have the power and authority to inspect and examine all books
and records pertaining to City affairs and all books and record kept by all officers and employees of
the City in their official capacities at any reasonable time. The Mayor shall act for and on behalf of
the City on all formal occasions and at all formal receptions.
(c) Appointment of officers. The Mayor shall have the power and authority to appoint and remove from
appointment, by and with the advice and consent of the City Council, all officers of the City whose
election or appointment is not otherwise provided for. Any vacancies occurring in an appointive office
shall be filled in like manner.
(d) Designation of duties. The Mayor shall have the power to delegate to any appointed officer any duty
which is to be performed when no specific officer has otherwise been directed to perform such duty.
Whenever there is a dispute or uncertainty concerning the respective duties or powers of any
appointed officer of the City, such dispute or uncertainty shall be settled by the Mayor upon
consultation with the City Attorney.
(e) Mayor Pro-Tem. During any temporary absence or disability of the Mayor, the City Council shall elect
one of its members to act as Mayor Pro-Tem, who shall possess the powers and authority of the
Mayor, as provided by law and by ordinance.
(f) Bond. Before entering upon the duties of the office, the Mayor shall execute a bond in such amount
and with such sureties as may be required by law and by ordinance, conditioned upon the faithful
performance of the duties of the office. The City shall pay the premium on such bond.
.02 THE CITY CLERK. (2015-6)
(a) The City Clerk shall be appointed by the Mayor with approval of the City Council for a term to run
concurrent with the term of the Mayor and until the Clerk’s successor is duly appointed and qualified.
(b) Duties. The City Clerk shall perform the following duties:
1. Seal and attest all contracts of the City, all licenses, permits and such other instruments and
documents as are provided for by law or by ordinance.
2. Keep a register of all licenses and permits issued, a record showing all of the officers and regular
employees of the City, and such other records as may be required by law or by ordinance.
3. Be the custodian of all papers, instruments and documents belonging to the City which are not
assigned for custody to another officer of the City or to the Mayor or City Council.
4. Keep and maintain a proper index of all documents and records in the Clerk’s possession.
5. Be the custodian of the City seal, and shall affix its impression upon all papers, instruments and
documents as shall be required by law or by ordinance.
6. Attend all meetings of the City Council and accurately record the minutes of all such proceedings
of the City Council, and record and file in separate files all motions, resolutions, ordinances and
other actions passed and approved by the City Council.
7. Perform such other duties as may be required by law or by ordinance.
(c) Bond. Before entering upon the duties of office, the City Clerk shall execute a bond in such amount
and with such sureties as may be required by law or by ordinance, conditioned upon the faithful
performance of the duties of the office. The City shall pay the premium on such bond.
Fairbury Code Ch. 3 Page - 2 Sep-16
.03 THE CITY TREASURER. (2015-6)
(a) The City Treasurer shall be appointed by the Mayor with approval of the City Council for a term to run
concurrent with the term of the Mayor and until the successor is appointed and qualified.
(b) Duties. The City Treasurer shall perform the following duties:
1. Oversee the city bonds and maintain accurate records regarding said bonds, and shall report to
the City Council, upon request, as to the status of said bonds.
2. Invest City funds, not immediately needed, in approved depositories or move certificates of
deposits between two depositories, in the best interest of the City. A list of certificates with due
date, rate and current balance will be provided and approved in the monthly Financial
Statements.
3. Permit and encourage and establish the use of efficient planning, budgeting, auditing, reporting,
accounting, and other fiscal management procedures in all City departments, commissions, and
boards.
4. Shall compile an annual budget in accordance with the requirements of the Illinois Revised
Statues. Preparing budget, appropriation and levy with help of City Superintendent and Attorney
5. Shall examine all books and records of all City departments, commissions, and boards which
relate to moneys received by the City, City departments, commissions, and boards, debts and
accounts receivable, amounts owed by or to the City, City Departments, commissions, and
boards.
6. Compile Annual Report within six months of the close of the fiscal year, in accordance with the
requirements of Illinois Revised Statues.
7. Financial Responsibilities in detail
A. Responsible for main audit, IDOT audit and Work comp Audit. This would include any audits
by the state for grants & revolving loans.
B. Receive all monies paid into the City either directly or from other City officers and deposit in
such legal depository as designated by the City Council at the start of the fiscal year.
C. Pay out City funds from invoices and requests, initialed and coded with account numbers by
Department Heads. A Board Report will be approved at each meeting. The Utility Billing
Clerk will review the check copy backup as listed above and sign the checks. If the UB Clerk
is unavailable one of the Check signers designated by the City Council at the start of the
fiscal year will review and sign the checks with two signatures required.
D. Maintain accurate records of deposits and expenditures through cash basis fund accounting
on municipal software provided by the City. The Financial Statement will be approved
monthly at the Council meeting. Records will show the financial condition of the City.
E. Open checking/saving accounts when receiving money for grants, loans or bond issues per
state or federal requirements or changing accounts - two signatures are required.
F. Do the financial work involved with grants, revolving loans, loans, bonds and Motor Fuel
accounts.
G. Payroll is outsourced. Shall be responsible for sending payroll to the vendor and posting
payroll to accounting.
H. Act as HR and be representative for I.M.R.F., deferred compensation, health insurance and
commercial insurance.
I. Other areas of responsibility. Maintain the Firemen’s checking account.
8. Keep the City funds separate and distinct from personal funds and all others, and shall not
intermingle personal funds or any others with the City funds, and shall not make private or
personal use of the City funds.
(c) Bond. Before entering upon the duties of office, the City Treasurer shall execute a bond in such
amount and with such sureties as may be required by law or by ordinance, conditioned upon the
faithful performance of the duties of the office, and to indemnify the City against any loss due to any
neglect of any duty or wrongful act on the part of the City Treasurer. The City shall pay the premium,
on such bond.
Fairbury Code Ch. 3 Page - 3 Sep-16
.04 THE CITY ATTORNEY.
(a) Creation of Office and appointment. There is hereby created the office of City Attorney, an executive
office of the City. The City Attorney shall be appointed by the Mayor, by and with the advice and
consent of the City Council. The City Attorney need not be a resident nor a qualified elector of the
City, but he must be licensed to practice law in the State of Illinois.
(b) Duties.
1. The City Attorney shall be the legal advisor of the City, and shall render advice upon all legal
questions affecting the City whenever requested so to do by any City officer. Upon the request of
the Mayor to the City Council, the City Attorney shall reduce legal advice or opinions to writing.
2. The City Attorney shall prosecute or defend any and all suits or actions at law or in equity to
which the City may be a part, or in which the City may be interested, or which may be brought
against or by any officer of the City on behalf of the City or in the capacity of such person as an
officer of the City.
3. The City Attorney shall act to enforce in full all judgment, decrees, or orders rendered or entered
in favor of the City, and to carry out to completion all special assessment and condemnation
proceedings.
4. The City Attorney shall draft or supervise the drafting of all contracts, leases and other documents
or instruments to which the City may be a party, and upon the request of the Mayor or City
Council shall draft ordinances or resolutions on any subjects within the powers of the City.
(c) Bonds. The City Attorney shall not be required to furnish bond before entering upon the duties of the
office.
.05 THE CHIEF OF POLICE. (section added 2015-10)
(a) Creation. There is hereby created the office and position of Chief of Police. Such office and position
shall be filled by appointment of the Mayor by and with the consent and approval of the City Council.
(b) Terms. The Chief of Police shall be appointed by the Mayor with approval of the City Council for a
term to run concurrent with the term of the Mayor or until the Chief of Police successor is duly
appointed and qualified.
(c) Duties.
1. It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to supervise and assign all employees in the Police
Department and the Chief shall have the general supervisory responsibility for the performance
of all employees of the Department.
2. The Chief of Police is hereby empowered to make and enforce by appropriate disciplinary
measures such rules for the operation of the Police Department or the conduct of its employees
as are reasonable and necessary for the performance of the duties of the Department. Such rules
shall be effective when approved by the Mayor and the City Council.
(d) Reports. The appointee shall be responsible solely to the Mayor and City Council for all matters
coming under his/her control and shall regularly render a monthly report of the progress and
condition of such matters to the Mayor and City Council. The Mayor, under authority of the City
Council, shall exercise day-to-day supervision of the Chief of Police in matters of routine City
operation.
(e) Removal. The appointee shall be subject to removal from office upon the sole determination of the
Mayor and City Council.
.06 SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC WORK. (2015-10 renumbered)
(a) Creation. There is hereby created the office and position of Superintendent of Public Works. Such
Fairbury Code Ch. 3 Page - 4 Sep-16
office and position shall be filled by appointment of the Mayor by and with the consent and approval
of the City Council.
(b) Terms. The term of the office of the said Superintendent shall be from year to year and shall
commence on the first day of May in each year, and any individual duly appointed shall serve in such
position from the first of May in each year to the first day of May in the year following, or until his
successor shall be otherwise appointed and qualified. In the event of the resignation, death, or
inability of the person so appointed to serve, a successor may be appointed by the Mayor by and with
the consent and approval of the City Council to complete the unexpired term and such successor
shall service until the completion of the unexpired term or until his successor is duly appointed and
qualified.
(c) Duties. It shall be the duty of the Superintendent of Public Works to correlate, control, superintend
and otherwise see to the completion of all water and sewer projects which may be undertaken by the
City or ordered done by the Mayor of the City, under authority of the City Council.
(d) Reports. The appointee shall be responsible solely to the Mayor and City Council for all matters
coming under his control and shall regularly render a monthly report of the progress and condition of
such matters to the Mayor and City Council. The Mayor, under authority of the City Council, shall
exercise day-to-day supervision of the Superintendent in matters of routine City operation.
(e) Removal. The appointee shall be subject to removal from office upon the sole determination of the
Mayor and City Council.
.07 POLICE DEPARTMENT. (section added 2015-10)
(a) Creation. The Police Department of the City is hereby created and established. The Department
shall consist of a Chief of Police, Police Officers and civilian employees in such numbers and at such
ranks and position classifications as are established from time to time by the Mayor with consent
and approval of the City Council.
(b) Duties. The duties and functions of the Police Department and its employees shall include, but not
be limited to the following:
1. Preservation of the peace and order of the City through the enforcement of the law, apprehension
and arrest of persons who have violated the law; regulation of traffic and parking; the prevention
and detection of crimes; and participation in the criminal justice system;
2. Service and execution of criminal process issued by a court of competent jurisdiction;
3. Maintenance of records pertaining to any duty or function or as required by law;
4. Maintenance of custody of lost, abandoned or stolen property;
5. Performance of duties as from time to time may be imposed by law; and
6. Performance of such other duties as may be required by the Chief of Police or Mayor and City
Council.
State Law reference— Authority to prescribe powers and duties of police officers, 65 ILCS 5/11-1-2.
.08 BONDS OF OFFICERS. (2015-10 renumbered)
(a) Every officer and employee of the City, as may be required so to do by law or by ordinance, before
entering upon the duties of office or position of employment, shall give a bond execute a bond in such
amount and with such sureties as may be required by law or by the City Council, which shall be
subject to the approval of the City Council, and which shall be conditioned upon the faithful
performance of the duties of the office or position of employment. Unless otherwise provided for by
law or by ordinance, such bonds shall have as surety a company or corporation licensed to as surety
in the State of Illinois and to do business in the State of Illinois. The premium on such bonds shall be
paid out of the general funds of the City.
(b) The amounts of bonds of certain elected and appointed officers and employees of the City shall be as
directed by the Statutes of the State of Illinois.
.09 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES OF CITY. (2015-10 renumbered)
(a) Effect of section. The provisions of this section shall apply alike to all officers and employees of the
City, regardless of the time of the creation of the office or position of employment, and regardless of
Fairbury Code Ch. 3 Page - 5 Sep-16
the time of the appointment of the officer or employment of the employee.
(b) Appointments. The Mayor, by and with the advice and consent of City Council, shall appoint all
officers of the City whose election or appointment is not otherwise provided for. The Mayor, after
receiving recommendations from the respective department heads and committees of the City
Council, shall with the advice and consent of the City Council select all employees and fill all positions
of employment of the City. The Mayor may remove appointive officers or employees as provided in
Section 1(c) of chapter 3 of this Code or as otherwise provided by law. (1993-3)
(c) Terms of office, vacancies. Every appointed officer and every employee of the City shall hold office
or a position of employment for a period of one year from the date of appointment, or until his
successor is appointed, chosen or selected and has qualified, except as may otherwise be provided
for by ordinance, and except that employees shall serve only so long as their services are desired or
as the terms of their position of employment require and provide.
(d) Assignment of duties. The Mayor shall have the power and authority to assign to any appointed
officer any duty which is not assigned by ordinance or by law to some other specific officer, and the
Mayor shall determine all disputes or questions relating to the respective powers and duties of such
officers.
(e) Records. All records kept or maintained by any officer of the City shall be open to inspection by the
Mayor or any member of the City Council at all reasonable times, whether or not such reports are
required to be kept by statute or ordinance.
(f) Monies received. Every officer of the City shall at lest once a week turn over all monies received by
him in his official position to the City Clerk, with a statement showing the source from which the same
was received, and shall take the City Clerk’s receipt therefor.
(g) Oath. Before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, all City officers, where elected or
appointed, shall take and subscribe the oath or affirmation as set forth in the Illinois Municipal Code.
(h) Salaries and wages. All officers and employees of the City shall receive such salaries or wages as
may be provided from time to time by ordinance. No officer or employee receiving a salary from the
City shall be entitled to retain any portion of any fees collected or received by him in the performance
of his duties as a City officer or employee, in the absence of specific authorization to the contrary as
may be provided by law or ordinance.
(i) Conservators of peace. The Mayor, Police Department and City Council shall be conservators of the
peace, and shall have such powers of arrest, commitment, and detention as may be prescribed by
law or ordinance. (2015-10)
(j) Termination of office or employment. Every office and employee of the City, upon the termination of
his office or employment, shall deliver to his successor all books and records which may be the
property of the City. If no successor has been elected, chosen or appointed within seven days after
the termination of such office or position of employment, such property shall be delivered to the City
Clerk or to the City Treasurer, and a receipt taken therefore.
(k) Employee residency requirement: Every current and future full time employee of the City of Fairbury,
except clerical and full time sworn Police Officers, shall establish his or her residency within the city
limits of the City of Fairbury within one year of the date of being hired and shall maintain said
residency within the city limits of the City throughout the period of his or her employment by the City.
Full time sworn current and future Police Officers and clerical employees shall establish residency
within the boundaries established by the Prairie Central Unified School District #8 within one year of
the date of being hired and shall maintain said residency within the School District boundaries
throughout the period of his or her employment by the City. If a full time employee has not
established residency within the city limits of the City within one year of the date of being hired, or as
a full time Police Officer or clerical employee within the Prairie Central Unified School District #8, he
or she may request an extension of said time limit from the corporate authorities for up to six months
for good cause shown. Failure to abide by the terms of this subsection shall be cause for termination
of employment. For good cause shown, the corporate authorities may grant an employee temporary
permission to reside outside the city limits or School District boundaries for a period up to six months.
(2016-8)
.10 CORPORATE SEAL. (2015-10 renumbered)
The corporate seal of the City shall be as follows: A circular disc with the words “Corporate Seal”
Fairbury Code Ch. 3 Page - 6 Sep-16
inscribed in the inner circle there of, and the words, “City of Fairbury, Livingston County, Illinois” inscribed
in the outer circle thereof.
.11 FISCAL YEAR. (2015-10 renumbered)
The fiscal year of the City shall begin on May 1 of each year and end on April 30 of the following year.
.12 ELECTIONS. (2015-10 renumbered)
Elections for municipal offices shall be held as provided by law, and in accord with such lawful regulation
as may be made by ordinance by the Mayor and City Council.
.13 BEGINNING OF OFFICE. (2015-10 renumbered)
The Terms of elected officers of the City of Fairbury shall commence at the first regular or special meeting
of the corporate authorities during the month of May following the proclamation of the results of the
regular municipal election at which such officers were elected. (1989-3)
.14 THE PROHIBITION OF THE SOLICITATION AND ACCEPTANCE OF GIFTS AND THE ADOPTION
OF THE STATE GIFT BAN ACT (5 ILCS 425/1 ET SEQ) (section added 1999-10) (2015-10
renumbered)
(a) The State Gift Ban Act (5 ILCS 425/1 et seq), hereinafter called the Act, is hereby adopted as
required by Section 83 of the Act (5 ILCS 425/83).
(b) The solicitation or the acceptance of gifts prohibited to be solicited or accepted under the Act is
prohibited by any elected or appointed official or any employee of the City of Fairbury. All nonsalaried
appointed or elected officials are exempted from the Act and the provisions of this Section of
Chapter 3 of the Fairbury Municipal Code.
(c) To the extent authorized by law and to the extent required by Section 35 of the Act (5 ILCS 425/35),
the Mayor, by and with the advice and consent of the City Council, shall appoint an Ethics Officer of
the City of Fairbury. The Ethics Officer’s duties shall be as provided in Section 35 of the Act.
(d) All complaints for violations of the Act and this Section of Chapter 3 of the Fairbury Municipal Code
shall be filed with the State legislative ethics commission created by Section 45(a)(6) of the Act.
(f) Any amendment to the State Gift Ban Act (5 ILCS 425/1 et seq) that becomes effective after the
adoption of this Section .12 of Chapter 3 of the Fairbury Municipal Code shall be incorporated into
this Section of said Chapter 3 by reference and shall be applicable to the solicitation and acceptance
of gifts. However, any amendment that makes its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities
shall not be incorporated into this Section .12 of said Chapter 3 by reference without formal action by
the corporate authorities of the City of Fairbury.
(g) If the Illinois Supreme Court declares the State Gift Ban Act (5 ILCS 425/1 et seq) unconstitutional in
its entirety, then this Section .12 of Chapter 3 of the Fairbury Municipal Code shall be repealed as of
the date that the Supreme Court’s decision becomes final and not subject to any further appeals or
rehearing's. Said Section shall be deemed repealed without further action by the corporate authorities
of the City of Fairbury if the Act is found unconstitutional by the Illinois Supreme Court.
(h) If the Illinois Supreme Court declares part of the State Gift Ban Act (5 ILCS 425/1 et seq)
unconstitutional but upholds the constitutionality of the remainder of the Act or does not address the
remainder of the Act, then the remainder of the Act as adopted by this Section .12 shall remain in full
force and effect; however, that part of this Section .12 relating to the part of the Act found
unconstitutional shall be deemed repealed without further action by the corporate authorities of the
City of Fairbury.
.15 STATE OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES ETHICS ACT: (section added 2004-3) (2015-10
renumbered)
(a) The regulations of Sections 5-15 (5 ILCS 430/5-15) and Article 10 (5ILCS 430/10-10 through 10-40)
of the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act, 5 ILCS 430/1-1 et seq., (hereinafter referred to as the
Fairbury Code Ch. 3 Page - 7 Sep-16
“Act” in this Section) are hereby adopted by reference and made applicable to the officers and
employees of the City to the extent required by 5 ILCS 430/70-5.
(b) The solicitation or acceptance of gifts prohibited to be solicited or accepted under the Act, by any
officer or any employee of the City, is hereby prohibited.
(c) The offering or making of gifts prohibited to be offered or made to an officer or employee of the City
under the Act, is hereby prohibited.
(d) The participation in political activities prohibited under the Act, by any officer or employee of the City,
is hereby prohibited.
(e) For purposes of this Section, the terms “officer” and “employee” shall be defined as set forth in 5 ILCS
430/70-5(c).
(f) The penalties for violations of this Section shall be the same as those penalties set forth in 5 ILCS
430/50-5 for similar violations of the Act.
(g) This Section does not repeal or otherwise amend or modify any existing ordinances or policies which
regulate the conduct of City officers and employees. To the extent that any such existing ordinances
or policies are less restrictive than this Section, however, the provisions of this Section shall prevail in
accordance with the provisions of 5 ILCS 430/70-5(a).
(h) Any amendment to the Act that becomes effective after the effective date of this Section shall be
incorporated into this Section by reference and shall be applicable to the solicitation, acceptance,
offering and making of gifts and to prohibited political activities. However, any amendment that
makes its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be incorporated into this Section
by reference without formal action by the corporate authorities of the City.
(i) If the Illinois Supreme Court declares the Act unconstitutional in its entirety, then this Section shall be
repealed as of the date that the Illinois Supreme Court’s decision becomes final and not subject to
any further appeals or re-hearings. This Section shall be deemed repealed without further action by
the Corporate Authorities of the City if the Act is found unconstitutional by the Illinois Supreme Court.
(j) If the Illinois Supreme Court declare part of the Act unconstitutional but upholds the constitutionality of
the remainder of the Act, or does not address the remainder of the Act, then the remainder of the Act
as adopted by this Section shall remain in full force and effect; however, that part of this Section
relating to the part of the Act found unconstitutional shall be deemed repealed without further action
by the Corporate Authorities of the City.
.16 PART TIME POLICE OFFICERS (section added 2012-4A) (2015-10 renumbered)
(a). That all police officers, other than those officers who shall be employed on a full-time basis, shall be
required to enter and successfully complete any training mandated by the Illinois Law Enforcement
Training Standards Board; and
1. Shall be a U.S. Citizen
2. Shall have a High School Diploma or equivalent
3. Shall be age 21 or age 21graduating Illinois Enforcement Training and Standard Board certified
school (basic law enforcement training school)
4. Shall have no felony conviction under any jurisdiction
5. Shall complete job application
6. Shall complete background investigation
7. Must have 20/20 vision in both eyes with or without corrective lenses
8. Must have a valid Illinois Driver’s License
9. Must comply with any request for mental or physical examinations
(b) That the part-time officer will not work more than 1000 hours per year.
(c) That the aforesaid hiring standard, with respect to part-time officers employed by the City of Fairbury,
Livingston County, Illinois, shall be submitted to the Illinois Law Enforcement Training Standards
Board, as required by statute.
Fairbury Code Ch. 4 Page - 1 Dec-11
CHAPTER 4
MUNICIPAL PURCHASING
.01 COMPETITIVE BIDS TO BE OBTAINED.
Any labor, lease, goods, or services to be purchased, sale of personal property, equipment or supplies, or
public improvement which is not to be paid for in whole or in part by a special assessment or special
taxation, where the expenses or costs thereof will exceed $1500 shall be constructed or purchased either:
1. by a contract let to the lowest responsible bidder after advertising for bids, except that any such
contract may be entered into by the proper officers without advertising for bids if authorized by a
vote of two-thirds of all the council elected or
2. in the manner following, if authorized by a vote of two-thirds of all the council elected, to-wit: the
proper officers of departmental head shall make such purchase or shall superintend and cause
such work or construction to be carried out but all material of the value of $1500 and upward used
in any construction work or public improvement shall be purchased by contract let to the lowest
responsible bidder in the manner prescribed herein. Nothing herein contained shall apply to any
contract with the Federal Government or any agency thereof.
.02 EXCEPTIONS TO COMPETITIVE BID REQUIREMENTS.
Contracts which by their nature are not adaptable to award by competitive bidding, such as contracts for
the services of individuals possessing a high degree of professional skill where the ability or fitness of the
individual plays an important part, auditing, contracts for utility services such as water, heat, light,
telephone or purchasing of educational matter shall not be subject to competitive bidding.
.03 PROCEDURE IN CONTACTS OVER $1500
(a) Publication. All proposals to award purchase orders or contracts in excess of $1500 shall be
published once at least ten days in advance of the date announced for the receiving of bids, in a
newspaper of general circulation throughout the City by the Clerk. Nothing herein shall be construed
to prohibit the Clerk from posting additional notices or advertising in addition thereto in trade
magazines, if so directed by the City Council.
(b) Advertisements for bids. Advertisements for bids shall describe the character of the proposed
contract, purchase or improvement in sufficient detail to enable the bidders thereon to know what
their obligations will be, either in the advertisement itself, or by reference, to detailed plans and
specifications on file in the office of the Clerk at the time of publication of the announcement. The
advertisement shall also state the date, time and place assigned for the opening of bids, and such
bids will be received at any time subsequent to the time indicated in the announcement.
(c) Deposit on bids. Cash, a cashier’s check, or a certified check as a deposit of good faith, in a
reasonable amount but not in excess of 10 per cent of the contract or purchase amount, may be
required of each bidder on all sums in excess of $1500 if specified in the bid announcement.
(d) Opening of sealed bids. All sealed bids shall be publicly opened by City Council. All bids shall be
open to public inspection in the office of the Clerk.
(e) Bid Award. The award of any purchase or contract in excess of $1500 shall be made by the City
Council to the lowest or highest responsible bidder, depending on whether the City is to expend or
receive money.
.04 EMERGENCY CONTRACTS.
In the event of an emergency affecting the public health, welfare or safety so declared by the Mayor, a
contract may be let or a purchase made, to the extent necessary to resolve such emergency without
public advertisement in the sum not to exceed $1500. The Mayor shall file his authority for such
expenditure in writing in the office of the Clerk and a copy to the City Council and shall provide the date or
time when the emergency shall terminate and shall name the person authorized to make such
expenditure or contract and the amount or amounts to be expended.
Fairbury Code Ch. 4 Page - 2 Dec-11
.05 CONTRACTS OR PURCHASES NOT EXCEEDING $100.
A City officer may make purchases or award contracts not in excess of $100 to the lowest or highest
bidder, depending on whether the City is expending or receiving money, without authorization by the City
Council or procurement of bids as set forth in this chapter. The sum herein authorized to be expended
shall constitute the total payment for such contract or purchase and shall not be expended as an
installment or partial payment on a larger amount nor shall it be expended in any manner to circumvent
directly or indirectly the other provisions of this chapter providing for authorization or bidding when a
larger sum is expended.
.06 CONTRACTS OR PURCHASES OF $100 to $1500.
A City officer shall certify to the City Council all requisitions or purchase orders or proposed contracts in
the sum of $100 to $1500 together with all necessary attachments thereto including written itemized
statements, descriptions of transaction, quantity, and all other data and information relative to the
transaction, contract, purchase or lease to properly enable the City Council to approve or disapprove the
request. The City Council shall approve or disapprove the request. Approval by the Council of an
expenditure, contract, lease or purchase shall empower the departmental head to enter into a contract to
be executed by the Mayor on behalf of the City or to make the purchase. The approval or authorization
by the Council may provide such other terms, conditions, directions, or restrictions as may be required by
the Council.
.07 CONTRACTS EXEMPT FROM PURCHASING REGULATIONS.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to local improvement contracts, special assessments or to
purchases or contracts otherwise specifically provided for by the Illinois Revised Statutes.
.08 INVALID PURCHASE CONTRACTS.
Any purchase or contact executed in violation of this chapter shall be null and void as to the City and if
public funds have been expended thereupon, the amount thereof may be recovered in the name of the
City.
Fairbury Code Ch. 5 Page - 1 Dec-16
CHAPTER 5
WATER
SECTION A - RATES AND CHARGES
.01 That there shall be and there are hereby established rates or charges per monthly period beginning
May 1, 2016 for the use of and for the service supplied by the waterworks system of the City of Fairbury,
Livingston County, Illinois, as shown by the water meters, as follows: (2016-1A)
(A) Within the Corporate Limits: For each user of water service within the corporate limits of the
City of Fairbury, the minimum charge shall be $18.15 per monthly billing period, (which amount
will consist of $14.40 basic rate, $1.50 to be used for payment of the loan from the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency Loan L17 121300 and $1.50 to be used for payment of the
loan from the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency and for Operation, Maintenance and
Replacement Loan L17 3193 and $0.75 to be used for payment of loan from Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency for water tower painting and cleaning), to all users whose
water consumption does not exceed 1,250 gallons per billing period, and in addition to said
minimum charge there shall be a charge of $7.98 per 1,000 gallons of water consumption
metered in excess of 1,250 gallons per billing cycle. (2016-1A)
(B) Outside the Corporate Limits: Users of the waterworks system of the City of Fairbury whose
premises are located outside of the corporate limits of the City shall be charged the rate
established in paragraph (A) above plus 50% added to their bill based upon the service
rendered. (2011-13)
(C) A fee of $1.00 shall be charged each month for each water meter in service in the Fairbury
water system whether said meter is located within or outside the city limits of the City of
Fairbury. Said charge shall be added to each water bill when rendered.
.02 Said rates or charges for service shall be payable monthly. The owner of the premises shall be liable
to pay for the service on such premises and the service is furnished to the premises by the City of
Fairbury only upon the condition that the owner of the premises of the service is liable to the City of
Fairbury. Services for each month shall be due and payable the 15th day of the following month. A
penalty of 10% shall be added to all bills not paid by the due date. (2016-4A)
(A) The City of Fairbury shall require a $100.00 per meter non-refundable user fee from every owner
of property. All bills shall be posted in the owner's name and payable by the owner. Whenever
meter registration is transferred from owner to a new owner there shall be a $100.00 nonrefundable
user fee from the new owner. Whenever meter registration is transferred from an
owner, or their agent, the transfer shall be liable for at least the minimum billing for water, sewer,
and garbage usage at the time in effect regardless of length of usage. (2006-8)
(B) Trailer parks, condos, duplexes, triplexes, apartment buildings, and multi-housing, etc. shall be in
compliance of .02-A and be required $100.00 per meter non-refundable user fee for water and
sewage and shall remain in the owner of the property's name. (2006-8)
(C) Any time an owner requests a reading by the Water Department for their property, other than an
ownership transfer, there shall be a minimum charge of $25 as set forth by the Water
Department. This charge will be reviewed yearly by the Water and Sewer Committee and may be
adjusted. (2006-8)
(D) All deposits as posted on or before September 1, 2006 shall remain in effect until the deposit is
returned to tenant or property is sold, at which time a $100.00 per meter non-refundable user fee
shall be charged.
(E) Existing services shall be grandfathered in as of the date of this ordinance change. Present
owners shall not be required to pay a user fee as long as ownership is retained by this owner.
(2006-8)
(F) In the event the user fee is not paid within 10 days of closing of real estate transaction, utility
Fairbury Code Ch. 5 Page - 2 Dec-16
services will be discontinued. (2006-8)
.03 In the event the charges for service are not paid within thirty (30) days after rendition of the bill for
such period service, such charges shall be deemed and are hereby declared to be delinquent, and
thereafter such delinquencies shall constitute liens upon the real estate for which such service is
supplied, and the City Clerk is hereby authorized and directed to file sworn statements showing such
delinquencies in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Livingston County, Illinois, and the filing of such
statements in the pertinent offices shall be deemed notice for the payment of such charges for such
service. (2006-8)
.04 If the rates or charges for such services are not paid within thirty (30) days as hereinabove mentioned
after the rendition of the bill for such services, such services shall be discontinued without further notice
and shall not be reinstated until all past due bills including the penalty thereon are paid in full, together
with payment made of $25.00 for reinstating such services. (2016-12)
.05 It is hereby made the duty of the City Clerk of the City of Fairbury to render bills for service and for all
rates and charges in connection therewith and to collect all moneys due thereon.
.06 All revenues and moneys derived from the operation of the waterworks system shall be held by the
City Clerk separate and apart from his private funds and separate and apart from all other funds of the
City, and all of said sum, without any deductions whatever, shall be delivered to the City Treasurer not
more than ten (10) days after receipt of same, or at such more frequent intervals as may from time to time
be directed by the City Council.
.07 The City Clerk shall receive all such revenues from the waterworks system and all other funds and
moneys incident to the operation of such system as the same may be delivered to him and deposit the
same in a separate fund designated as the “Waterworks Fund of the City of Fairbury”, and said Clerk
shall administer such fund in every respect in the manner provided by law.
.08 The City Clerk shall establish a proper system of accounts and shall keep proper books, records and
accounts in which complete and correct entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the
waterworks system, and at regular intervals he shall cause to be made an audit by an independent
auditing concern of the books to show the receipts and disbursements of the waterworks system. In
addition to the customary operating statements, the annual audit report shall also reflect the revenues
and operating expenses of the water facilities, including a replacement cost. The financial information to
be shown in the audit report shall include the following: (1998-20)
a. Flow data showing total gallons received at the water plant for the current fiscal year. (1998-20)
b. Billing data to show total number of gallons billed per fiscal year. (1998-20)
c. Debt service for the next succeeding fiscal year. (1998-20)
d. Number of users connected to the system. (1998-20)
e. Number of non-metered users. (1998-20)
.09 FORECLOSURE OF LIEN:
Property subject to a lien for unpaid charges shall be sold for non-payment of the same, and the proceeds
of the sale shall be applied to pay the charges, after deduction costs, as is the case in the foreclosure of
statutory liens. Such foreclosure shall be in the name of the City. The City attorney is hereby authorized
and directed to institute such proceedings in the name of the City in any court having jurisdiction over
such matters against any property for which the bill has remained unpaid sixty-five days in the case of a
monthly bill after it has been rendered.
.10 All ordinances and parts of ordinance in conflict herewith are hereby repealed insofar as the
conflicting portions thereof are concerned.
.11 New water and sewer charges may be, from time to time, enacted by the approval of a majority of the
Fairbury Code Ch. 5 Page - 3 Dec-16
City Council. The adequacy of the water service charge shall be reviewed, not less often than annually,
by Certified Public Accountants for the City of Fairbury in their annual audit report. The water service
charge shall be revised periodically to reflect a change in local capital costs or operation, maintenance
and replacement costs. (1998-20)
SECTION B - METERS, INSTALLATION, TAPPING AND CROSSCONNECTIONS
.12 Every application for water supply shall express that the same is taken subject to all rules and
Fairbury Code Ch. 5 Page - 4 Dec-16
regulations then in force or that may thereafter be adopted for the government of the waterworks. Any
person who shall willfully violate any or either of the foregoing rules and regulations or refuse or neglect to
comply with any of the terms thereof shall be subject to disconnection and civil fine of $500.00.
.13 The Water Department reserves the right at any time to enter any premises supplied with City water
or sewer services. In the event that an owner or occupant or their agent refuses to permit entry for
purposes of reading, exchanging or disconnecting water meters, the premises will be disconnected from
City water and sewer services and the owner, occupant or their agent shall be jointly and severally liable
for the fair value of the water meter and a civil penalty as provided above.
.14 Where the accuracy of record of a water meter is questioned it shall be removed at the consumer’s
request, and if so desired shall be tested in his presence, in the shops of the Water Department, by
means of the apparatus there provided and a report thereof duly made. Both parties to the test must
accept the finding so made. If the test discloses an error against the consumer of more than five percent
(5%) in the meter’s registry, the excess of the consumption on the current monthly’s bill shall be adjusted
and entire expense of the test will be borne by the Water Department, and the deposit required, as
hereinafter prescribed, shall be returned. On the other hand, where no such error is found, the person
who has requested the test shall pay the charges fixed for said test.
.15 Before making a test of any meter the person requesting such test shall, at time of making application
for test, make a deposit at office of said Water Department, of the amount charged for such test, subject
to the conditions herein stated, which charges are determined by the Superintendent of Water Works
from time to time, subject to the approval of the Water Works Committee.
.16 No meter shall be removed or in any way disturbed, nor the seal broken, except in the presence of, or
under the direction of the Superintendent of Public Works.
.17 Abandoned lines will be excavated and turned off at main corporate stop and disconnected under
supervision of the Superintendent of Public Works.
.18 Water Tap - No person, company or corporation shall be permitted to tap or make any connection
with the distributing pipes of the City of Fairbury unless duly authorized by the Superintendent of Public
Work.
.19 In all cases, the Superintendent of Public Works shall tap or supervise the tapping and installation of
corporate stop at the main and shall supervise the placement of the water line to the curb stop, which
shall be placed at the sidewalk or six feet from the street line, when there will be a stop box or gain cut off
box attached. All applicants shall pay the actual cost of materials used to the City Clerk.
.20 Material used for service connection from the corporate stop to a meter valve must in all cases
conform to such standards that the City Engineer may have prescribed.
.21 The service line from main to and including meter valve shall be maintained at owner’s expense. All
5/8” x ½” meters shall be maintained and repaired by the Water Department when rendered
unserviceable through fair wear and tear, provided, however, that where replacements, repairs, or
adjustments of any meters are rendered necessary by the act, neglect, or carelessness of the owner or
occupant of any premises, or where meters are damaged by freezing, hot water, etc., any expense
caused by the owner or occupant shall be charged against and be collected from the owner of said
premises.
.22 All City water used on any premises, wheresoever situated in said City of Fairbury, must pass through
a water meter. No bypass or connection between the meter and water main shall be made, allowed, or
maintained.
.23 No person except a representative of the Water Department shall turn on the City water supply to any
Fairbury Code Ch. 5 Page - 5 Dec-16
premises form which the said supply has been turned off on account of non-payment of water rents or
rates or for any other purpose whatsoever.
.24 Failure to receive notice of rents or rates will not be a valid excuse for failure to pay rents or rates
when due.
.25 No deduction shall be made on account of leakage after the water has passed through and been
registered by meter.
.26 If any meter, at any time, fails to register the quantity of water consumed the same shall be
determined and charges made based on the average quantity registered during the billing period prior to
the date of failure.
.27 All meters must at all times be kept accessible to the Water Department for examination, inspection or
reading. All mobile home courts or apartment complexes with more than one meter will number all meter
pits and maintain the visibility of said number.
.28 The City of Fairbury will notify consumers at any time it becomes necessary to shut off the City water
supply, but, in case of emergency, the City reserves the right at any time, without notice, to shut off the
water supply for repairs, extensions, non-payment of rents or rates or any other reason, and the City shall
not be responsible for any damage, such as bursting of boilers, supplied by direct pressure, the breaking
of any pipes or fixtures, stoppages or interruptions of water supply, or any other damage resulting from
the shutting off of the City water supply.
.29 All primary metered services must be provided with separate cut-off boxes in the street. No additional
cut-offs will be made on any water services supplying any premises.
.30 All services now in or that may hereafter be installed shall be provided with water meters of 5/8” x ½”
size, to be furnished and installed by the Water Department, under direction of the Superintendent.
Services requiring larger than 5/8” x ½” shall be at the owner’s expense.
.31 No person, company, or corporation shall be permitted to cause a connection to be made, or allow
one to exist, with city water supply for commercial, domestic, sanitary, fire protection or boiler-feed
purposes, or for any other purpose whatsoever, where water foreign to the city water supply is used for a
second source of supply.
.32 Whoever shall in any manner obstruct the access to any stop cock hydrant or valves connected with
any water pipes within any street, alley or consumer of said City by means of any lumber, brick, building
materials or other articles, things or hindrance whatever, shall be subject to a civil fine equal to the cost of
each obstruction.
.33 Any person who shall lay any service pipes or introduce into or about any building or on any grounds
any water pipes or do any plumbing works in any building or on any grounds for the purpose of
connecting such pipes or plumbing with the pipes of the waterworks of the City or who shall make any
addition to or alteration of any water pipe, stop cock, or other fixtures or apparatus for the supplying of
any premises with water without approval to perform said work by the City of Fairbury, or without first
having obtained a permit for doing such work from the City thereof shall be subject to a penalty.
.34 All plastic mains and all service lines will have a tracer wire placed with them and protruding above
ground for each connections by the City Waterworks.
.35 It shall be the duty of all consumers of City water at any and all times to exercise due diligence to
prevent waste of said water supply and to this end shall stop all leaks on their premises. The City water
supply will be shut off from any and all premises until such violations of this rule are corrected.
.35A RESTRICTIONS ON WATER USAGE.
Fairbury Code Ch. 5 Page - 6 Dec-16
(a) The Superintendent of Waterworks may, after receiving approval of the water and sewer Committee
of the City Council, place restrictions on water usage by consumers of water from the water system of
the City of Fairbury in any of the following situations in which it appears that unlimited usage of water
could be greater than the ability of the system to provide such water or there would be a situation in
which the health or safety of water consumers could be affected: (1988-9)
1. Any time that the water tower is not in use because of repairs or painted. (1988-9)
2. Any time in which one or more wells is not in use because of repairs being made to such well.
(1988-9)
3. Any time that the water systems is unable to retain pressure of 45 pounds per square inch in the
system as measured at the City Water Plant. (1988-9)
4. Any time that the demand placed upon the water system requires the use of more than three
wells to maintain a safe water level in the water system’s clear well. (1988-9)
5. Any time that the water table in the water system’s wells is ten feet or more below its highest level
as recorded at the Water Plant or if it become necessary to throttle the valves in order to keep the
well pumps from sucking in air. (1988-9)
6. In any event that there is a break in a water main or other malfunction that would affect the
capacity of the water system to deliver water or which would affect the health quality of the water
in the systems. (1988-9)
7. Any time that there is found in the water system a foreign substance which can affect the health
quality of the water in the water system. (1988-9)
(b) If any one or more of the conditions in paragraph (a) above exists, the Superintendent of Waterworks
may, after receiving approval of the Water and Sewer Committee of the City Council, place
restrictions on water usage. Depending on the severity of the situation, weather conditions, and
anticipated length of time that such condition may exist, the Superintendent of Waterworks may adopt
the restrictions of any of the following levels and may change the restriction level to a higher or lower
level as conditions change. (1988-9)
Level 1: Water shall not be used from the water system for watering yards, gardens, and other open
spaces, for watering shrubs or other plants, for the initial filling of swimming pools or for the washing
of houses or other buildings, or for the washing of automobiles, trucks, motor homes and recreational
vehicles, or any other vehicles by private individuals not at a commercial car washing establishment.
Fertilizer and chemical plants will be limited to using water only for mixing with fertilizer and chemicals
to be applied to farm ground. Water may be purchased for use outside the City limits of the City of
Fairbury only for human and livestock consumption and hygiene and must be purchased at The City
Waterworks Plant. (1988-9)
Level 2: In addition to all the restrictions in Level 1, water shall not be used for replacing water in a
swimming pool previously filled and commercial car wash operation shall cease. (1988-9)
Level 3: In addition to the restrictions in Level 1 and Level 2, the Superintendent of Waterworks shall
have the authority to establish hours of water usage and rationing the amount of water used. Such
hours and rationing may be varied according to the type of water usage, and the amount of water
necessary for such usage. (1988-9)
Level 4: In additional to all restrictions in Levels 1, 2, and 3, water may be used only for human
consumption and hygiene and other uses of water shall be ceased. (1988-9)
(c) In the event that any person, partnership, association, corporation, or any other entity, shall violate
any of the restrictions in paragraph (b) above which are in effect at any time, then such violator shall
be given a verbal warning to cease the specific violation and shall also at that time be informed of all
restrictions then in effect. After such a verbal warning has been given, if the same person,
partnership, association, corporation, or any other entity shall use water in violation of any restrictions
then in effect, then such violation shall be punished by a fine of $100.00. Any second and each
subsequent violation of such restrictions, shall be punished by a fine of $500.00 for each and every
Fairbury Code Ch. 5 Page - 7 Dec-16
violation. If any person, partnership, association, corporation, or any other entity shall continue to
commit violations of the water usage restrictions in effect, then the Superintendent of Public Works
shall have the authority to either disconnect water service to that user completely or ration the amount
of water permitted to that user. If any fine imposed hereunder is not paid in thirty days after issuance
of a citation, then the Mayor or City Council may instruct the City Attorney to take such legal action as
is necessary to collect said fine. (1988-9)
(d) The Mayor, the Superintendent of Waterworks, or the Superintendent of Public Works, will have the
authority to enforce the provisions of this Section .35A and to issue citations for violation of said
Section. (1988-9)
(e) If any person, partnership, association, corporation, or any other entity, has a well, cistern, or other
water source not connected with the water system of the City of Fairbury, they must use the same for
activities otherwise restricted by this Section .35A but it shall be the burden of such user to prove that
the water is coming from a well or cistern, or other source not connected with the water system of the
City of Fairbury. (1988-9)
.36 That if water originating at a well is used by the property owner and then it is pumped in to sewerage
system, the owner shall install at this own expense a meter approved by the superintendent of Public
Works, which meter shall be available for inspection at any time by the Superintendent of Public Works or
his agent. The owner shall pay fees for the use of such sewerage service as if the water had been
supplied form city sources as opposed to a well. The owner shall, in addition, pay tap fee of $25.00 and a
deposit of $40.00 to insure payment of any sewerage charges. Furthermore, any charges incurred by the
owner for sewerage use shall be lienable and foreclosure proceedings may be had thereon as in other
cases under this chapter.
.37 DEFINITIONS.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this ordinance shall be
as follows: (1998-20)
a. Backflow shall mean water of questionable quality, wastes or other contaminates entering a
public water supply system due to a reversal of flow. (1998-20)
b. Cross-connection shall mean a connection or arrangement of piping or appurtenance which a
backflow could occur. (1998-20)
c. Safe air gap shall mean the minimum distance of a water inlet or opening above the maximum
high water level or overflow rim in a fixture, device or container to which public water is furnished
which shall be at least two times the inside diameter of the water inlet pipe; but shall not be less
that six inches. (1998-20)
d. Secondary water supply shall mean a water supply system maintained in addition to a public
water supply, including but not limited to water systems from ground or surface sources not
meeting the requirements of the Statute relating thereto, or water from a public water supply
which in any way has been treated, processed or exposed to any possible contaminant or stored
in other than an approved storage facility. (1998-20)
e. Submerged inlet shall mean a water pipe or extension thereto from a public water supply
terminating in a tank, vessel, fixture or appliance which may contain water of questionable quality,
waste or other contaminant and which is unprotected against backflow. (1998-20)
f. Water utility shall mean the City of Fairbury Water Department. (1998-20)
g. Federal Act means the Federal 1996 Safe Drinking Water Acts Amendments. (1998-20)
h. Administrator means the Administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. (1998-20)
i. State Act means the Illinois Anti-Pollution Bond Act of 1970. (1998-20)
j. Director means the Director of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. (1998-20)
k. State Loan shall mean the State of Illinois participation in the financing of the construction of
water works as provided for by the Illinois Anti-Pollution Bond Act and for making such loans as
filed with the Secretary of State of the State of Illinois. (1998-20)
l. Ordinance means this ordinance. (1998-20)
m. City means the City of Fairbury. (1998-20)
Fairbury Code Ch. 5 Page - 8 Dec-16
n. Approving Authority means the Water and Sewer Committee of City Council of the City of
Fairbury. (1998-20)
o. Person shall mean any and all persons, natural or artificial including any individual, firm,
company, municipal, or private corporation, association, society, institution, enterprise,
governmental agency or other entity. (1998-20)
p. Clarification of word usage: “Shall” is mandatory; “may” is permissible. (1998-20)
q. Water and its characteristics: (1998-20)
1. ppm shall mean parts per million by weight. (1998-20)
2. Milligrams per Liter shall mean a unit of the concentration of water constituents. It is 0.01 g
of the constituent in 1,000 ml of water. It has replaced the unit formerly used commonly,
parts per million, to which it is approximately equivalents, in reporting the results of water
analysis. (1998-20)
3. pH shall mean the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion concentration
expressed by one of the procedures outlined in the IEPA Division of Laboratories Manual of
Laboratory Methods. (1998-20)
4. Curb Cock shall mean a shutoff valve attached to a water service pipe from a water main to
a building installed near the curb, which may be operated by a valve key to start or stop flow
in the water-supply lines of a building. Also called curb stop. (1998-20)
5. Easement shall mean an acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others.
(1998-20)
6. Service Box shall mean a valve box used with corporation or curb cock. (1998-20)
r. Types of charges: (1998-20)
1. Water Service Charge shall be the charge per quarter or month levied on all users of the
Water Facilities. The service charge shall be computed as outlined in Section A - Rates and
Charges and shall consist of the total of the Basis User Charge and the Local Capital Cost if
applicable. (1998-20)
2. User Charge shall mean a charge levied on users of water works for the cost of operation,
maintenance and replacement. (1998-20)
3. Basic User Charge shall mean the basic assessment levied on all users of the public water
system. (1998-20)
4. Debt Service Charge shall be the amount to be paid each billing period for payment of
interest, principal and coverage of (loan, bond, etc.) outstanding. (1998-20)
5. Capital Improvement Charge shall mean a charge levied on users to improve, extend or
reconstruct the water works. (1998-20)
6. Local Capital Cost Charge shall mean charges for costs other than the operation,
maintenance and replacement cost, i.e. debt service and capital improvements costs. (1998-
20)
7. Replacement shall mean expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories,
or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of the works to maintain the
capacity and performance for which such works were designed and constructed. The term
“operation and maintenance” includes replacement. (1998-20)
8. Useful Life shall mean the estimated period during which the water works will be operated.
(1998-20)
9. Water Fund is the principal accounting designation for all revenues received in the operation
of the water system. (1998-20)
.38 COMPLIANCE WITH EXISTING LAWS.
A connection with a public water supply system shall comply with the existing laws and rules and the
provisions of the Code of the City of Fairbury and the State of Illinois.
Fairbury Code Ch. 5 Page - 9 Dec-16
.39 CROSS-CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED.
Cross-connection of the public water supply system and any other water supply system or source
including, but not limited to the following are prohibited:
1. Between a public water supply system and a secondary water supply.
2. By submerged inlet.
3. Between a lawn sprinkling system and the public water supply system.
4. Between a public water supply and piping which may contain sanitary waste or a chemical
contaminant.
5. Between a public water supply system and piping immersed in a tank or vessel which may
contain a contaminant.
.40 LOCAL CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL PROGRAM.
The City of Fairbury shall develop a comprehensive control program for the elimination and prevention of
all cross-connections, and removal of all existing cross-connections and prevention of all future crossconnections.
.41 CORRECTIONS AND PROTECTIVE DEVICES.
Any user of Fairbury water shall obtain written approval from the Water Department of any proposed
corrective action or protective device before using or installing it. The total time allowed for completion of
the necessary corrections shall be contingent upon the degree of hazard involved and include the time
required to obtain and install equipment. If the cross-connection has not been removed within the time as
hereinafter specified, the City shall physically separate the Fairbury water supply from the on-site piping
system in such manner that the two systems cannot be connected by any unauthorized person.
.42 PIPING IDENTIFICATION.
When a secondary water source is used in addition to the Fairbury water supply, exposed Fairbury water
and secondary water piping shall be identified by distinguishing colors or tags and so maintained that
each pipe may be traced readily in its entirety, it will be necessary to protect the Fairbury water supply at
the service connection in a manner acceptable to the Water Department.
.43 PRIVATE WATER STORAGE TANKS.
A private water storage tank supplied from the Fairbury water supply system shall be deemed a
secondary water supply unless it is designed and approved for portable water usage.
.44 ELIMINATION OF EXISTING CROSS-CONNECTIONS.
Within one year from the effective date of this Section all existing cross-connections to the Fairbury water
supply systems shall be eliminated. The expenses of such elimination shall be that of the owner of the
property on which such cross-connection exists.
.45 All extensions of water lines exceeding two inches or more shall be looped into the water distribution
system, or have a means to flush the line. No dead ended lines will be allowed. In all cases, water lines
and materials used will be of materials specified by the City Engineers and the Superintendent of Public
Works.
.46 INSPECTION.
The Water Department of the City or any representative thereof shall have the authority to inspect any
premises to determine the presence of an existing cross-connection and to order the elimination of such
cross-connection.
Fairbury Code Ch. 5 Page - 10 Dec-16
.47 DISCONTINUANCE OF WATER SERVICE.
The Water Department is hereby authorized to discontinue water service after a reasonable notice to any
person owning any property where a cross-connection in violation of this Code exists. The Water
Department may take such other precautionary measures as necessary to eliminate any danger of the
contamination of the Fairbury water supply system. Water service to such property shall not be restored
until such cross-connection has been eliminated.
.48 RESTRICTIONS ON DRILLING WELLS.
No person, partnership, corporation, governmental body, association, or any other entity shall drill any
well for any purpose within the City limits of the City of Fairbury or within the immediate water source
providing the public water supply for the City of Fairbury, Livingston County, Illinois as legally described
above without first receiving the permission of the City Council of the City of Fairbury. Any person,
partnership, corporation, governmental body, association, or any other entity desiring to seek permission
to drill a well within such immediate water source shall file with the City Clerk a request to be heard at the
City Council at least ten days prior to a meeting of the City Council. Such request shall indicate the name
of the person, partnership, corporation, governmental body, association, or any other entity desiring to
drill said well and the name of the person, partnership, corporation, governmental body, association, or
any other entity who will use said well, the location of said well and the name of the owner of the real
estate on which said well will be located, the purpose for which said well will be drilled, and the estimated
date upon which the well drilling will be begun. Immediately upon the filing of such request, the City Clerk
shall send copies thereof to the Mayor, each alderman, the City Engineer, and the Superintendent of
Waterworks. The City Council shall not grant a permit for the drilling until the person partnership,
corporation, governmental body, association, or any other entity requesting permission to drill the well
shall present evidence satisfactory to the City Council that the drilling or the use of said well will not cause
pollution to or injury to the water source of the City of Fairbury. If the City Council grants such request, it
may impose such restrictions on the drilling or use of said well as are reasonable to protect the water
source of the City of Fairbury from pollution or injury and may require the party seeking to drill the well or
to use the well to put up such security as the City Council deems appropriate to protect the water source
of the City of Fairbury from pollution or injury. Any person, partnership, corporation, governmental body,
association, or any other entity which drills a well in violation of this Section shall be fined $1000.00 for
each offense and each day that such drilling continues or that such well is used shall constitute a
separate offense. In addition to or in lieu of seeking such fines, the City may enforce this Ordinance by
injunction to prevent any person, partnership, corporation, governmental body, association, or any other
entity from drilling wells in violation of this Ordinance or from using wells drilled in violation of this
Ordinance. (1988-21)
A permit from the City Council to drill a well shall not be required, (1) for individuals desiring to drill a well
for new construction of a single-family residence outside the City limits of the City of Fairbury, or (2) for
individuals who are faced with an emergency need for water, outside the City limits of the City of Fairbury,
for human and livestock consumption because an existing well no longer produces water or because the
water from such existing well has become contaminated and is not longer suitable for human or livestock
consumption. These exceptions to Section .48 shall apply only to areas outside the City limits of the City
of Fairbury and only where the individual already has all state and county permits necessary. These
exceptions apply only to individuals and do not apply to partnerships, corporations, governmental bodies,
associations, or any other entities. (1988-22)
.49 MINIMUM AND MAXIMUM WELL SET-BACK ZONES.
(1) Purpose
Pursuant to the authority conferred by Ill, Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 24, par. 11-125-4; Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987,
ch.111 ½, par. 1014.2 and 1014.3; and in the securing the public health, safety, and welfare; to preserve
Fairbury Code Ch. 5 Page - 11 Dec-16
the quality and quantity of groundwater resources in order to assure a safe and adequate water supply for
present and future generations; and to preserve groundwater resources currently in use and those
aquifers having a potential for future use as a public water supply, the provisions of this ordinance shall
apply to all properties located within the minimum setback zone established under Section 14.2 of the
Environmental Protection Act (“Act”) (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 111 ½, par. 1014.2) and this ordinance, and
maximum setback zone established under Sec. 14.3 of the Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 111 ½. (1014.3)
and this ordinance. Pursuant to Ill. Rev. State. 1989 ch. 24 par. 7-4-2, said minimum and maximum
setback zones shall apply to all wells located on property owned by the City of Fairbury which lie outside
the corporate limits of the City of Fairbury and which do not lie within the corporate limits of any other
municipality in all respects the same as any wells owned by the City of Fairbury which lie within the
corporate limits thereof. (1991-11)
(2) Definitions
Except as stated in this ordinance, and unless a different meaning of a word or term is clear from the
context, the definition of words or terms of this ordinance shall be the same as those used in the Act and
the Illinois Groundwater Protection Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 111 ½, pars. 7451 et seq.): (1991-11)
Act means the Environmental Protection Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 111 ½, par. 1001 et seq.) (1991-
11)
Agency means the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. (1991-11)
Board means the Illinois Pollution Control Board. (1991-11)
Minimum setback zone means the area around a community water supply well established under
Section 14.2 of the Act and this ordinance. The City of Fairbury water wells each have been
designated a 400 ft. radius minimum setback zone. See Appendix A for map delineation. (1991-11)
Maximum setback zone means the area around a community water supply well established under
Section 14.3 of the Act and this ordinance. For each water well used by the City of Fairbury the
maximum setback zone is the area greater than 400 foot radius distance and less than or equal to
1000 ft. radius from each city water well. See Appendix A for map delineation. (1991-11)
(3) Prohibitions
a) Except as provided in Section 4 or 5 of this ordinance, no person shall place a new potential
primary source, new potential secondary source, or new potential route within the minimum
setback zone. (1991-11)
b) Except as provided in Section 4 of this ordinance, no person shall place a new potential primary
source within the maximum setback zone. (1991-11)
(4) Waivers, Exception, and Certifications of Minimal Hazard
a) If, pursuant to Section 14.2(b) of the Act the owner of a new potential primary source, new
potential secondary source, or new potential route is granted a waiver by the Agency, such owner
shall be deemed to have a waiver to the same extent from Section 3(a) of this ordinance. (1991-
11)
b) If, pursuant to Section 14.2© of the Act the owner of a new potential primary source (other than
landfilling or land treating), new potential secondary source, or new potential route is granted an
exception by the Board, such owner shall be deemed to have an exception to the same extent
from Section 3(a) of this ordinance. (1991-11)
c) If, pursuant to Section 14.2© of the Act the owner of a new potential primary source (other than
Fairbury Code Ch. 5 Page - 12 Dec-16
landfilling or land treating), is granted an exception by the Board, such owner shall be deemed to
have an exception to the same extent from Section 3(b) of this ordinance. (1991-11)
d) If, pursuant to Section 14.5 of the Act, the owner of a new potential primary source, new potential
secondary source, or new potential route is issued a certificate of minimal hazard by the Agency,
such owner shall not be subject to Section 3(a) of this ordinance to the same extent that such
owner is not subject to Section 14.2(d) of the act. (1991-11)
(5) Exclusion
Section 3(a) of this ordinance shall not apply to new common sources of sanitary pollution as specified
pursuant to Section 17 of the Act and the regulation adopted thereunder by the Agency; however, no
such common sources may be located within the applicable minimum distance from a community water
supply well specified by such regulations. (1991-11)
.50 ACCESS TO RECORDS.
The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency or its authorized representative shall have access to any
books, documents, papers and records of the City which are applicable to the City system of user
charges for the purpose of making audit, examination, excerpts and transcriptions thereof to insure
compliance with the terms of the Special and General Conditions to any State Grant and Loan Agreement
and Rules or any State Loan. (1998-20)
.51 APPEALS:
The method for computation of rates and service charges established for user charges in Section A -
Rates and Charges shall be made available to a user with 14 days of receipts of a written request for
such. Any disagreement over the method used or in the computations thereof shall be resolved by Water
and Sewer Committee of the City Council of the City of Fairbury within 30 days after notification of a
formal written appeal outlining the discrepancies. (1998-20)
Fairbury Code Ch. 5-A Page - 1 May-12
CHAPTER 5-A
SEWER
.01 DEFINITIONS.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this Chapter shall be as
follows:
(a) Federal Government.
Federal Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq) as amended by
the Federal Pollution Control Act of Amendments of 1972 (Pub. L. 92-500) and Pub. L. 93-243).
Administrator means the Administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
Federal Grant shall mean the U.S. government participation in the financing of the construction of
treatment works as provided for by Title II-Grants for Construction of Treatment Works of the Act and
implementing regulations.
(b) State Government.
State Act means the Illinois Anti-Pollution Bond Act of 1970.
Director means the Director of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
State Grant shall mean the State of Illinois participation in the financing of the construction of
treatment works as provided for by the Illinois Anti-Pollution Bond Act for making such grants as filed
with the Secretary of the State of the State of Illinois.
(c) Local Government.
Chapter means this Chapter.
City means the City of Fairbury.
(d) Person shall mean any and all persons, natural or artificial including any individual, firm, company,
municipal, or private corporation, association, society, institution, enterprise, governmental agency or
other entity.
(e) NPDES Permit means any permit or equivalent document or requirements issued by the
Administrator, or, where appropriated by the Director, after enactment of the Federal Water Pollution
Control Amendments of 1972, to regulate the discharge of pollutants pursuant to section 402 of the
Federal Act.
(f) Clarification of word usage: “Shall” is mandatory; “may” is permissible.
(g) Wastewater and its characteristics:
Wastewater shall mean the spent water of a community. From this standpoint of course, it may be a
combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes form residences, commercial buildings, industrial
plants, and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water, and storm water that may be
present.
Sewage is used interchangeably with wastewater.
Effluent Criteria are defined in applicable NPDES Permit.
Water Quality Standards are defined in the Water Pollution Regulations of Illinois.
Fairbury Code Ch. 5-A Page - 2 May-12
Unpolluted Water is water of quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect or water that
would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by
discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
ppm shall mean parts per millions by weight.
Milligrams per Liter (mg/l) shall mean a unit of the concentration of water or wastewater constituent.
It is 0.001 g of the constituent in 1,000 ml of water. It has replaced the unit formerly used commonly,
parts per million, to which it is approximately equivalent, in reporting the results of water and
wastewater analysis.
Suspended Solids shall mean solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water,
sewage, or industrial waste, and which are removable by a laboratory filtration device. Quantitative
determination of suspended solids shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in Standard
Methods.
BOD (denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand) shall mean the quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days at 20
o
C,
expressed in milligrams per liter.
pH shall mean the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion concentration expressed
by one of the procedures outlined in Standard Methods.
Standard Methods shall mean the examination of analytical procedures set forth in the most recent
edition of “Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater” published jointly by the
American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution
Control Federation.
Garbage shall mean solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking, and
dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
Properly Shredded Garbage shall mean the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of
food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow
conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half (1/2) inch (1.27
centimeters) in any dimension.
Floatable Oil is oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from
wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered free
of floatable fat if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection
system.
Slug shall mean any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in concentration of any
given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than fifteen (15)
minutes more than five (5) times the average twenty-four (24) hour concentration or flows during
normal operation.
Industrial Waste shall mean any solid, liquid or gaseous substance discharged, permitted to flow or
escaping from any industrial, manufacturing, commercial or business establishment or process or
from the development, recovery or processing of any natural resource as distinct from sanitary
sewage.
Industry shall mean an industrial user of the publicly owned treatment works that: 1. Has a flow of
25,000 gallons or more per average calendar day; or 2. has a flow greater than ten percent of the flow
carried by the municipal system receiving the waste; or 3. has in its waste, a toxic pollutant in toxic
amounts as defined in standards issued under section 307 (a) of the Federal Act; or 4. is found by the
permit issuance authority, in connection with the issuance of the NPDES permit to the publicly owned
treatment works receiving the waste, to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with
other contributing industries, on that treatment works or upon the quality of effluent from that
treatment works.
Fairbury Code Ch. 5-A Page - 3 May-12
(h) Sewer types, and appurtenances:
Sewer shall mean a pipe or conduit for conveying sewage or any other waste liquids, including storm,
surface and groundwater drainage.
Public Sewer shall mean a sewer provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of the City.
It shall also include sewers within or outside the City boundaries that serve one or more persons and
ultimately discharge into the City sanitary or combined sewer system, even though those sewers may
not have been constructed with City funds.
Sanitary Sewer shall mean a sewer that conveys sewage or industrial wastes or a combination of
both, and into which storm, surface, and groundwaters or unpolluted industrial wastes are not
intentionally admitted.
Storm Sewer shall mean a sewer that carries storm, surface, and groundwater drainage but excludes
sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted cooling water.
Combined Sewer shall mean a sewer which is designed and intended to receive wastewater, storm,
surface, and groundwater drainage.
Building Sewer shall mean the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of
disposal.
Building Drain shall mean that part of the lowest piping of a drainage system which receives the
discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to
the building sewer or other approved point of discharge, beginning five (5) feet (1.5 meters) outside
the inner face of the building wall.
Stormwater Runoff shall mean that portion of the precipitation that is drained into the sewers.
Sewerage shall mean the system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection, transportation and
pumping of sewage.
Easement shall mean an acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others.
(i) Treatment:
Pretreatment shall mean the treatment of wastewaters from sources before introduction into the
wastewater treatment works.
Wastewater Treatment Works shall mean an arrangement of devices and structures for treating
wastewater, industrial wastes, and sludge. Sometimes used a synonymous with waster treatment
plat or wastewater treatment plant or pollution control plant and shall include the Fairbury Sewage
Treatment Plant.
(j) Wastewater Facilities shall mean the structures, equipment, and processes required to collect, carry
away, and treat domestic and industrial wastes and transport effluent to a watercourse.
(k) Watercourse and connections:
Watercourse shall mean a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or
intermittently.
Natural Outlet shall mean any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface or
groundwater.
(l) User types:
User Class shall mean the type of user either residential or commercial (non-industrial) or industrial
as defined herein.
Fairbury Code Ch. 5-A Page - 4 May-12
Residential or Commercial or Non industrial user shall mean any user of the treatment works not
classified as an industrial user or excluded as an industrial user as provided for in this section.
Industrial User shall mean any nongovernmental user of publicly owned treatment works identified in
the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972, Office of Management and Budget, as amended
and supplemented, under the following division:
1. Division A—Agriculture, Forestry, and Fishing.
2. Division B—Mining.
3. Division D—Manufacturing.
4. Division E—Transportation, Communications, Electric, Gas and Sanitary Services.
5. Division I—Services.
A user in the Divisions listed may be excluded if it is determined by the city council that it will introduce
primarily segregated domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences.
Control Manhole shall mean a structure located on a site from which industrial wastes are discharged.
Where feasible, the manhole shall have an interior drop. The purpose of a control manhole” is to provide
access for the city representative to sample and/or measure discharges.
(m) Types of charges:
Wastewater Service Charge shall be the bi-monthly charge levied on all users of the Wastewater
Facilities. The service charge shall be computed as outlined in Section .08 and shall consist of the
total of the Basic User Charge, the Debt Service Charge and a Surcharge, if applicable.
User Charge shall mean a charge levied on users of treatment works for the cost of operation and
maintenance.
Basic User Charge shall mean the basic assessment levied on all users of the public sewer systems.
Debt Service Charge shall be the amount to be paid each billing period for payment of interest,
principal and coverage of (loan, bond, etc.) outstanding and shall be computed by dividing the annual
debt service by the number of users connected to the Wastewater Facilities.
Surcharge shall mean the assessment in addition to the basic user charge and debt service charge
which is levied on those persons whose wastes are greater in strength than the concentration values
established in Section .09.
Replacement shall mean expenditure for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories, or
appurtenances which are necessary during the service life of the treatment works to maintain the
capacity and performance for which such works were designed and constructed. The term operation
and maintenance includes replacement.
Useful Life shall mean the estimated period during which the collection system and/or treatment
works will be operated and shall be 20 years from the date of start-up of any wastewater facilities
constructed with a State grant.
Sewerage Fund is the principal accounting designation for all revenues received in the operation of
the sewerage system.
.02 USE OF PUBLIC SEWER REQUIRED.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary
manner on public or private property within the City of Fairbury or in any area under the jurisdiction of
said City, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
(b) It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the City of Fairbury, or in any area under
the jurisdiction of said City, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has
been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter.
Fairbury Code Ch. 5-A Page - 5 May-12
(c) Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault,
septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
(d) The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation,
or other purposes situated within the City and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which
they may in the future be located any public sanitary (or combined) sewer of the City, is hereby
required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly
with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within ninety (90) days
after date of official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is within 300 feet of the property
line.
(e) The requirements in this Section .02 shall not apply to any private sewage disposal system in use at
the time this chapter is passed and adopted which private sewer system makes use of a septic tank
and soil absorption system provided that if any such private sewage disposal system ceases to
operate properly, then the owner or owners of the property of properties served by such private
sewage disposal system shall be required at his or their expense to connect such property or
properties directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter,
within ninety (90) days after date of official notice to do so.
.03 PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL.
(a) Where a public sanitary (or combined) sewer is not available under the provisions of Section .02,
paragraph (d), the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying
with the provisions of this Section.
(b) Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, the owner shall first
obtain and present to the City Clerk a written permit signed by the Livingston County Health
Department. A permit and inspection fee of $50.00 shall be paid to the City at the time the permit is
filed with the City Clerk.
(c) A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is
completed to the satisfaction of the Livingston County Health Officer. He shall be allowed to inspect
the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the
Livingston County Health Officer when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any
underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within 48 hours of the receipt of
written notice by the Livingston County Health Officer.
(d) The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all
recommendations of the State of Illinois Private Sewage Disposal Licensing Act and Code and with
the State of Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. No permit shall be issued for any private
sewage disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is
less than that specified by the Livingston County Health Department. No septic tank or cesspool shall
be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet.
(e) At such time as a public sewer become available to a property served by a private sewage disposal
system, as provided in Section .02, paragraph (d), a direct connection shall be made to the public
sewer in compliance with this chapter within 60 days after such public sewer becomes available, and
any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be cleaned of sludge,
disconnected from the service sewer line, and filled with suitable clean bank-run gravel or soil;
provided that this paragraph (e) shall not apply to any private sewage disposal system in use at the
time this chapter is adopted which private sewage disposal system makes use of septic tank.
(f) The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facility in a sanitary manner at all
times, and at no expense to the City.
(g) No statement contained in this Section shall be construed to interfere with any additional
requirements that may imposed by the Livingston County Health Officer.
.04 BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS.
(a) No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with, or opening into; use; alter; or
disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the
Superintendent of Public Works. The Superintendent of Public Works shall be the city employee who
is primarily responsible for the operation of the Fairbury Sewage Treatment Plant.
Fairbury Code Ch. 5-A Page - 6 May-12
(b) There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer permits: 1. for residential and commercial service,
and 2. for service to establishments producing industrial wastes. In either case, the owner or his
agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the City. The permit application shall be
supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment
of the Superintendent of Public Works. A permit and inspection fee of $50.00 for all sewer permits
shall be paid to the City Clerk at the time the application is filed. The industry, as a condition of
permit authorization, must provide information describing its wastewater constituents, characteristics,
and type of activity.
(c) A building sewer permit will only be issued and a sewer connection shall only be allowed if it can be
demonstrated that the downstream sewerage facilitates, including sewers, pump stations and
wastewater treatment facilities, have sufficient reserve capacity to adequately and efficiently handle
the additional anticipate waste load.
(d) All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne
by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage that may directly or
indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
(e) A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building, except that where
one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be
constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, courtyard or driveway, then the building
sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one
building sewer.
(f) Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on
examination and test by the Superintendent of Public Works, to meet all requirements of this chapter.
If these requirements are not met, said old building sewer shall be disconnected from the main sewer
line of the City, and capped.
(g) The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used
in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the
requirements of the building and plumbing code and other applicable rules and regulations of the City.
In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in
appropriate specifications of the American Society of Testing Materials, Water Pollution Control
Federation Manual of Practice No. 9 and Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main
Construction in Illinois shall apply.
(h) Wherever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the
basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the
public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by a means which is
approved in accordance with Section .04, paragraph (b), and discharged to the building sewer.
(i) No person(s) shall make connection of roof downspouts, sump pumps, exterior or interior foundation
drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or
building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
(j) The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the
building and plumbing code, or other applicable rules and regulations of the City, or the procedures
set forth in appropriate specifications of the American Society of Testing Materials, Water Pollution
Control Federation Manual of Practice No. 9, and Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main
Construction in Illinois. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Connections to a
city sewer shall be with a gasketed sewer saddle Y or T or a gasketed SDR 26 Y or T with couplings
at both ends. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the
Superintendent of Public Works before installation. (2012-2)
(k) The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Superintendent of Public Works when the
building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be
made under the supervision of the Superintendent of Public Works or his representative.
(l) All excavations from building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and
lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property
disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the City Street
Commissioner.
Fairbury Code Ch. 5-A Page - 7 May-12
.05 USE OF THE PUBLIC SEWERS.
(a) No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any stormwater, surface water, groundwater,
roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process
waters to any sanitary sewer.
(b) Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically
designated as combined sewers or storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the City
Engineer. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged on approval of
the City Engineer, to a storm sewer, combined sewer, or natural outlet.
(c) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described water or wastes
to any public sewers:
1. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas.
2. Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity,
either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment
process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any
hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant.
3. Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other corrosive property capable
of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works.
4. Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the
flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but
not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and
paper dishes, cups, mild containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
(d) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials,
waters, or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the City Engineer that such wastes can harm
either the sewer’s sewage treatment process or equipment; have an adverse effect on the receiving
stream; or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance. Informing his
opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the City Engineer will give consideration to such
factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials
of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage
treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and maximum limits
established by regulatory agencies. The substances prohibited are:
1. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit
(150
o
F), (65
o
C).
2. Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous materials; or oils, whether emulsified or not,
in excess of one hundred (100) mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become
viscous at temperatures between thirty-two (32) and one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit
(150
o
F), and (0 and 65
o
C).
3. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage
grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths (3/4) horsepower (0.76 HP metric) or greater shall
be subject to the review and approval of the City Engineer.
4. Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating
solutions whether neutralized or not.
5. Any water or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc or similar objectionable or toxic
substances; or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such
material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits
established by the City Council for such materials.
6. Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor-producing substances, in such
concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the City Council as necessary after
treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the State, Federal, or other
public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters.
7. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits
Fairbury Code Ch. 5-A Page - 8 May-12
established by the City Council in compliance with applicable State or Federal regulations.
8. Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5.
9. Any mercury or any of its compounds in excess of 0.005 mg/l as Hg at any time except as
permitted by the City Council in compliance with applicable State and Federal regulations.
10. Any cyanide in excess of 0.025 mg/l at any time except as permitted by the City Council in
compliance with applicable State and Federal regulations.
11. Materials which exert or cause:
a. Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, Fullers earth,
lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium
chloride and sodium sulfate);
b. excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning
solutions);
c. unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to
constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works;
d. unusual volume of flow or concentrations of wastes constituting “slugs” as defined herein.
12. Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the
sewage treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that
the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of agencies having jurisdiction
over discharge to the receiving waters.
(e) If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which
waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated herein, and/or which are in
violation of the standards for pretreatment provided in Chapter 1, EPA Rules and Regulations, subchapter
D, Water Programs Part 128 - Pre-treatment Standards, Federal Register Volume 38, No.
215, Thursday, November 8, 1973, and any amendments thereto, and which in the judgment of the
City Council may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or
receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the City
Council may:
1. reject the wastes;
2. require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers;
3. require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
4. require payment to cover the added costs of handling and treating the wastes not covered by the
existing taxes or sewer charges, under the provisions of paragraph (j) of this Section. If the City
Council permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the
plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the City Council and subject
to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws.
(f) Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the City Engineer they are
necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any
flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be
required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity
approved by the City Engineer, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for
cleaning and inspection.
(g) Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided, they shall be maintained
continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense.
(h) Each industry shall be required to install a control manhole and, when required by the City Engineer,
the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a
suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the
building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole,
when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with
plans approved by the City Engineer. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense,
and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessibly at all times.
(i) All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference
Fairbury Code Ch. 5-A Page - 9 May-12
is made in this chapter shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of “Standard
Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater”, published by the American Public Health
Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples
taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control
manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point
at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted
methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of
hazards to life, limb, and property. (The particular analyses involved will determine whether a twentyfour
(24) hour composite of all outfalls of a premise is appropriate or whether a grab sample or
samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are
obtained from 24-hour composits of all outfalls, whereas pH’s are determined form periodic grab
samples.)
(j) No statement contained in this Section shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or
arrangement between the City of Fairbury and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of
usual strength or character may be accepted by the City of Fairbury for treatment, subject to payment
therefor, in accordance with Section .08 hereof, by the industrial concern, provided such payments
are in accordance with Federal and State guidelines for User Charge System and Industrial Cost
Recover System.
.06 PROTECTION OF SEWAGE WORKS FROM DAMAGE.
No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, or tamper with any structure,
appurtence or equipment which is a part of the sewage works.
.07 POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS.
(a) The City Engineer and other duly authorized employees of the City, bearing the proper credentials
and identification, shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
The City Engineer or his representative shall have no authority to inquire into any processes,
including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries beyond that point
having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterway or facilities for
waste treatment.
(b) While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in Section .07, paragraph (a)
above, the City Engineer or duly authorized employees of the City shall observe all safety rules
applicable to the premises established by the owners and the owners shall be held harmless for injury
or death to the employees and the City shall indemnify the owners against loss or damage to its
property by City employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property
damage asserted against the owners and growing out of gauging and sampling operation, except as
such may be caused by negligence or failure of the owners to maintain safe conditions as required in
Section .05, paragraph (h).
(c) The City Engineer and other duly authorized employees of the City bearing proper credentials and
identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the City holds a duly
negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within said easement. All
entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms
of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.
.08 WASTEWATER USER CHARGES.
(a) Basis for Wastewater User Charges: The wastewater user charge for the use of and for service
supplied by the wastewater facilities of the City of Fairbury shall consist of a basic user charge for
operation and maintenance plus replacement, and a surcharge, if applicable.
The user charge shall be based on water usage as recorded by water meters for normal waste having
the following strengths.
Fairbury Code Ch. 5-A Page - 10 May-12
1. A five-day, 20 degree Centigrade (200 C) bichemical oxygen demand (BOD) of 200 mg/l.
2. A suspended solids (SS) content of 250 mg/l.
Water meter readings shall be assumed to equal sewage flow.
The user charge shall consist of operation and maintenance costs plus replacement and shall be
computed as follows:
1. Estimate the projected annual revenue required to operate and maintain the wastewater facilities
including a replacement fund for the year, and the debt service requirements.
2. Estimate wastewater volume discharged to the sewer system based on total water meter
readings after appropriate adjustment for water not returned to the sewer and/or water from
unmetered private sources which is discharged to the sewer system.
3. Compute costs per 1000 gallons for normal sewage strength wastes.
A surcharge will be levied to all users whose waters exceed the normal concentrations for BOD (200 mg/l)
and SS (250 mg/l). The surcharge will be based on water usage as recorded by water meters and/or
sewage meters for all wastes which exceed the 200 mg/l and 250 mg/l concentration for BOD and SS,
respectively. Section .08, paragraph (d) specifies the procedure to compute a surcharge.
The adequacy of the wastewater service charge shall be reviewed annually by Certified Public
Accountants for the City in their annual audit report. The wastewater user charge shall be revised
periodically to reflect a change in operation and maintenance costs including replacement costs and
adjusted as required. One of the purposes of the annual review shall be to maintain service charges in
relation to cost and assure that all use classes are being charged an equitable share.
(b) Measurement of Flow: The volume of flow used for computing user charges and surcharges shall be
the metered water consumption read to the lowest even increments of 1,000 gallons.
1. If the person discharging wastes into the public sewers procures any part or all of his water from
sources other than the City of Fairbury Water System, all or a part of which is discharged into the
public sewers, the person shall install and maintain, at his expense, water meters of a type
approved by the Superintendent of Public Works for the purpose of determining the volume of
water obtained from these other sources.
2. Devices for measuring the volume of waste discharged to the sanitary sewer may be required by
the Superintendent of Public Works if these volumes cannot otherwise be determined from the
metered water consumption records.
3. Devices for measuring the volume of waste not discharged to the sanitary sewer may be required
by the Superintendent of Public Works.
4. Metering devices for determining the volume of waste shall be installed, owned, and maintained
by the person. Following approval and installation, such meters may not be removed, unless
service is cancelled, without the consent of the City Council.
5. The Superintendent of Public Works shall be the city employee who is primarily responsible for
operation of the Fairbury Sewage Treatment Plant.
(c) Sewer Service Charge Per Bi-Monthly Billing Period: For each user of the sewer service of the
combined waterworks and sewerage system of the City of Fairbury, the basic user rate shall be as
follows: (2011-13)
(i) The minimum charge for such service shall be $11.00 per billing period to all users whose water
consumption does not exceed 2,500 gallons per billing period. Of said amount of $11.00, $6.74
shall be applied toward the operation and maintenance of the sewerage system and $1.26 shall
be applied toward debt reduction and future replacement of equipment, and $3.00 shall be used
for payment of the loan from the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency and Operation,
Maintenance, and Replacement Loan L17 1833. (2011-13)
(ii) The basic user rate shall be $4.25 per 1,000 gallons of water consumption metered in excess of
2,500 gallons per billing period to all users who discharge normal strength wastes to the
Fairbury Code Ch. 5-A Page - 11 May-12
sewerage system. Of said $4.25 per 1,000 gallons, $3.80 shall be applied toward operation and
maintenance of the sewerage system and $.45 shall be applied toward debt reduction and future
replacement of equipment. (2011-13)
(iii) The charge for use of the sewer system only, for discharge of normal strength wastes to the
sewerage system, shall be as follows: (2011-13)
(A) The minimum charge for such service shall be $11.00 per billing period to all users whose
discharge of waste does not exceed 2,500 gallons per billing period. Of said amount of
$11.00, $6.74 shall be applied toward the operation and maintenance of the sewerage
system and $1.26 shall be applied toward debt reduction and future replacement of
equipment, $3.00 shall be used for payment of the loan from the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency and Operation, Maintenance, and Replacement Loan L17 1833. (2011-13)
(B) The basic user rate shall be $4.25 per 1,000 gallons of wastes discharged in excess of 2,500
gallons per billing period. Of said $4.25 per 1,000 gallons, $3.80 shall be applied toward
operation and maintenance of the sewerage system and $.45 shall be applied toward debt
reduction and future replacement of equipment. (2011-13)
(C) The amount of wastes discharged shall be measured by meters to be installed at the cost of
the user. (2011-13)
(iv) Surcharges, industrial cost recovery charges, bond cost charges, and debt service charges for
sewer service established by Chapter 5-A shall remain effective at the rates hereinafter stated.
(1995-1)
(v) Users of the service of the combined waterworks and sewerage system of the City whose
premises are located outside of the corporate limits of the City shall be charged the following user
rates: (2011-13)
(A) The minimum charge for such service shall be $16.50 per billing period to all users whose
water consumption does not exceed 2,500 gallons per billing period. Of said amount of
$16.50, $10.11 shall be applied toward the operation and maintenance of the sewerage
system, $1.89 shall be applied toward debt reduction and future replacement of equipment,
and $4.50 shall be used for payment of the loan from Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency and Operation, Maintenance, and Replacement Loan L17 1833. (2011-13)
(B) The basic user rate shall be $6.38 per 1,000 gallons of water consumption metered in excess
of 2,500 gallons per billing period to all users who discharge normal strength wastes to the
sewerage system. Of said $6.38 per 1,000 gallons, $4.73 shall be applied toward operation
and maintenance of the sewerage system and $1.65 shall be applied toward debt reduction
and future replacement of equipment. (2011-13)
(C) The charge for use of the sewer system only, for discharge of normal strength wastes to the
sewerage system, shall be as follows: (2011-13)
(a) The minimum charge for such service shall be $16.50 per billing period to all users
whose discharge of wastes does not exceed 2,500 gallons per billing period. Of said
amount of $16.50, $10.11 shall be applied toward the operation and maintenance of the
sewerage system, $1.89 shall be applied toward debt reduction and future replacement
of equipment, and $4.50 shall be used for payment of the loan from the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency and Operation, Maintenance, and Replacement Loan
17-1833. (2011-13)
(b) The basic user rate shall be $6.38 per 1,000 gallons of wastes discharged in excess of
2,500 gallons per billing period. Of said $6.38 per 1,000 gallons, $4.73 shall be applied
toward operation and maintenance of the sewerage system and $1.65 shall be applied
toward debt reduction and future replacement of equipment. (2011-13)
(c) The amount of wastes discharged shall be measured by meters to be installed at the cost
of the owner. (2011-13)
Fairbury Code Ch. 5-A Page - 12 May-12
(d) Surcharge rate: For waste strengths above normal strength of 200 mg/l BOD and 250 mg/l SS, a
surcharge of $00.11 per pound BOD and $00.05 per pound SS shall be applied. The surcharge for
each Bi-monthly period shall be computed by the following formulae:
SC
BOD - (X-200) x A x 0.00000834 x $00.11
SC
SS - (Y-250) x A x 0.00000834 x $00.05
where:
SC
BOD = surcharge above the basic user rate of BOD concentration above 200 mg/l.
SC
SS = surcharge above the basic user rate of SS concentration above 250 mg/l.
X = average BOD concentration in mg/l during the bi-monthly billing period.
Y = average SS concentration in mg/l during the bi-monthly billing period.
A = bi-monthly metered water flow adjusted for appropriate losses in gallons.
Computation of Surcharge: The concentration of wastes used for computing surcharges shall be
established by waste sampling. Waste sampling shall be performed as often as may be deemed
necessary by the Superintendent of Public Works and shall be binding as a basis for surcharges.
Computation of Total Wastewater User Charge: The wastewater user charge shall be computed by the
following formula:
CW = MC + BC +
SC
BOD +
SC
SS
where:
CW = total wastewater user charge.
MC = minimum charge as set out in Section .08, paragraph ©.
BC = basic user charge as set out in Section .08, paragraph ©.
SC
BOD = surcharge for BOD as computed in Section .08, paragraph (d).
SC
SS = surcharge for SS as computed in Section .08, paragraph (d).
.09 INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY.
(a) Industrial Cost Recovery Required: Each industrial user shall pay that portion of any State grant
which has been obtained by the City of Fairbury for the financing of the construction of wastewater
treatment works allocable to the treatment of the wastewater from such user. Such users share shall
not include an interest component.
(b) Industrial Cost Recovery Charge: The charge for industrial cost recovery shall be based on a charge
per unit volume of normal strength process flow. Normal strength flow shall be waste strength less
than or equal to 200 mg/l BOD and 250 mg/l SS. The industrial cost recovery charge will be
computed as follows:
1. Estimate the State grant amount allocable to those treatment units used to process dry weather
sewage flow (which includes industrial waste flows).
2. Divide the allocable State grant amount by the industrial cost recovery period.
3. Determine the average annual design flow volume by multiplying the daily design flow average of
660,000 gallons/day by 365 days/year. (The result is 240.9 million gallons per year).
4. Divide the annual allocable grant amount determined in subparagraph 2. of paragraph (b),
Section.09, by the average annual design flow volume of 240.9 million gallons.
5. The resulting charge of $00.23 per 1000 gallons will be charged all industrial users having a
process waste flow.
Fairbury Code Ch. 5-A Page - 13 May-12
(c) Total Charge to an Industrial User: The total industrial cost recovery charge for each billing period
shall be determined by multiplying a user’s industrial process flow volume discharged during the
billing period by $00.23 per 1000 gallons.
Industrial process flow volume shall be determined by measurement or estimation of all water flow
through industrial plant processes. In absence of meter readings, process flow shall be estimated by
using the following formula:
PF = TWF - DF- CF
where:
PF = process flow for billing period.
TWF = total water flow for billing period from meter reading, plus estimates of flow from private wells,
if any.
DF = domestic flow from employees estimated by multiplying the average number of man-shifts
worked for the billing period by an allowance of 25 gallons per man-shift worked.
CF= flow consumed or otherwise not returned to the sewer.
If, in the opinion of the City Clerk, the City’s interest would best be served by making the above estimation
on an annual basis, then the Clerk may elect to negotiate with each industry a percentage of the total
water flow to estimate process flow each billing period.
(d) Length of Industrial Cost Recovery Period: The industrial cost recovery period shall be equal to the
useful life of the treatment works which shall be 30 years form 1978, not to exceed thirty (30) years.
(e) Payments and Billing for Industrial Cost Recovery Period: Industrial cost recovery charges to
industrial users shall be included with the regular billing for sewer use charges.
(f) Adjustment of Charge Due to Introduction of High Strength Industrial Waste Discharges: If, at any
time, during the industrial cost recovery period an industry begins discharging wastes with strengths
greater than 200 mg/l BOD and 250 mg/l SS, a study shall be made under the direction of the City
Council to revise the industrial cost recovery charge to include a high waste strength surcharge as
well as a process flow volume charge. The revised charge factors shall be applied to process flow
volume and measured waste strength quantities in excess of normal.
(g) Adjustment of Charge Due to Plant Improvement Utilizing State Grant Funds: If there is an expansion
or upgrading of the treatment works utilizing a State grant, each existing industrial user’s share shall
be adjusted accordingly.
(h) No Charge for Unused or Unreserved Capacity: An industrial user’s portion of any State grant shall
not include any portion of the grant amount allocable to unused or reserved capacity.
(i) Payment to the State of Illinois Required: The City shall retain fifty per cent (50%) of the amounts
recovered from industrial users. The remainder, together with any interest earned thereon, shall be
returned to the State of Illinois Anti-Pollution Fund on an annual basis.
(j) Disposition of Retained Amounts: Eighty per cent (80%) of the retained amounts, together with
interest earned thereon, shall be used solely for the eligible costs of the expansion or reconstruction
of treatment works associated with the project and necessary to meet the requirements of the Federal
Act and the Sate of Illinois. The City, prior to commitment of the retained amounts, shall obtain
written approval of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency for any expansion or reconstruction.
The remainder of the retained amounts may be used for such expenditures as the City deems
appropriate.
(k) Investment of Retained Amounts Required: Pending use, the grantee shall invest the retained
amounts for reconstruction and expansion in: 1. obligations of the U.S. Government; or 2. obligations
guaranteed as to principal and interest by the U.S. Government or any agency thereof; or 3. shall
deposit such amounts in accounts fully collateralized by obligations of the U.S. Government or by
obligations fully guaranteed as to principal and interest by the U.S. government or any agency
thereof.
(l) City Clerk’s Responsibility: The City Clerk shall maintain the necessary records for determination of
services as required by Section .08, paragraph (a) and Section .09, paragraph (a).
Fairbury Code Ch. 5-A Page - 14 May-12
(m) City Treasurer’s Responsibility: City Treasurer shall be responsible for the investment and
expenditure of all moneys collected for industrial cost recovery in accordance with Section .09,
paragraphs (i), (j) and (k).
(n) Monitoring Required: The Superintendent of Public Works shall maintain a program of monitoring
industrial user discharges as the City Council deems necessary, provided that any industry shall be
monitored no less than twelve (12) times annually.
.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
(a) Bills: Said user charges, industrial cost recovery charges, and bond cost charges for service shall be
payable bi-monthly. The owner of the premises, the occupant thereof and the user of the service
shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for the service to such premises and the service is furnished
to the premises by the City only upon the condition that the owner of the premises, occupant and user
of the services are jointly and severally liable therefor to the City.
Bills for sewer service shall be sent out the City Clerk on the first day of the first month succeeding
the period for which the service is billed.
All sewer bills are due and payable 20 days after being sent out. A penalty of 10 per cent shall be
added to all bills not paid by the 20th day after they have been rendered.
(b) Delinquent Bills: If the charges for such services are not paid within 30 days after the rendition of the
bill for such services, such services shall be discontinued without further notice and shall not be
reinstated until past due water and sewage bills including the penalties thereon are paid in full,
together with payment made of $25.00 for reinstating such service.
(c) In the event the charges for service are not paid within 30 days after the rendition of the bill for such
bi-monthly service, such charges shall be deemed and are hereby declared to be delinquent, and
thereafter such delinquencies shall constitute liens upon the real estate for which such service is
supplied, and the City Clerk is hereby authorized and directed to file sworn statements showing such
delinquencies in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of Livingston County, Illinois, and filing of such
statements in the pertinent offices shall be deemed notice for the payment of such charges for such
service.
Such lien for delinquent charges for sewer service shall be in addition to the lien for delinquent
charges for water service set forth in the preceding chapter.
(d) Foreclosure of Lien: Property subject to a lien for unpaid charges shall be sold for non-payment of
the same, and the proceeds of the sale shall be applied to pay the charges, after deducting costs, as
in the case in the foreclosure of statutory liens. Such foreclosure shall be done in the name of the
City. The City Attorney is hereby authorized and directed to institute such proceedings in the name of
the City in any court having jurisdiction over such matters against any property for which the bill has
remained unpaid sixty days in the case of a bi-monthly bill after it has been rendered.
(e) Revenues: All revenues and monies derived from the operation of the sewerage system shall be
deposited in the Water and Sewer Fund. All such revenues and monies shall be held by the City
Clerk separate and apart from his private funds and separate and apart from all other funds of the
City and all of said sum, without any deduction whatever, shall be delivered to the City Treasurer not
more than ten days after receipt of the same, or at such more frequent intervals as may, from time-totime,
be directed by the Mayor and the Council.
The City Clerk shall receive all such revenues from the sewerage system and all other funds and
monies incident to the operation of such system as the same may be delivered to him and deposit the
same in the account of the fund designated as the “Sewerage Fund of the City”. Said Clerk shall
administer such fund in every respect in the manner provided by statute of the Illinois Municipal Code
of 1961 effective July 1, 1961.
Fairbury Code Ch. 5-A Page - 15 May-12
(f) Accounts: The City Clerk shall establish a proper system of accounts and shall keep proper books,
records, and accounts in which complete and correct entries shall be made of all transactions relative
to the sewerage system, and at regular annual intervals, he shall cause to be made an audit by an
independent auditing concern of the books to show the receipts and disbursements of the sewerage
system.
In addition to the customary operating statements, the annual audit report shall also reflect the
revenues and operating expenses of the wastewater facilities, including a replacement cost, to
indicate that sewer service charges under the waste cost recovery system and capital amounts
required to be recovered under the industrial cost recovery system do in fact meet these regulations.
In this regard, the financial information to be shown in the audit report shall include the following:
1. Flow data showing total gallons received at the wastewater plant for the current fiscal year.
2. Billing data to show total number of gallons billed.
3. Debt service for the next succeeding fiscal year.
4. Number of users connected to the system.
5. Number of non-metered users.
6. A list of users discharging non-domestic wastes (industrial users) and volume of waste
discharged.
(g) Notice of Lien: A copy of this section, properly certified by the City Clerk, shall be filed in the office of
the Recorder of Deeds of Livingston County and shall be deemed notice to all owners of real estate of
their liability for charges for service supplied to any user of the service of the sewerage system of said
City on their properties.
(h) Access to Records: The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency or its authorized representative
shall have access to any books, documents, papers and records of the City which are applicable to
the City system of user charges or industrial cost recovery for the purpose of making audit,
examination, excerpts and transcriptions thereof to insure compliance with the terms of the Special
and General Conditions to any State Grant.
.11 BOND COST CHARGE.
(a) Basis for Bond Cost Charge: General obligation bonds were issued to pay for the City’s share of the
wastewater treatment plant construction. The debt service cost of these bonds are met through
property tax levies annually. Issuance of these bonds and procedures for the levy are in accordance
with Ordinance No. 774, dated September 3, 1975.
Tax exempt sewer system users shall be charged a bond cost charge, the revenues from which will
be used to abate tax levies required to meet bond debt service costs.
The bond cost charge shall be based on water usage as recorded by water meters on the water
service line to each tax exempt user.
Water meter readings shall be assumed to equal sewage flow except in cases where the tax exempt
user may show that water passed through the meter is not returned to the sewer.
The bond cost charge shall consist of the average annual debt service costs and shall be computed
as follows:
1. Estimate the average annual debt service cost to amortize the wastewater treatment construction
bond issue.
2. Determine the average annual dry weather sewage flow for which the sewage treatment plant
was constructed. This shall be done by multiplying 365 days per year times the design average
flow of 660,000 gallons per day.
3. Compute the cost per 1000 gallons of design flow. This cost will be charge only tax exempt
users.
Fairbury Code Ch. 5-A Page - 16 May-12
Property tax paying users will be exempted from this charge since tax payments will be assumed to pay
their fair share of debt service requirements. No adjustment in a user’s property taxes will be made for
changes in wastewater flow by that user.
(b) Bond Cost Charge Rate: There shall be and there is hereby established a bond cost charge of $.46
per 1000 gallons of metered water use less all volumes not returned to the city sewer by all significant
tax-exempt users. A significant tax-exempt user shall be defined as a user of the city sewer system
not subject to payment of city property taxes.
12. EFFECTIVE DATES OF RATES:
The rate and service charges herein established for user charges, industrial cost recover charges,
bond cost charges, and any other charges of any nature or description shall, if not now in effect,
become effective as of the effective date of this ordinance.
13. PENATIES:
(i) Any person found to be violating any provision of this ordinance, except Section .06, shall be
served by the City with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a
reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period
of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. The City may revoke any permit
for sewage disposal as a result of any violation of any provision of this ordinance.
(ii) Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in Section .13(i),
shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor as provided in Illinois Revised Statutes, and on
conviction thereof shall be penalized accordingly. Each day in which any such violation shall
continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
(iii) Any person convicted of violation Section .06 of this ordinance shall be fined in the amount not
exceeding Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for each violation.
Fairbury Code Ch. 6 Page - 1 Dec-11
CHAPTER 6
REFUSE AND GARBAGE
.01 RECEPTACLE REQUIRED.
It shall be the duty of every owner, organization, or occupant of any house, building, flat or apartment, or
tenement in the city where people reside, board or lodge, or where animal or vegetable foods are
prepared or served, and at all time, to maintain in good order and repair, a can lined with a plastic bag
with appropriate tie for garbage, tin cans, bottles, ashes and similar refuse. All garbage shall be enclosed
in plastic bags, or other suitable containers.
.02 DEPOSIT IN STREET.
No garbage or refuse of any kind shall be deposited in any street, alley or public way, except as it
provided in this chapter; and no such refuse shall be so placed that it can be blown about or scattered by
the wind.
No person in the City of Fairbury shall mow his lawn so that the grass clippings from the lawn mower shall
be blown into any street, alley, or public way in the City of Fairbury; nor shall any person rake any leaves
or grass clippings into any street, alley, or public way in the City of Fairbury; nor shall person deposit, put,
or place by any means or in any manner grass clippings or leaves in any street, alley, or public way in the
City of Fairbury. (1986-8)
.03 PENALTY.
Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a Class C
Misdemeanor as provided in Illinois Revised Statutes, and penalized accordingly. Furthermore, the
violation of this chapter is declared to be a public nuisance to be abated in the manner provided by law.
.04 GARBAGE COLLECTION SERVICE CHARGE.
(a) There is hereby established a regular garbage collection service charge for garbage picked up within
the City of Fairbury as follows: (2008-3)
(i) Said charge for a single family dwelling will be $8.00 per month to be billed to the resident. (2008-
3)
(ii) Said charge for a multiple family dwelling shall be $8.00 per month for each dwelling unit in the
multiple family dwelling. In the case of a multiple family dwelling unit having individual water
meters for each dwelling unit, the charge for each dwelling unit shall be billed to the person in
whose name the water meter is listed. In the case of multiple family dwelling units without
individual water meters for each unit, then said charge for each dwelling unit shall be billed to the
person in whose name the water meter is listed. (2008-3)
(iii) Said charges for units in senior citizen assisted living facilities shall be $5.00 per month for each
unit. (2008-3)
(iv) Said charges for all non-residential users shall be as follows: (2008-3)
(A) Non-residential users producing up to .2 cubic yards of garbage per week shall be charged
$18.00 per billing period. (2008-3)
(B) Non-residential users who do not have a dumpster and produce from .2 to 1.0 cubic yards of
garbage per week shall be charged $24.00 per billing period. (2008-3)
(C) Non-residential users who do not have a dumpster and produce more than 1.0 cubic yard of
garbage per week shall be charged $3.50 per cubic yard for each time the garbage is picked
up, with a minimum charge of $24.00 per billing period. (2008-3)
(D) Non-residential users with a dumpster shall be charged $3.50 per cubic yard based upon the
capacity of the dumpster. Said charge shall be charged each time the dumpster is picked up
with a minimum $24.00 charge per billing period. (2008-3)
(E) For non-residential users, the term “billing period” shall mean the two month period covered
Fairbury Code Ch. 6 Page - 2 Dec-11
by the water and sewerage billing cycle for that part of Fairbury in which the non-residential
use is located. (2008-3)
(F) The non-residential charges set forth above are based upon one garbage pick-up per week.
Any non-residential user having more than one garbage pick-up per week shall be charged
$3.50 per cubic yard for each time that his garbage is picked up, with a minimum charge of
$24.00 per billing period. All non-residential users shall be charged individually whether they
have their garbage set out separately or whether it is co-mingled with the garbage of other
non-residential users in a common dumpster or otherwise. Where several non-residential
users are located in the same building, each non-residential user shall be billed separately at
the current rate for non-residential users. (2008-3)
(v) The regular garbage collection service charges set forth above shall be charged for each month
or part of a month that such services are provided, without pro-ration. (2008-3)
(b) As used in this Chapter, a single family dwelling shall mean a building designed for or occupied
exclusively by one family for residential purposes. Multiple family dwelling as used in this Chapter
shall mean a building designed for or occupied exclusively by two or more families for residential
purposes. (1988-2)
(c) There is hereby established a special garbage collection service charge for the following types of
materials which will be in addition to the regular garbage collection service charge established in
paragraph (a) above. All such items will be billed at the rate which the landfill used by the City of
Fairbury shall from time to time charge for such items. (1988-2)
(i) All furniture and appliance including but not limited to sofas, chairs, box spring and mattress,
television, refrigerator, stoves, dishwashers, furnaces, water heaters, sinks and stools, and any
other large household furnishings. (1988-2)
(ii) Tires, building materials and large quantities of cardboard, newspaper, plaster, lath, and similar
materials. (1988-2)
(iii) The preceding types of items shall be picked up at residential sites, commercial sites and
construction sites only upon request of the person having such items to be picked up. Such
person shall notify the Fairbury Street Department of such items to be picked up and where they
are to be picked up. The City reserves the right to refuse to pick up any construction materials.
(1988-2)
(d) Hazardous substances as defined in the Illinois Environmental Protection Act as now in effect or as
hereafter amended shall not be picked up or disposed of by the City under any circumstances. (1988-
2)
(e) (i) The regular garbage collection charges established hereby will be billed to those received garbage
collection services every two months. The bill will be sent with the water and sewerage bill for those
recipients of garbage collection services who also receive water and sewerage services from the City
of Fairbury. The bill will be sent separately to such recipients of garbage collection services who do
not receive water and sewerage services from the City of Fairbury. Persons receiving water and
sewerage services from the City of Fairbury will be presumed to also be receiving garbage collection
services from the City of Fairbury. Any such person who is not receiving garbage collection services
shall be responsible for notifying the City of that fact. (1988-2)
(ii) The special garbage collection charges established hereby will be billed monthly by separate
invoice whenever items subject to said special garbage collection charge are pickup up by the City.
(1988-2)
(iii) Whenever payment is made on a combined bill for water, sewerage, and regular garbage collection
charges, The payment shall be applied first toward the regular garbage collection service charge, then
to the charge for sewerage service, and lastly to the charge for water service. (1988-16)
(iv) If any garbage collection charge, whether regular or special, is not paid within twenty days of the
date such statement is rendered, then the Mayor of the City may direct the City Attorney to take legal
action to collect such garbage collection charges not paid by the 20th day after the bill is rendered.
(1988-16)
Fairbury Code Ch. 6 Page - 3 Dec-11
.05 GARBAGE PICK UP REGULATIONS
The following regulations shall apply to all garbage picked up by the City of Fairbury. Any garbage which
is not set out in compliance with these regulations shall not be picked up by the City of Fairbury:(1988-2)
(a) All residential garbage shall be placed in containers no greater than thirty gallon in capacity and
having a maximum weight of no more than seventy-five pounds. (1988-2)
(b) All non-residential garbage shall be placed in containers no greater than thirty gallon in capacity
and having a maximum weight of no more than seventh-five pounds or in dumpsters which shall
have a maximum capacity of no more than 3.0 cubic yards. No loose garbage, either residential
or non-residential, shall be picked up by the City, but shall be put in containers approved by the
City of Fairbury, except as otherwise herein provided. (1988-2)
(c) No loose leaves or grass clippings shall be picked up by the City of Fairbury. Leaves and grass
clippings need not be placed in approved containers but if not placed in approved containers,
must be placed in plastic garbage bags. No cardboard boxes, including appliance or furniture
cartons, shall be picked up by the City unless they have first been cut up and flattened prior to
disposal. (1988-2)
(d) All garbage must be taken to the City coping, alley, or street before it will be picked up by the
City. The City will not enter onto private property to pick up garbage except in the case of
dumpsters which must be located at points approved by the City. (1988-2)
.06 STARTING AND STOPPING OF GARBAGE PICK UP AND DISPOSAL SERVICES
Any user of the garbage pick-up and disposal service of the City of Fairbury who shall be gone form the
City of Fairbury and not need such services for a period of 2 months or longer may have service stopped
and may have the user fee charged for such service dropped for the time that he is gone. Such user shall
file with the City Clerk, on a form provided by the Clerk, a request for temporary termination of service
stating the date when such service is to be terminated, the date when such service is to be resumed, and
the name and address of the person requesting the temporary termination of service. During such period
of temporary termination of service, the user charge for garbage pick-up and disposal service will not be
charged to such user. (1988-12)
If a person is not sure of the date that he desires garbage pick-up and disposal service to resume, then
such person shall, as soon as he is sure of such date, notify the City Clerk to have garbage pick-up and
disposal service resumed, at which time the user charge shall be resumed. (1988-12)
If any user who requests temporary termination of garbage pick-up and disposal service fails to notify the
City Clerk when to resume such service and puts garbage out for pick-up and disposal, then such person
shall pay in addition to the charge which would have otherwise been due, a penalty of $10.00 for each
month, or part thereof, that such person has used such services without notifying the City Clerk that he
has resumed such services. (1988-12)
.06.1 PRIVATE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL OF GARBAGE.
(a) The collection and disposal of residential garbage and refuse by private contractors shall not be
allowed within the City of Fairbury. Non-residential garbage and refuse may be collected and
disposed of by private contractors in City of Fairbury as provided in this Section .06. Such private
collection and disposal of garbage and refuse shall be permitted only from 7:00 A.M. to 7:00 P.M. on
Monday through Saturday of each week. (1988-18)
(b) Contractors desiring to provide private collection and disposal of non-residential garbage and refuse
in the City of Fairbury shall file and application for license with the City Clerk. The fee for such
license which shall accompany the application shall be $35.00. The application shall state the name,
address and telephone number of the applicant; the number of garbage trucks and employees that
the applicant has; the number of trucks and employees that the applicant plans to use for the
collection and disposal of garbage and refuse in the City of Fairbury, the make and size of garbage
trucks that the applicant would plan to use in the City of Fairbury; the days of the week that the
applicant plans to collect garbage and refuse in the City of Fairbury; the amount of liability insurance
carried by the applicant and name of its insurance carrier; list any other municipalities, counties, or
state in which the applicant is licensed to proved garbage collection and disposal service; and
Fairbury Code Ch. 6 Page - 4 Dec-11
whether the applicant has ever been denied or lost a license from any municipality, county, or state to
provide garbage collection and disposal service, and if so, when and where. The bond hereinafter
provided shall accompany the application. Said application shall be forwarded to the Street
Commissioner for his recommendation and he shall then forward the application with his
recommendation to the City Council for approval or rejection. The City Council will either approve or
reject the application. If the application is approved by the City Council, the City Clerk shall issue to
the applicant a license permitting the private collection and disposal of non-residential garbage and
refuse in the City of Fairbury until April 30 next following. Said license shall be effective upon
issuance by the Clerk. (1988-18)
(c) Each applicant shall provide a bond to the City in an amount not less than $5,000.00 with surety as
approved by the City Council that it will collect and dispose of garbage and refuse of its customers in
the City of Fairbury on the days set forth in its application for license that it will not allow garbage and
refuse to accumulate to a degree that is a danger to public health, unsightly, or a public nuisance.
Said bond shall become payable to the City of Fairbury if the contractor fails to collect and dispose of
garbage of its customers on the day provided or the following day or if its failure to collect and
dispose of garbage and refuse creates a situation which is a danger to public health, unsightly, or a
public nuisance. (1988-18)
(d) Any private contractor desiring to collect and dispose of non-residential garbage and refuse in the
City of Fairbury shall use only commercially manufactured closed garbage trucks which have a
capacity of at least fifteen cubic yards. (1988-18)
(e) Any such private contractor shall dispose of the garbage and refuse collected by it only in accordance
with State and Federal laws and regulations. (1988-18)
(f) Each such license shall be for a one year term except that the first such license shall be effective
from the date of its approval by the City Council until April 30 next following. Thereafter each license
shall be for a one year periods from May 1 of each year to April 30 of the following year. Each private
contractor desiring to renew its license for private collection and disposal of non-residential garbage
and refuse in the City of Fairbury shall re-apply with the City Clerk on or before April 1 of each year
and the contractor must continue to meet all of the requirements of a private contractor. The fee of
the first license shall be pro-rated on a monthly basis from the date that the application is approved to
the next following April 30. Thereafter each application fee shall be due and payable when the
application is filed with the City Clerk. Said license may not be assigned or conveyed. If any such
private contractor should decide to terminate the collection and disposal of garbage and refuse in the
City of Fairbury, such contractor shall notify the Street Commissioner of the City of Fairbury at least
thirty days prior to the date he intends to stop such private collection and disposal of garbage and
refuse and shall give the Street Commissioner a list of all his customers. The contractor shall
continue to collect and dispose of garbage for his customers during that thirty day period. At the end
of that time the contractor may stop. (1988-18)
(g) The license of any contractor for the private collection and disposal of garbage and refuse in the City
of Fairbury may revoked in the manner herein provided. If any contractor shall fail to collect and
dispose of garbage and refuse on the days that he has provided in his application or if he shall allow
garbage and refuse to accumulate so as to be a danger to public health, unsightly, or a public
nuisance; or if the contractor shall fail to keep liability insurance in force in the amounts in effect when
its license was granted; or if the contractor should fail to dispose of garbage and refuse in accordance
with state and federal laws and regulation; or if the applicant shall fail to use the type of garbage truck
required in this Section .06; or if the trucks used by the contractor shall be unsafe or his employees
shall collect garbage and refuse and operate the trucks in a reckless or unsafe manner, then the
Streets and Alleys Committee shall investigate the matter. The contractor shall be notified of the
investigation being made by the Streets and Alleys Committee and allowed an opportunity to present
evidence in defense of his position to the Committee. The Streets and Alleys Committee shall make
a recommendation to the City Council whether or not to revoke the license, and the contractor shall
be given at least five days notice of the City Council hearing on revocation. The contractor shall be
given an opportunity to appear and to be heard at the Council meeting before any vote is taken on
revocation of his license. If the City Council should vote to revoke the license, then the contractor
shall immediately crease the collection and disposal of garbage and refuse in the City of Fairbury.
(1988-18)
(h) If any non-residential user of the Fairbury garbage services desires to have his garbage and refuse
Fairbury Code Ch. 6 Page - 5 Dec-11
collected by a private contractor, he shall so notify the Street Commissioner that he is so doing, the
name of the contractor who will be collecting and disposing of his garbage and refuse, and the date
that such private collection and disposal shall begin. After that time the City of Fairbury shall not
collect any garbage or refuse of any type from such user. If the user desires to terminate the private
collection and disposal of his garbage and refuse and to again have the City collect and dispose of
his garbage and refuse, then he shall file a written request for such City service with the Street
Commissioner stating the date that he wants such City service to begin, and shall pay a
reinstatement fee of $35.00. (1988-18)
(i) This Section .06 shall not apply to the collection and disposal of construction materials from
construction sites. (1988-18)
(j) This Section .06 shall not apply to the collection and disposal of metal, glass, paper, and cardboard
by person or entities collecting the same for recycling purposes. If such person or entitles collect
such materials for any purposes other than recycling they must comply with all the requirements of
this Section.06. (1988-18)
Fairbury Code Ch. 7 Page - 1 Nov-16
CHAPTER 7
OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE, SAFETY AND
MORALS
.01 FIREARMS.
(a) No person shall discharge any firearms, B.B. guns or pellet guns, or do any hunting in the City. This
shall not apply to peace officers in line of duty, or any person acting in self defense.
(b) No person except a police officer shall carry any weapon, concealed or otherwise into a public
meeting, tavern, or other retail business.
.02 WEAPONS.
(a) A person who is not a city officer, shall not carry about his person any concealed pistol, switchblade,
knife, razor, slingshot, metal knuckles or any other weapon or thing of deadly character.
(b) No person shall sell, give or transfer any such weapon to any minor person.
.03 FIREWORKS.
No person shall sell, offer for sale, use or explode any fireworks in the City; except the City Council may
grant a permit for a public display of fireworks under such conditions as it may impose under provisions of
Chapter 127-1/2, Section 128 of the Illinois Revised Statutes.
.04 FIRES.
No person shall start or maintain any fire in any street, sidewalk, park or public place. All burning of
materials shall be in compliance with regulation found elsewhere in this Code. (See Nuisances).
.05 BARBED WIRE FENCES.
No person shall maintain any fence containing barbed wire along or near any public sidewalk.
.06 NOISE.
No person shall disturb the peace and quiet of any other person by creating loud or excessive noise on
his property, or by allowing other person to create loud and excessive noise on his or any property.
Excessive noise shall include but not by way of limitation any of the following:
1. Loud playing of phonographs, radios, television sets, or music machines, or musical instruments.
2. Barking or howling dogs or cats.
3. Vehicles without mufflers, or the unnecessary use of horns on vehicles.
4. The use of any power lawn mower, snow blower, snowmobile, or other noisy machine between
11:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M. the following day, or at any time if not properly muffled.
.07 DAMAGING PROPERTY.
No person shall damage, destroy or deface any City property or any public or private property without
permission of the owner.
.08 LITTERING.
No person shall litter any public or private property with paper or other debris or foreign matter. Any
stored or transported materials susceptible to blowing or scattering shall be adequately covered or
protected to prevent littering.
.09 POLLUTION.
No person shall pollute the air or any water course by excessive discharge of waste products or foreign
matter.
Fairbury Code Ch. 7 Page - 2 Nov-16
.10 DISORDERLY HOUSES.
No person shall, within the City or within three miles of the outer limits of the City, keep, maintain,
frequent, or be an inmate of or connected therewith, or contribute to the support of any disorderly house
or house of ill fame or assignation, or any place used for the practice of fornication or adultery; or
knowingly suffer or permit any house or other premises owned or occupied by him or under his control to
be used for any such purposes.
.11 COMBUSTIBLE REFUSE.
It shall be unlawful to permit or store any combustible refuse in such manner as to create a fire hazard, or
to throw or deposit, or cause to be thrown or deposited, any such refuse of any kind on or in any street,
highway, or alley or other public place within the corporate limits of the City.
.12 PARADES AND DEMONSTRATIONS.
(a) No person shall participate in or promote any parade or demonstration on any street or other public
property unless a permit therefor has been issued by the Mayor.
(b) Application for such permit shall be made a least 72 hours before the event and shall provide such
information as the Mayor shall require for proper protection of the public.
(c) No such parade or demonstration shall be held during the nighttime, or in any such manner as to
obstruct the orderly use by the public of any street or public place.
(d) The Mayor may issue such permit subject to such reasonable restrictions as he shall deem necessary
to safeguard the residents of the City and to protect private and public property.
.13 SNOWMOBILES.
(a) As used in this Section the following terms shall have the indicated definitions:
1. Snowmobile means a self-propelled device designed for travel on snow or ice or natural terrain,
steered by skis or runners, and supported in part by skis, belts, or cleats.
2. Operate means to ride in or on a snowmobile (other than as a passenger) or to use or control the
operation of a snowmobile in any manner, whether or not the snowmobile is underway.
3. Operator means every person who operates or is in actual physical control of a snowmobile.
4. Snowmobile route means a public street or alley in the City of Fairbury which is shown as a
snowmobile route upon the map which is made a part of this Section and which shall be called
the Snowmobile Route Map. Such map and all notations, references, and other information
shown thereon are a part of this Section and have the same force and effect as if such map and
all the notations, references, and other information shown thereon were all fully set forth or
described herein. A copy of the original of such map, properly attested, is on file with the Clerk of
the City.
5. Storage location means the place where a snowmobile is stored, kept or garaged in the City of
Fairbury.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to violate the following provisions of this Section:
1. No person shall operate a snowmobile on any laws or private property without the prior consent
of the owner or lessee thereof.
2. No person shall operate a snowmobile on any public street or alley of Fairbury, other than a
snowmobile route, for any purpose except to travel to and from his snowmobile’s storage location
and the nearest snowmobile route. In so doing the operator must use the shortest and most
direct route between the storage location and the nearest snowmobile route and he must use
alleys instead of streets wherever possible.
3. No person shall operate a snowmobile on a snowmobile route except to travel to and from his
snowmobile’s storage location and the city limits or to pass through the city from one city limit to
another. Any person who operates a snowmobile on a snowmobile route shall not take his
snowmobile off the snowmobile route until he passes the city limit, until he reaches his
snowmobile’s storage location, or until he reaches the point on a snowmobile route nearest to this
storage location.
Fairbury Code Ch. 7 Page - 3 Nov-16
4. No person shall operate a snowmobile upon a snowmobile route or other public street or alley to
travel from one location in Fairbury to a different location in Fairbury nor for any purpose except
to go to the city limit or to his storage location and always by the most direct and immediate route.
5. No person operating a snowmobile on a public street or alley of Fairbury shall stop his
snowmobile except to obey traffic laws and regulations or as required by traffic conditions or
emergency.
6. No person shall operate a snowmobile upon a public street or alley in Fairbury unless the
snowmobile is properly registered and numbered in accordance with the laws of the State of
Illinois and unless the snowmobile meets the equipment and safety requirements of the laws of
the State of Illinois.
7. No person shall operate a snowmobile on a public street or alley in Fairbury unless that person
possesses a valid motor vehicle driver’s license.
8. No person shall operate a snowmobile on a public street or alley in Fairbury at a speed greater
than fifteen (15) miles per hour.
9. No person shall operate a snowmobile on a public street or alley in Fairbury earlier than 7:00
A.M. or later that 11:00 P.M. of each day.
10. Every operator of a snowmobile shall obey all traffic signs and signals and all traffic laws,
regulations, and ordinances of the State of Illinois and the City of Fairbury.
11. Every operator of a snowmobile shall always yield the right-of-way to the operator of all motor
vehicles.
12. Whenever two or more snowmobiles are being operated along the same part of a public street or
alley in Fairbury at the same time and in the same direction, then the operators of those
snowmobiles shall keep them in single file.
13. If a street has no curb, the operator of a snowmobile shall keep his snowmobile on the shoulder
of that street. On streets which have curbs, the operator shall keep his snowmobile as close to
the curb as it is safe to do.
14. Any person who must deviate from the provisions of this section because of an emergency
involving danger to human life or health or to property, shall inform the Chief of Police of such
deviation and why it is necessary.
.14 CHILDREN ON STREET AT NIGHT.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person under sixteen (16) years of age to be or remain in or upon any
street, alley, or other public place in the City after 11:00 P.M. and before 6:00 A.M., on any day,
unless such person is accompanied by a parent or guardian, or other person having custody of such
minor, or unless the said minor is in the performance of an errand or duty directed by such parent or
guardian or other person having custody of such minor person, or unless such person is in lawful
employment making it necessary to be in such places during the hours herein specified.
(b) It shall be unlawful for anyone have the legal care and custody of any person under sixteen (16)
years of age, to allow or permit such person to go or be upon any public street, alley, or other public
place in the City after 11:00 P.M. and before 6:00 P.M., on any day, except in case of necessity.
.15 PEDDLERS. (2016-10)
A. Statement of purpose.
Residents of the City of Fairbury have an inalienable interest in their personal safety, well-being and
privacy in their residences, as well as their ability to provide or receive information regarding matters of
personal belief, political or charitable activities and goods and services lawfully in commerce. The City
has a substantial interest in protecting the well-being, tranquility, personal safety and privacy of its
citizens, which includes the ability to protect citizens from unwanted intrusions upon residential or
commercial property. The City also has a substantial interest in protecting citizens from fraud or
otherwise unfair consumer sales practices as well as criminal activity.
Fairbury Code Ch. 7 Page - 4 Nov-16
B. Statement of policy. There must be a balance between these substantial interests of the city and its
citizens, and the effect of the regulations in this section on the rights of those who are regulated. Based
on the collective experiences of City officials derived from regulating business activity, protecting
persons and property from criminal conduct, responding to the inquiries of citizens regarding door-todoor
and on street solicitation and canvassing, the experience of its law enforcement officers and those
affected by door-to-door and on street solicitation and canvassing, as well as judicial decisions outlining
the boundaries of constitutional protections afforded and denied persons seeking to engage in door-todoor
and on street solicitation and canvassing, the City adopts this section to promote the City’s
substantial interests in:
1. Respecting citizen’s decisions regarding privacy in their residences and businesses;
2. Protecting persons from criminal conduct;
3. Providing equal opportunity to advocate for and against religious belief, political position, or
charitable activities; and
4. Permitting truthful and non-misleading door-to-door and on street solicitation regarding
lawful goods or services in intrastate or interstate commerce.
C. The City finds that the procedures, rules and regulations set forth in this chapter are narrowly
tailored to preserve and protect the City interests referred to herein while at the same time balancing
the rights of those regulated.
II. DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates
or requires a different meaning.
CANVASSING. Canvassing includes the act of any person, whether a resident of the City or not, traveling
by foot, vehicle or other type of conveyance to go from place to place, from house to house or street to
street by;
A. Conducting a poll, survey or petition drive; or
B. Sharing, communicating or otherwise conveying ideas, views or beliefs; or
C. Disseminating oral or written information to a person willing to directly receive such
information, for the political, religious, charitable purposes or otherwise.
CANVASSER. Shall mean any person, firm, corporation or entity including agents and employees of any
firm, corporation or entity whether a resident of the City or not, who engages in canvassing.
CHARITABLE. Charitable means patriotic, philanthropic, social service, health, welfare, benevolent,
educational, civic, cultural or fraternal.
COMMERCIAL BUILDING. Any place of business within the City or any structure used by any firm,
corporation or entity for the purpose of sale of any items on a commercial basis.
HANDBILLS. Handbills include any commercial or noncommercial handbill, pamphlet, circular,
newspaper, paper, newsletter, booklet, poster, leaflet, brochure or other printed or written materials
Fairbury Code Ch. 7 Page - 5 Nov-16
that have been cast, deposited, placed, scattered or thrown onto the property of a business or residence
in the absence of a subscription agreement.
HEARING OFFICER. Hearing Officer means the person designated or responsible for hearing and
deciding any appeal relating to or regarding the denial or revocation of a solicitors permit and issuing a
decision as required by this section.
PEDDLER. Any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association corporation, limited liability
company, estate, trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate or other lawful entity, organization, society or
association who or which engages in peddling.
PEDDLING. The selling, bartering or exchanging or the offering for sale, barter or exchange of any
tangible personal property upon or along the streets, highways or public places of the City or from
house to house, whether at one place thereon or from place to place, from any wagon, truck, pushcart
or other vehicle or from movable receptacles of any kind, but shall not include the delivery routes where
the purchaser has previously requested the seller to stop and exhibit his items.
RESIDENCE. Any separate living unit occupied for residential purposes by one or more persons,
contained within any type of building or structure.
SOLICITOR. Any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association corporation, limited liability
company, estate, trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate or other lawful entity, organization, society or
association who or which engages in solicitation.
SOLICITATION. Solicitation occurs when a Solicitor travels by foot, vehicle, or any other type of
conveyance, from place to place, house to house or from street to street while engaging in one or more
of the following activities:
1. Seeking to obtain orders for the purchase of goods, wares, merchandise, personal property
or services, of any kind, character or description for any kind of remuneration or consideration
regardless of advance payment of sought.
2. Seeking to obtain prospective customers for application or purchase of insurance of any type.
3. Seeking to obtain prospective customers or clients for application or purchase of stocks,
bonds, mutual funds or other investments.
4. Seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals, newspapers and every other
type or kind of publication.
5. Seeking to obtain gifts or contributions of money, clothing or other property of value for the
support or benefit, in whole or in part, of any charitable or nonprofit association, organization,
corporation, or project.
6. Delivery of hand bills.
Fairbury Code Ch. 7 Page - 6 Nov-16
7. Seeking to engage an individual in conversation at a residence or commercial building for the
purpose of promoting or facilitating the receipt of information regarding religious belief,
political position or charitable conduct.
8. Activities falling within the definition of canvassing.
9. Activities falling within the definition of peddling.
III. PERMIT REQUIRED
Unless otherwise authorized, permitted or exempted, pursuant to the terms and provisions of this
section, being in or upon a private residence or commercial property or on a public street within the City
by a Solicitor for the purpose of solicitation is prohibited and is punishable as set forth in this Chapter.
A. APPLICATION FOR PERMITS; QUALIFICATIONS
No person shall engage in the act of solicitation, unless such person obtains a permit from the City Clerk,
or his or her designee. The application for the permit, as provided by the City, shall contain information
about the Solicitor including the following:
1. The applicant’s name, telephone number, and home address and length of residence at such
address;
2. Applicant’s home address during the past three years if other than applicant’s present home
address;
3. Applicant’s present local address if other than applicant’s home address;
4. Applicant’s business address if other than present home or local address;
5. Applicant’s date of birth;
6. Applicant must provide a photo copy of applicant’s driver’s license or identification card
issued by any state.
7. Applicant must provide vehicle(s) make, model, color and license plate number(s) of all
vehicles used during solicitation.
8. If employed or acting as an agent, the name, address and telephone number of the employer
or principal who is being represented, as well as credentials in written form establishing the
relationship and the authority of the employee or agent to act for the employer or the principal;
9. The name and address of the applicant’s employer/principal during the past three years if
other than the present employer/principal.
10. A description sufficient for identification of the subject matter of the solicitation which the
applicant will engage in;
11. The date of the latest previous application for a permit under this chapter, if any;
Fairbury Code Ch. 7 Page - 7 Nov-16
12. Whether a permit issued to the applicant under this chapter has ever been revoked and if so
when and the reason for the revocation;
13. Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a violation of any other provision of the
City’s Code of Ordinances or the code of any other municipality regulating solicitation;
14. A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any criminal offense
under any state law or federal law of the United States whether felony or misdemeanor, other
than traffic violations. As to any such offense, the applicant must provide the date and place of
conviction, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty imposed;
15. The names of the last cities or villages, not exceeding three, where applicant has carried on
business immediately preceding the date of application and the address(es) from which the
business was conducted in those municipalities;
16. Two photographs of the applicant will be taken by the City of Fairbury Police Department
personnel at the time application is made;
17. Proof of possession of any license or permit which, under federal, state or local laws and
regulations, the applicant is required to have in order to conduct the proposed business, or
which, under any such laws or regulations, would exempt the applicant from the permit
requirements of this chapter. If a charitable solicitation, applicant shall show compliance with
the Solicitation for Charity Act, 225 ILCS 460/0.01 et seq;
18. The application shall contain a waiver of liability, allowing the City to investigate and verify
the information contained in the application;
19. The application shall be verified, under oath, by the applicant stating that the information
contained therein is true and correct.
B. EXEMPTIONS
The following are exempt from obtaining a solicitor’s permit and from registering with the City;
1. Persons specifically invited to a residence or a commercial building by a competent individual
prior to the time of the person’s arrival at the residence or commercial building.
2. Person delivering goods to a residence or commercial building pursuant to a previously made
order, or persons providing services at a residence or commercial building to a previously made
request by a competent individual.
3. Persons advocating or disseminating information for, against or in conjunction with any
religious belief, or political position.
4. Those seeking to obtain from an occupant of any residence or business, an indication of the
occupant’s belief in regard to any political or religious matter.
5. Those who canvas door to door.
6. Those who distribute handbills.
Fairbury Code Ch. 7 Page - 8 Nov-16
7. A person 18 years of age and under, who is participating in a fund raising program for, or
sponsored by, a public or private elementary, high school or bon-a-fide children’s organization,
including, without limitation, Boy Scouts, Girl Scouts or youth sports.
8. A charitable solicitor other than a charitable organization soliciting on City streets (see Section
on SOLICITATION ON STREETS BY CHARITABLE ORGANIZATIONS). The charitable solicitor,
however, shall comply with the Solicitation for Charity Act, 225ILCS 460/0.01 et. seq. if
applicable.
Those who are exempt from obtaining a solicitor’s permit or from registering with the City must comply
with the Regulations and Prohibitions and the Duty to Observe the No Solicitors signs as provided below.
C. ISSUANCE OF PERMIT
The City Clerk, after consideration of the application and all information obtained relative thereto, shall
issue the permit if the applicant possesses the qualifications for such permit as herein required and the
issuance of a permit to the applicant would be in accord with the intent and purposes of this chapter.
The permit shall be issued for the calendar year in which the application is filed. The permit shall be
issued within 15 business days of the receipt of the application and shall expire on December 31 of the
year for which it was issued. The solicitor shall surrender the permit to the City Clerk upon its expiration
unless renewed by the Clerk.
D. CREDENTIALS
Upon approval of the application for a permit, as hereinbefore stated, the City Clerk shall issue
credentials to the applicant which credentials shall be issued over the name of the City Clerk, and to
which shall be appended a photograph of the applicant. Such credentials must be worn by the solicitor
within the City when soliciting. The credentials will be worn in such a manner as to be readily visible to
all individuals being solicited.
E. FEE
A permit applicant must pay a non-refundable application fee in the amount of Fifty Dollars ($50.00)
payable to the City of Fairbury (money order, in-state business check, cashier’s check or exact change
cash only). In addition, each person to whom a permit is issued shall pay an annual fee of Fifty ($50.00)
(money order, cashier’s check, in-state business check or exact change cash only). Once a permit is
issued, the solicitor may annually renew the permit for the following year, by paying, to the City, a
renewal fee of Fifty ($50.00) (money order, cashier’s check, in-state business check or exact change cash
only) by no later than December 31 in the year in which the permit is to expire. In addition the solicitor
shall confirm the information contained within the initial application and advise the City of Fairbury of
any changes with regard to the information. Should the solicitor fail to renew the annual permit, he shall
be required to reapply for a new permit.
F. REGULATIONS AND PROHIBITIONS.
Unless otherwise noted herein, the following shall apply to all solicitors, including those exempt from
obtaining a solicitor’s permit or from registering with the City.
A. Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any residence or commercial building, whether
invited or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises when requested to do
so by the occupant.
Fairbury Code Ch. 7 Page - 9 Nov-16
B. It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person, whether
issued a permit under this section or not, to solicit on a public street or to go upon any premises
and ring the doorbell upon or near any door of a residence or commercial building located
thereon, or rap or knock upon any door, or create any sound in any other manner calculated to
attract attention of the occupant of such residence or commercial building for the purpose of
securing an audience with the occupant thereof, and engage in soliciting as herein defined, at
any time less than 30 minutes after sunrise or 30 minutes before sunset.
Further, it shall be unlawful to engage in soliciting at any time Sunday or any state or national
holiday.
This provision shall not apply to solicitation on streets by charitable organizations, as provided in
section SOLICITATION ON STREETS BY CHARITABLE ORGANIZATIONS herein.
Further, canvassing may take place during daylight hours only.
C. Except as provided in section SOLICITATION ON STREETS BY CHARITABLE ORGANIZATIONS, no
solicitor shall solicit in a City street or highway located within the City.
D. No solicitor shall represent in any manner that the City or its departments or officers have
indorsed the permit holder or the products, services or causes on behalf of which individuals are
being solicited without the written consent of the City Clerk.
E. No solicitor shall willfully obstruct the movement of any person on any street, sidewalk or
other public place.
F. No solicitor shall solicit any person that has objected by words or conduct to such soliciting.
G. No solicitor shall refuse to identify the entity on whose behalf the soliciting is being
conducted when requested to do so by any person contacted by the solicitor or fail to truthfully
state the use(s) to which any solicited item(s) will be put when requested to do so by any person
being solicited.
H. No solicitor shall threaten any injury or damage to any individual who declines to be subject
to any soliciting or who declines to make a purchase, donation or contribution.
I. No solicitor shall directly or indirectly solicit for any purpose by misrepresentation of his or
her name, occupation, financial conditions, social condition, physical or mental health, or
residence and no person shall make or perpetrate any misstatement, deception or fraud in
connection with any soliciting for any purpose.
J. No more than two solicitors shall solicit at a residence or commercial building at any one time.
K. It shall be unlawful for any solicitor, other than the permit holder, to use any permit issued
under the provisions of this Section.
G. NOTICE TO SOLICITORS; DUTY TO OBSERVE.
A. Any occupant of a residence or commercial building may give notice of a desire to refuse
solicitors by displaying a “No Solicitation” or “No Trespassing” or similar sign which shall be
posted on or near the main entrance door or near the property line adjacent to the sidewalk
Fairbury Code Ch. 7 Page - 10 Nov-16
leading to the residence or the commercial building. Such sign shall not exceed the size
parameters specified in the City’s land use ordinance regulating to signs. The display of such sign
shall be deemed to constitute notice to any solicitor that the inhabitant of the residence or
commercial building does not desire to receive and/or does not invite solicitors. It shall be the
responsibility of the solicitor to check such residence or commercial building for the presence of
any such notice.
B. No solicitor shall solicit at any residence or commercial building where the owner or occupant
has provided notice appropriate notice.
C. The provisions of this Section shall apply to all solicitors including those who are exempt from
obtaining a solicitor’s permit or registering with the City.
H. DENIAL OF PERMIT
The City Clerk, after consideration of the application and all information obtained relative
thereto, shall deny the application if the applicant does not possess the qualifications for such
permit as herein required, and the issuance of a permit to the applicant would not be in accord
with the intent and purposes of this chapter. Endorsement of the denial shall be made by the
City Clerk upon the application.
I. REVOCATION OF PERMIT
Any permit issued hereunder may be revoked by the City Clerk for any of the following reasons:
1. Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for a permit.
2. Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made by the permitee in the course of conducting
solicitation activities.
3. Conducting solicitation activities contrary to the provisions contained in the permit.
4. Conviction of a felony or any crime involving moral turpitude subsequent to the issuance of a
permit.
5. Conducting solicitation activities in such a manner as to create a public nuisance constitute a
breach of the peace or endanger the health, safety or general welfare of the public.
6. Going upon the premises of a residence or commercial building in violation of this section.
IV. SOLICITATION ON STREETS BY CHARITABLE ORGANIZATIONS
A charitable organization which is either based in the City of Fairbury, or maintains a business or office in
the City of Fairbury shall, through its representatives and or members, be permitted to solicit at the
intersections of the City streets without obtaining a solicitor’s permit but shall be required to register
with the City Clerk and provide the following information.
A. Name address and telephone number of the group or organization.
B. Name address and telephone number a contact person for the group or organization.
C. The purpose of the solicitations to be conducted in the City.
D. A list of the names of the persons acting on behalf of the group or organization.
E. Provide proof of compliance with the Solicitation for Charity Act 225ILCS 460/0.01et. seq, if
applicable.
Fairbury Code Ch. 7 Page - 11 Nov-16
Solicitation shall be allowed only under the following conditions.
1. Solicitations may only be set up at intersections controlled by stop signs and as designated by
the Chief of Police and the City Clerk. They are not permitted at intersections controlled by
electronic traffic signals.
2. Each individual participating in the event shall be at least 16 years of age and will wear a
reflective vest.
3. The charitable organization or corporation shall be liable for any injuries to any person or
property during the solicitation which is casually related to an act of ordinary negligence of the
solicitor; shall hold the City harmless from any claim of said person(s); shall provide the City
with evidence that the charitable organization is insured for One Millions Dollars
($1,000,000.00) through an insurance company licensed to do business in Illinois and has
named the City as an additional insured.
4. The solicitor shall comply with Section III: F. REGULATIONS AND PROHIBITIONS.
5. Solicitation may be conducted on weekends only. For the purpose of this section a weekend
shall mean Friday, Saturday and Sunday.
6. The applicant shall be entitled to solicit a total of two (2) non-consecutive weekends in any
calendar year.
7. The solicitation shall take place on no more than two (2) days of the weekend with the total
hours of solicitation, per weekend, not exceed 8 hours. The applicant may divide this time over
the two (2) day period.
8. Solicitation will not be permitted on the consecutive weekends whether by the same or
different applicant. However should weather or other unforeseen circumstances prevent the
charitable organization from conducting their scheduled solicitation, the City shall have the
discretion to permit the applicant to conduct a solicitation on another weekend even if the
solicitation would result in a solicitation taking place on consecutive weekends.
9. Solicitation will be permitted only between one-half hour after sunrise and one-half hour
before sunset.
V. SOLICITOR’S BOND
A. Surety Bond. The applicant’s employer or principal or if none, the applicant himself shall, before a
permit is issued to the applicant, file with the City a Surety Bond in the amount of Ten Thousand Dollars
($10,000.00) covering the applicant’s employer or principal, as the case may be, or if none the applicant
himself. If more than one employee or agent of an employer or principal is issued a permit under this
Chapter the Bond shall cover all such employees or agents. The Bond shall condition that the applicant
shall comply fully with the ordinances of the City and statutes of the State of Illinois regulating the
solicitors, and guaranteeing to the residents of this City of Fairbury that all money paid to the applicant
or his employer or principal will be accounted for or applied according to the representations of the
applicant, and further guaranteeing to the residents of the City doing business with the applicant that
the property purchased will be delivered according to the representations of the applicant. Actions on
such Bond may be brought by the person aggrieved and for whose benefit among others the Bond is
Fairbury Code Ch. 7 Page - 12 Nov-16
given. Any person injured by the breach of conditions of such surety bond may make application to the
City to recover legal damages suffered by reason of such breach; provided that the aggregate recovery
from such surety bond for all such damages shall, in no event, exceed the sum of said surety bond.
Where the legal damage suffered by an injured person exceeds the amount recovered by the surety
bond, such partial recovery shall, in no way, prejudice the right of the injured person to proceed directly
against the solicitor for such excess damages.
VI. PENALTY
Whoever violates any provisions of this section for which another penalty is not specifically provided,
shall be penalized as provided in City’s Code of Ordinances of the City of Fairbury.
VII. MAINTENANCE OF REGISTRY
The City Clerk shall maintain and make available, for public inspection and copy, a record of every
completed application received and the permit issued by the City or the denial or revocation of same.
The applicant’s background check shall remain a confidential, protected, private record not available for
public inspection.
VIII. PROVISIONS SEVERABLE
The provisions of this Ordinance are severable; and the invalidity of any provision of this Ordinance shall
not affect the validity of other provisions thereof; and such other provisions shall remain in full force
and effect as long as they remain valid in the absence of those provisions determined to be invalid.
.16 PENALTY.
Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a Class C
Misdemeanor as provided in Illinois Revised Statutes, and penalized accordingly. Furthermore, the
violation of this chapter is declared to be a public nuisance to be abated in the manner provided by law.
.17 SEVERABILITY.
If any portion of this Chapter is found to be unconstitutional, such finding shall not affect the remaining
sections.
.18 USE OF MOTOR VEHICLES FOR THE COMMISSION OF CERTAIN OFFENSES
(a) Definitions.
For purposes of this Section, and the interpretation and enforcement thereof, the words, terms and
phrases set forth below shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this paragraph as
follows.
1. “Motor Vehicle’ means every vehicle which is self-propelled, including but not limited to automobiles,
trucks, vans, motorcycles, and motor scooters.
2. “Owner of Record’ means, collectively, the record title holder or holders of the Motor Vehicle.
(b) Violations; exceptions.
1. The Owner of Record of any Motor Vehicle shall be liable to the City of Fairbury, Illinois, for an
administrative penalty in the amount of Three Hundred Fifty Dollars ($350.00), plus any applicable
towing and storage fees payable to a towing agent, whenever any such Motor Vehicle is used in the
Fairbury Code Ch. 7 Page - 13 Nov-16
commission of any of the following offenses and any Motor Vehicle used in the commission of any
such offenses shall be subject to seizure and impoundment as provided in this Section:
(i) the knowing possession of more than 30 grams of cannabis as provided in Section 4 of the
Cannabis Control Act (720 ILCS 550/4) or the knowing possession of a controlled substance as
provided in Section 402 of the Illinois Controlled Substances Act (720 ILCS 570/402)
(ii) driving under the influence of alcohol, drugs and/or intoxicating compounds as provided in
Section 11-501 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/11-501).
(iii) driving on a suspended or revoked license as defined in Section 5/6-303 of the Illinois Vehicle
Code (625 ILCS 5/6-303).
2. For purposes of this Section, a Motor Vehicle is not considered to have been used in a violation,
that would render such Motor Vehicle eligible for seizure and impoundment if: (1) the Motor Vehicle
used in the violation was stolen at the time and the theft was reported to the appropriate police
authorities within 24 hours after the theft was discovered or reasonably should have been
discovered; (2) the Motor Vehicle was operating as a commercial carrier and the violation occurred
without the knowledge of the person in control of the Motor Vehicle: or (3) the alleged Owner of
Record provides adequate proof that the Motor Vehicle had been sold to another person prior to the
violation
3. If an administrative penalty is imposed against the Owner of Record of a vehicle pursuant to Section
(b)1 above, and if the person who was charged with the offense which led to the imposition of said
administrative penalty is later found to be not guilty of said offense, then the administrative penalty
shall be refunded to the Owner of Record of said vehicle. The Owner of Record shall apply to the
Chief of Police of the City of Fairbury for said refund and the Chief of Police shall approve said
refund upon receiving proof of said finding of not guilty.
(c) Seizure and Impoundment.
Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a Motor Vehicle is subject to seizure and
impoundment pursuant to Paragraph (b) of this Section such police officer shall provide for the towing
of such Motor Vehicle to a facility designated by the City of Fairbury, Illinois. Before or at the time the
Motor Vehicle is towed, the police officer shall notify the Owner of Record or the person in control of
the Motor Vehicle at the time of the alleged violation, whichever is present if there is such a person, of
the fact of the seizure and impoundment and of the right of the Owner of Record to request a vehicle
impoundment hearing under this Chapter
(d) Notice.
Within 72 hours after a Motor Vehicle is seized and impounded pursuant to paragraph (c) of this
Section, the police department shall notify by certified mail the Owner of Record and any lien holder of
record of the fact of the seizure and impoundment and the right to request a Motor Vehicle
impoundment hearing under this Chapter. However, no such notice need be sent to the Owner of
Record if the Owner of Record is personally served with the notice at the time the Motor Vehicle is
seized and impounded and the Owner of Record acknowledges receipt of such notice in writing. A
copy of such notice shall be forwarded to the hearing officer. The notice shall state the penalties that
may be imposed if no hearing is requested, including that a Motor Vehicle not released by payment of
the administrative penalty and applicable towing and storage fees may be sold or disposed of by the
City of Fairbury, Illinois, in accordance with applicable law.
(e) Hearing.
The Owner of Record seeking a vehicle impoundment hearing shall file a written request for such a
hearing with the Police Department of the City of Fairbury, Illinois, no later than 15 days after notice
Fairbury Code Ch. 7 Page - 14 Nov-16
was mailed or otherwise given to the Owner of Record under paragraphs (c) or (d) of this Section. The
hearing date shall be no more than 10 calendar days after a request for a vehicle impoundment
hearing has been filed. If, after the vehicle Impoundment hearing, the hearing officer determines by a
preponderance of the evidence that the Motor Vehicle was used in the violation, the hearing officer
shall enter an order finding the Owner of Record liable to the City of Fairbury, Illinois, for the amount of
the administrative penalty prescribed, plus applicable towing and storage fees payable to the towing
agent. If, after a hearing, the hearing officer does not determine by a preponderance of the evidence
that the Motor Vehicle was used in such a violation, the hearing officer shall enter an order finding
for the Owner of Record and for the return of the Motor Vehicle and any previously paid administrative
penalty and applicable towing and storage fees: provided that if the Motor Vehicle was seized and
impounded pursuant to state or federal drug asset forfeiture laws, the Motor Vehicle shall not be
returned unless and until the City of Fairbury, Illinois, receives notice from the appropriate state, or
where applicable, federal officials that (i) forfeiture proceedings will not be instituted: or (ii) forfeiture
proceedings have concluded and there is a settlement or a court order providing that the Motor
Vehicle shall be returned to the Owner of Record. If the Owner of Record requests a vehicle
impoundment hearing but fails to appear at such hearing or fails to request a vehicle impoundment
hearing in a timely manner, the Owner of Record shall be deemed to have waived his or her right to
such a hearing and the hearing officer shall enter a default order in favor of the City of Fairbury,
Illinois, for the amount of the administrative penalty prescribed, plus applicable towing and storage
fees payable to the towing agent. However, if the Owner of Record pays such administrative penalty
and applicable towing and storage fees and the Motor Vehicle is returned to the Owner of Record, no
default order need be entered if the Owner of Record is informed of his or her right to a hearing and
signs a written waiver, in which case an order of liability shall be deemed to have been made when the
City of Fairbury, Illinois, receives the written waiver
(f) Hearing officer; proceedings.
1. The Mayor or his or her designee shall serve as the hearing officer for vehicle impoundment
hearings under this Section.
2. All interested persons shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard at any vehicle
impoundment hearing. The formal rules of evidence will not apply at any such hearing.
3. Any sworn or affirmed report, including a report prepared in compliance with Section 11-501.1 of the
Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/11-501 .1) that (1) is prepared in the performance of a law
enforcement officer’s duties and (2) sufficiently describes the circumstances leading to the
impoundment, shall be admissible evidence of the Owner of Record’s liability under paragraph (b)
of this Section and shall support a finding of the Owner of Record’s liability under paragraph (b) of
this Section unless rebutted by clear and convincing evidence.
(g) Disposition of impounded vehicle.
An administrative penalty imposed pursuant to this Chapter shall constitute a debt due and owing the
City of Fairbury, Illinois, which may be enforced in any manner provided by law. Except as otherwise
provided in this Chapter, a Motor Vehicle impounded pursuant to this Chapter shall remain impounded
until (1) the administrative penalty is paid in full to the City of Fairbury, Illinois, and all applicable towing
and storage fees are paid to the towing agent, in which case the Owner of Record shall be given
possession of the Motor Vehicle, (2) a cash bond in the amount of $350.00 is posted with the City of
Fairbury, Illinois, and all applicable towing and storage fees are paid to the towing agent, at which time
the Motor Vehicle shall be released to the Owner of Record, or (3) the Motor Vehicle is sold or
otherwise disposed of to satisfy a judgment or enforce a lien as provided by law. Notwithstanding any
other provision of this Section, whenever a person with a lien of record against a Motor Vehicle
impounded under this Section has commenced foreclosure proceedings, possession of the Motor
Vehicle shall be given to that person if he or she pays the applicable towing and storage fees and
agrees in writing to refund to the City of Fairbury, Illinois, the net proceeds of any foreclosure sale, less
any amounts necessary to pay all lien holders of record, up to the total amount of administrative
Fairbury Code Ch. 7 Page - 15 Nov-16
penalties imposed under this Section. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Section, no vehicle
that was seized and impounded pursuant to state or federal drug asset forfeiture laws shall be
returned to the Owner of Record unless and until the City of Fairbury, Illinois, has received notice from
the appropriate state, or where applicable, federal officials that (i) forfeiture proceedings will not be
instituted: or (ii) forfeiture proceedings have concluded and there is a settlement or a court order
providing that the vehicle shall be returned to the Owner of Record.
(h) Posting of bond.
If a cash bond in the amount of $350.00 is posted with the City of Fairbury, Illinois, the Impounded
Motor Vehicle shall be released to the Owner of Record upon the payment of any applicable towing
and storage fees to the towing agent. If an administrative penalty is imposed for any violation under
paragraph (b) of this Section, the $350.00 cash bond will be forfeited to the City of Fairbury, Illinois;
however, in the event a violation under paragraph (b) of this Section, is not proven by preponderance
of the evidence, the $350.00 cash bond will be returned to the person posting the bond. All bond
money to be forfeited to the City of Fairbury, Illinois, pursuant to this Section shall be held by the City
of Fairbury, Illinois, until 30 days after an administrative penalty is imposed by the hearing officer
under this Section, or, if there is a judicial review, until such judgment is rendered by a court of
competent jurisdiction.
(i) Failure to pay penalty.
If the administrative penalty and applicable towing and storage fees are not paid within 30 days
after an administrative penalty is imposed under this Section against an Owner of Record who
defaults by failing to appear at the vehicle impoundment hearing, the Motor Vehicle shall be
deemed unclaimed and shall be disposed of in the manner provided by law for the disposition of
unclaimed vehicles. In all other cases, if the administrative penalty and applicable towing and
storage fees are not paid within 30 days after the expiration of time at which administrative review
of the hearing officer’s determination may be sought, or within 30 days after an action seeking
administrative review has been resolved in favor of the City of Fairbury, Illinois, whichever is
applicable, the Motor Vehicle shall be deemed unclaimed and shall be disposed of in the manner
provided by law for the disposition of unclaimed vehicles; provided that, if the Motor Vehicle was
seized and impounded pursuant to state or federal drug asset forfeiture laws and proceedings have
been instituted under state or federal drug asset forfeiture laws, the Motor Vehicle may not be
disposed of by the City of Fairbury, Illinois, except as consistent with those proceedings.
.19 ESTABLISHING HALLOWEEN TRICK OR TREAT HOURS
Trick or Treat hours for Halloween shall be from 4:00 p.m. to 8:00 p.m. on October 31 of every year
beginning in 2011.
Fairbury Code Ch. 8 Page - 1 Dec-19
CHAPTER 8
LIQUOR, TOBACCO AND GAMING
.01 DEFINITIONS.
Terms used in this chapter mean as follows:
Alcohol means the product of distillation of any fermented liquid, whether rectified or diluted, whatever
may be the origin thereof, and includes synthetic ethyl alcohol. It does not include denatured alcohol or
wood alcohol.
Alcoholic Liquor includes alcohol, spirits, wine and beer, and every liquid or solid, patented or not,
containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and capable of being consumed as a beverage by a human
being. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to alcohol used in the manufacture of denatured
alcohol produced in accordance with Acts of Congress and regulations promulgated thereunder, nor to
any liquid or solid containing one-half of one percent, or less of alcohol by volume. No tax provided for in
Illinois Revised Statutes 35 ILCS 5/Article VIII shall apply to wine intended for use and used by any
church or religious organization for sacramental purposes, provided that such wine shall be purchased
from a licensed manufacturer or importing distributor under provisions of the Illinois “Liquor Control Act”
(235 ILCS 5/1-1, et seq.).
Beer means a beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or concoction of barley, or
other grain, malt, and hops in water, and includes, among other things, beer, ale, stout, lager, beer, porter
and the like.
Club means a corporation organized under the laws of this state, not for pecuniary profit, solely for the
promotion of some common object other than the sale or consumption of alcoholic liquors which conforms
to the definition of a club, as provided by Illinois Revised Statutes, 235 ILCS 5/1-3.24, commonly known
as “Liquor Control Act” as amended.
Manufacturer means every brewer, fermenter, distiller, rectifier, wine maker, blender, processor, bottler or
person who fills or refills an original package, whether for himself or for another, and others engaged in
brewing, fermenting, distilling, rectifying or bottling alcoholic liquors.
Person means Natural person, join venture, join stock company, partnership, association, club, company,
corporation, business, limited liability company, trust or organization, or the manager, lessee, agent,
servant, officer or employee of any of them.
Retailer means a person who sells, or offers for sales, alcoholic liquor for use or consumption and not for
resale in any form.
Sale means any transfer, exchange or barter in any manner, or by any means whatsoever, including the
transfer of alcoholic liquors by and through the transfer or negotiation of warehouse receipts or
certificates, and includes and means all sales made by any person, whether principal, proprietor, agent,
servant or employee. The term “sale” includes any transfer of alcoholic liquor from a foreign importer’s
license to an importing distributor’s license even if both licenses are held by the same person.
Sell at retail and Sale at retail refer to and mean sales for use or consumption and not for resale in any
form.
Spirits means any beverage which contains alcohol obtained by distillation, mixed with water or other
substance in solution, and includes brandy, rum, whiskey, gin or other spirituous liquors, and such liquors
when rectified, blended or otherwise mixed with alcohol or other substances.
Wine means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the natural contents of fruits, or
vegetables, containing sugar, including such beverages when fortified by the addition of alcohol or spirits,
as above defined.
Fairbury Code Ch. 8 Page - 2 Dec-19
.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail in the City any alcoholic liquor without having a retail
liquor dealer’s license, or in violation of the terms of such license.
.03 APPLICATION.
Applications for such license shall be made to the local Liquor Control Commissioner in writing, signed by
the applicant, if an individual, or by a duly authorized agent thereof, if a corporation, verified by oath or
affirmation, and shall be addressed to the Mayor and City Council. Before granting a new license or
reviewing a current license, the Liquor Control Commissioner shall place in a newspaper of general
circulation in the City of Fairbury a Notice stating the date, time and location of hearing on such license
application or review. A Notice containing the same information shall also be posted at City Hall in an
area of general public access. Notice of the same Information shall also be given to adjacent property
owners in a manner to be determined by the Alcohol/Tobacco Committee. The applications for license
shall contain the following statements and information: (2001-3)
1. The name, age, and address of the applicant in the case of any individual; in the case of a
corporation, the objects for which organized, the names and addresses of the officers and
directors, and if a majority interest of the stock of such corporation is owned by one person or his
nominee, the name and address of such person; in the case of a co-partnership, the person
entitled to share in the profits thereof.
2. The citizenship of the applicant, his place of birth, and if a naturalized citizen, the time and place
of his naturalization.
3. The character of business of the applicant, and in the case of a corporation, the objects for which
it was formed.
4. The length of time the applicant has been in business of that character, or in the case of a
corporation, the date when its charter was issued.
5. The amount of goods, wares, and merchandise on hand at the time application is made.
6. The location and description of the premises or place of business which is to be operated under
the license.
7. A statement whether applicant has made application for a similar or other license on premises
other than described in the application, and the disposition of the application.
8. A statement that applicant will not allow gambling devices on the premises except for video
gaming devices for which the applicant obtains a license or permit from the Illinois Department of
Revenue pursuant to the Illinois Video Gaming Act, 230 ILCS 40/1 et seq. so long as such video
gaming is conducted in compliance with all requirements of said Act and all rules and regulations
of the Illinois Department of Revenue.(2012-6)
9. A statement that applicant has never been convicted of a felony and is not disqualified to receive
a license by reason of any matter or thing contained in this chapter, the laws of this state, or of
the United State of America, or the ordinances of this City.
10. Whether a previous license by any state or subdivision thereof, or by the federal government has
been revoked, and the reasons therefore.
11. A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the laws of the State of Illinois, or of the
United State, or any ordinance of the City in the conduct of his place of business.
12. A statement that he has not received or borrowed money or anything else of value, and that he
will not receive or borrow money or anything else of value directly or indirectly from any
manufacturer, importing distributor or distributor or representative of any of them except as may
be provided by the Illinois Revised Statutes, 235 ILCS 5/1-1, et seq.
.04 RESTRICTION ON LICENSES.
(a) No such license shall be issued to:
1. A person who is not a resident of the City of Fairbury.
2. A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community in which he resides.
3. A person who is not an adult citizen of the United States.
4. A person who has been convicted of a felony under any federal or state law.
Fairbury Code Ch. 8 Page - 3 Dec-19
5. A person who has been convicted of being the keeper or is keeping a house of ill-fame.
6. A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or misdemeanor opposed to
decency and morality.
7. A person whose license under this chapter has been revoked for cause.
8. A person who at the time of application for renewal of any license issued hereunder would not be
eligible for such license upon a first application.
9. A co-partnership, unless all of the members of such co-partnership shall be qualifiedly to obtain a
license.
10. A corporation, if any officer, manager, or director thereof, or any stockholder or stockholders
owning in the aggregate more than five percent of the stock of such corporation, would not be
eligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason other than citizenship and residence within
the political subdivision.
11. A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent unless the manager or
agent possesses the same qualifications required of the licensee.
12. A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal of state law concerning the
manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor or who shall have forfeited his bond to appear
in court to answer charges for any such violation.
13. A person who does not own the premises for which a license is sought, or does not have a lease
thereon for the full period for which the license is to be issued.
14. Any law enforcing public official, any Mayor or member of the City Council; and no such official
shall be interested in any way, either directly or indirectly, in the manufacture, sale or distribution
of alcoholic liquor.
15. Any person, firm or occupation not eligible for a state retail liquor dealer’s license.
16. A person who is not a beneficial owner of the business to be operated by the license.
(b) Each person desiring a license under this Chapter shall execute a penal bond in form and with a
security satisfactory to the Mayor and City Council, conditioned on the faithful observance of the
provisions of laws of the State of Illinois, and of this Code. Said bond shall be in the penal sum of
$1,000.00 and shall, upon approval, be filed with the City Clerk. Said bond shall be maintained in
effect as long as the person has a retail liquor dealer’s license, unless the bond is waived as herein
provided. At any time that a retail liquor dealer’s license is renewed, the Mayor may waive the
requirement for said penal bond if the license holder has not committed any violation of his license or
of the provisions of the laws of the State of Illinois or of this Code during the year immediately
preceding the license renewal. If the requirement for said bond has been waived at any time for the
license holder, and such license holder shall thereafter violate the terms of his license or the provision
of laws of the State of Illinois or of this Code, then the Mayor shall, at the next license renewal,
require the license holder to again execute the bond required by this Section. Said bond shall
thereafter be maintained in effect unless it is later waived as provided above. (1989-2)
.05 TERM: PRORATING FEE.
A retail liquor dealer’s license shall terminate on April 30 next following its issuance. The fee to be paid
shall be reduced in proportion to the full calendar months which have expired in the year prior to the
issuance of the license.
.06 CLASSIFICATION; FEES.
(a) There shall be only one class of retail liquor dealer’s licenses issued by the City of Fairbury, namely
Class A. (2014-4)
(b) 1. Class A retail liquor dealer’s licenses shall authorize the retail sale, on the premises specified in
said license, of any and all alcoholic liquors for consumption on or off the premises where sold. The
annual fee for such licenses shall be $700.00. There shall be no more than twelve Class A retail
liquor dealer’s licenses. (2014-4)
2. Each Class A retail liquor dealer license shall authorize retail sales of any and all alcoholic liquors
either (1) for consumption on the premises where sold only, or (2) for consumption on the premises
where sold or as packaged goods for consumption off the premises where sold. Every applicant for a
Class A license shall designate whether he desires a license (1) authorizing sale for consumption on
the premises where sold only or (2) for consumption on the premises where sold or as packaged
Fairbury Code Ch. 8 Page - 4 Dec-19
goods for consumption off the premises where sold. Once issued, a Class A retail liquor dealer’s
license cannot be changed from one category to another without filing an application requesting such
change in the same manner as an application for a new license. (2014-4)
(c) All currently authorized Class B retail liquor dealer’s licenses are hereby reauthorized as Class A
retail liquor dealer’s licenses. The two Class B retail liquor dealer’s licenses which are currently
issued shall be reissued to the holders thereof as Class A retail liquor dealer’s licenses. (2014-4)
(d) A holder of a current liquor license from the City of Fairbury may apply to the Alcohol/Tobacco
Committee for a special use permit to sell at retail at a location in the City of Fairbury other than the
location shown on his license, any alcoholic liquor permitted under his current license subject to the
following conditions:(2001-3)
1. He must have a valid and current license from the State of Illinois for special events. (2001-3)
2. He must have in effect special events insurance and dram shop insurance which would cover
sales other than on the premises permitted under his current license. (2001-3)
3. Such special use permit shall be valid only for specific dates and hours as show thereon. (2001-
3)
4. Such special use permit shall be valid only for the specific location described thereon. (2001-3)
5. Such special use permit shall be subject to all the requirements of the liquor ordinances of the
City of Fairbury. (2001-3)
6. Application for such special use permit must be submitted to the Liquor Control Commissioner at
least fourteen days before the date for which it shall be valid. (2001-3)
7. The Alcohol/Tobacco Committee may condition the granting of a special use permit subject to
such conditions and restrictions as the Committee believes to be in the best interest of the public.
(2001-3)
8. The fee for a special use permit shall be $25.00 per event. (2001-3)
(e) In addition to the fee for retail liquor dealer’s license, each applicant shall also pay the cost of notice
required in Section .03 of this ordinance including but not limited to costs of publication in newspaper
and costs of certified mail, if used. (2001-3)
.07 PREMISES.
Except in the case of clubs, no alcoholic liquor shall be sold at retail upon any premises which has any
access which leads from such premises to any other portion of the same building or structure used for
dwelling or lodging purposes and which is permitted to be used or kept accessible for use by the public.
This provision does not prohibit any connection between such premises and such other portion of the
building or structure which is used only by the licensee, his family and personal guests.
.08 DISPOSITION OF FEES.
All license fees shall be paid to the Local Liquor Control Commissioner at the time application is made,
and shall be forthwith turned over to the Treasurer. In the event that the application is denied, the fee
shall be returned to the applicant. If the license is granted, the fee shall be deposited in the general
corporate fund in a specific line item for drug, alcohol, and tobacco education and shall be used for said
purposes as approved by the Alcohol/Tobacco Committee subject to approval by the City Council. (2001-
3)
.09 DRINKING ON PUBLIC STREETS.
(a) No person shall openly drink or furnish to others any alcoholic liquors to be drunk upon any street,
public place or vacant lot within the City, and no person shall connive at or assist in or procure others
to violate any provision of this chapter.
(b) Persons shall be allowed to openly sell or consume alcohol upon any street, public place, or vacant lot
within the City upon the following conditions: (2016-3)
Fairbury Code Ch. 8 Page - 5 Dec-19
(1) Such sale and consumption shall be allowed only at an event where alcohol is sold by a business
holding a liquor license issued by the City of Fairbury or a business holding a liquor license issued by
the State of Illinois. (2019-10)
(2) The liquor license holder must apply for a permit to be issued by the City Council for such event
and for the sale and consumption of alcohol at such event at least 30 days before the event is to be
held. (2016-3)
(3) To receive such permit the liquor license holder must provide the following information to the City
Council: (2016-3)
(i) The location where the event will be held, the time that it will take place, the time during which
alcohol will be sold and consumed (which must be times allowed for the general sale and
consumption of alcohol by the Fairbury Municipal Code), the time when patrons must finish
consuming alcohol and leave the location of the event, provisions for cleaning up after the
event and, the time that the street, public place, or vacant lot will be reopened for public use.
(2016-3)
(ii) The means by which the liquor license holder intends to keep the sale and consumption of
alcohol confined to the location of the event and to assure that patrons of the event shall not
go on to private property adjacent to the event location. (2016-3)
(iii) The liquor license holder must have a current liquor license from the City of Fairbury or the
State of Illinois and must also purchase a special use permit under Section 8.06(d). (2019-10)
(iv) If the event is held at a location other than the current location of the liquor license holder, the
liquor license holder must contact neighbors of the event location and advise them of the
date, times, and nature of the event. The liquor license holder must advise the City of the
opinions of the neighbors about the date, times, and nature of the event. (2016-3)
(v) The security measures that will be taken to assure that only persons of legal age purchase
and consume alcohol during the event and that no alcohol be consumed except that which is
sold at the event. (2016-3)
(vi) The security measures that will be taken to assure that order will be maintained at the event.
(2016-3)
(vii) The number of porta-potties to be provided. (2016-3)
(4) The liquor license holder must provide special event insurance satisfactory to the City and name
the City of Fairbury as an additional insured. (2016-3)
(5) The liquor license holder must agree to hold the City of Fairbury harmless from and indemnify the
City of Fairbury against any damages, injuries, and claims of damage and injury which may arise from
the event and the sale and consumption of alcohol at the event whether under the Dram Shop Act or
any other means of civil liability. (2016-3)
(6) The granting of permits for such events and for sale or consumption of alcohol upon any street,
public place, or vacant lot within the City at such events shall be discretionary, shall be granted on a
per diem basis only, and may be denied by the City Council for any reason. (2019-10)
.10 RECORDS.
The Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall keep a complete record of all such licenses issued by him,
and shall furnish the City Clerk and Treasurer each with a copy thereof. Upon the issuance of any new
license, or the revocation of any old license, the Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall give written
Fairbury Code Ch. 8 Page - 6 Dec-19
notice of such action to each of these officers within forty-eight (48) hours of such action.
11. TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
(A) A liquor license shall be a purely personal privilege good for not to exceed one year after issuance
unless sooner revoked, and shall not constitute property, nor shall it be subject to attachment,
garnishment, or execution, nor shall it be alienable or transferable, except as provided in section
.11(B) hereof, voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to being encumbered or hypothecated. Such
license shall cease upon the death of the licensee and shall not descend by the laws of testate or
intestate devolution, provided that the executors or administrators of the estate of any deceased
licensee, and the trustee of any insolvent or bankrupt licensee, when such estate consists in part of
alcoholic liquor, may continue the business of the sale or manufacture of alcoholic liquor under order
of the appropriate court, and may exercise the privileges of the deceased or insolvent or bankrupt
licensee after the death of such decedent or such insolvency or bankruptcy, until the expiration of
such license, but not longer than six months after the death, bankruptcy or insolvency of such
licensee. A refund shall be made of that portion of the license fee paid for any period in which the
licensee shall be prevented from operating the license in accordance with the provision of this
section. (2001-3)
(B) Any licensee desiring to transfer a license in good standing may be permitted so to do upon the
specific approval of the Mayor and City Council, provided however that the proposed transferee shall
make application for transfer and be bound by this chapter as though he were the original applicant
for such license and shall, in addition thereto, pay a transfer fee in the amount of $50.00 to the Liquor
Control Commissioner at the time of submission of his application. The transfer of the license shall in
no way affect the annual termination date for the license issued hereunder. (2001-3)
(C) Any sale, transfer, or assignment of more than fifty percent (50%) of the ownership of a business or
partnership shall terminate licenses pursuant to this chapter. In the event that the license is held in
the name of a corporation, the sale, transfer of assignment of fifty percent (50%) of the stock shall
terminate licenses issued pursuant to this section.
.12 CHANGE OF LOCATION.
A liquor license shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquor only in the premises described in the application
and license. Such location may be changed only upon the written permit of the Mayor. No change of
location shall be permitted unless the proposed new location is in compliance with the provisions and
regulations of this chapter.
.13 RENEWAL OF LICENSE.
Any licensee may renew his liquor license at the expiration thereof, provided that he is then qualified to
receive a license and the premises for which such renewal license is sought are suitable for such
purpose; provided further, that the renewal privilege herein provided for shall not be construed as a
vested right which shall in any case prevent the reduction of the number of licenses to be issued within
the City.
.14 PEDDLING.
It shall be unlawful to peddle alcoholic liquor in the City.
.15 SANITARY CONDITIONS.
All premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor, or for the storage of such liquor for sale, shall be
kept in full compliance with the laws or ordinances regulating the condition of promises used for the
storage or sale of food for human consumption.
.16 EMPLOYEES.
It shall be unlawful to employ in any premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor any person who is
afflicted with, or who is a carrier of, any contagious, infectious, or venereal disease; and it shall be
unlawful for any person who is afflicted with or is a carrier of any such disease to work in or about any
premises or to engage in any way in the handling, preparing, or distribution of such liquor.
Fairbury Code Ch. 8 Page - 7 Dec-19
.17 LOCATION RESTRICTIONS.
No liquor license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor within 100 feet of any church,
school, hospital, or home for the aged; provided that this prohibition shall not apply to regularly organized
clubs, or to restaurants, food shops, or other places where the sale of alcoholic liquors is not the principal
business carried on, if such place of business so exempted shall have been established for such
purposes prior to the effective date of this code.
.18 STORES SELLING SCHOOL SUPPLIES, LUNCHES, ETC.
No license shall be issued to any person for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor at any store or other
place of business where the majority of customers are minors of school age or where the principal
business transacted consists of school books, school supplies, food, lunches, or drinks for such minors.
.19 CLOSING HOURS.
(a) It shall be lawful to sell or offer for sale any liquor between the hours of 6:00 am on any day and 1:00
am on the next day, except liquor may be sold until 2:00 am on New Year’s Eve. All liquor retailers
shall ascertain that their patrons have vacated the premises no later than one-half hour after sales
are legally prohibited on any day. (2008-18)
(b) It shall be unlawful to keep open for business or to admit the public to, or permit the public to remain
within, or to permit the consumption of alcoholic liquor in or upon any premises in which alcoholic
liquor is sold at retail during the hours within which the sale of such liquor is prohibited; provided, that
in the case of establishments which make substantial retail sales to the general public of goods other
than alcoholic liquors and also in case of restaurants, and clubs, such establishments, restaurants
and clubs may be kept open for business during such hours, but no alcoholic liquor may be sold to, or
consumed by, the public during such hours. (2008-18)
.20 VIEW FROM THE STREET.
In premises upon which the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the first floor or street level of the
premises is licensed, other than a restaurant or club, no screen, blind, curtain, partition, article or thing
shall be permitted in the windows or upon the doors of such licensed premises nor inside such premises,
which shall prevent a clear view into the interior of such licensed premises from the street, road, or
sidewalk at all times; and no booth, screen, partition, or other obstruction nor any arrangement of lights or
lighting shall be permitted in or about the interior of such premises which shall prevent a clear view of the
entire interior of such premises from the street, road, or sidewalk; in premises upon which the sale of
alcoholic liquor for consumption upon other that the first floor or street level of the premises is licensed,
other than as a restaurant or club, the entrance doors shall in no way be obstructed so as to prevent a full
view of the interior of the premises at all times, and the lighting within the premises shall be sufficient so
as to permit a clear view of, and into the premises. All rooms where liquor is sold for consumption on the
premises shall be continuously lighted during business hours by natural light or artificial white light so that
all parts of the interior of the premises shall be clearly visible. In case the view into any such licensed
premises required by the foregoing provision shall be willfully obscured by the licensee or by him willfully
permitted to be obscured or in any manner obstructed, then such license shall be subject to revocation in
the manner herein provided. In order to enforce the provisions of this section, the Liquor Commissioner
shall have the right to require the filing with him of plans, drawings, and photographs showing the
clearance of the view as above required.
.21 SALE TO MINORS.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to purchase or obtain any alcoholic
liquor in any tavern or other place in the City where alcoholic liquor is sold.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any minor in subsection (a) of this section to misrepresent his age for the
purpose of purchasing or obtaining alcoholic liquor in any tavern or other place in the City where
alcoholic liquor is sold.
(c) 1. It shall be unlawful for any holder of a retail liquor dealer’s license, or his or her agent or
employee, to suffer or permit any minor to be or remain in any room or compartment adjoining or
Fairbury Code Ch. 8 Page - 8 Dec-19
adjacent to or situated in the room or place where such licensed premises is located; provided that
this paragraph shall not apply to any minor who is accompanied by his or her parent or guardian, or to
any licensed premises which derives its principal business from the sale of services or commodities
other than alcoholic liquor.
2. In addition to all other fines and penalties, the Mayor may suspend or revoke the retail liquor
dealer’s license for any violation of this subsection.
(d) It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian to permit any minor child of which he or she may be the
parent or guardian, to violate any of the provisions of this section.
(e) It shall be unlawful to sell, give, or deliver alcoholic liquor to any minor.
.22 PURCHASE OR ACCEPTANCE OF GIFT OF LIQUOR BY PERSONS OF NON-AGE.
(a) Any person to whom the sale, gift or delivery of any alcoholic liquor is prohibited because of age shall
not purchase or accept a gift of such alcoholic liquor or have such alcoholic liquor in his possession.
(b) If a licensee or his agents or employees believes or has reason to believe that a sale or delivery of
any alcoholic liquor is prohibited because of the non-age of the prospective recipient, he shall, before
making such sale or delivery, demand presentation of some form of positive identification, containing
proof of age, issued by a public officer in the performance of his official duties.
(c) No person shall transfer, alter, or deface such an identification card; use the identification card of
another; carry or use a false or forged identification card; or obtain an identification card by means of
false information. No person shall purchase, accept delivery or have possession of alcoholic liquor in
violation of this section. The consumption of alcoholic liquor by any person under 21 years of age is
forbidden.
(d) The possession and dispensing, or consumption by a minor of alcoholic liquor in the performance of a
religious service or ceremony, or the consumption by a minor under the direct supervision and
approval of the parents or parent of such minor in the privacy of a home, is not prohibited by this
chapter.
(e) Any person convicted of violating any of the provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a
Class C Misdemeanor as provided in Illinois Revised Statutes, and penalized accordingly.
.23 EMPLOYEE RESTRICTIONS (MINOR).
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person younger than eighteen years of age to draw, pour, or mix any
alcoholic liquor as an employee of any retail licensee; and no person younger than eighteen years of
age shall at any time attend any bar or draw, pour, mix or sell any alcoholic liquor for consumption on
or off the premises, in any licensed retail premises. (2010-10)
(b) It shall be unlawful for any licensee under this chapter to suffer or permit any person younger than
eighteen years of age in subsection (a) of this section to draw, pour, mix or sell any alcoholic liquor
for consumption on or off the premises, in any licensed retail premises. (2010-10)
.24 SALES TO INTOXICATED PERSONS.
No holder of license under this chapter or any of his employees shall sell alcoholic liquor to any
intoxicated person. Nor shall a holder of a license under this chapter or any of his employees permit any
such person to loiter on the premises described in the license or permit any conduct which shall tend to
disturb the peace or quiet of the neighborhood or the premises. (2001-3)
.25 ENFORCEMENT.
(a) Any law enforcing officer may enter at any time upon any premises licensed hereunder to determine
whether any of the provisions of this chapter, whether any of the rules or regulations adopted by the
Mayor and City Council or by the State of Illinois have been or are being violated, and at such time
may examine the premises of the licensee in connection therewith. Any law enforcing officer may
receive complaint from any citizen within the jurisdiction of the City that any of the provisions of this
chapter or any rules or regulation adopted pursuant hereto have been or are being violated, any may
act upon such complaints in the manner provided.
Fairbury Code Ch. 8 Page - 9 Dec-19
(b) The Liquor Control Commissioner shall have the authority by and with the consent and approval of
the City Council, to make and establish rules and regulations of procedure concerning notice of
hearing and all such matters as may be from time to time necessary.
(c) The Mayor shall be the Liquor Control Commissioner. The Alcohol/Tobacco Committee shall review
the alcohol ordinances of the City of Fairbury, violations of said ordinances, applications for liquor
licenses, recommend to the City Council the disposition of the moneys from the drug/alcohol/tobacco
education line item, perform such other matters as the Liquor Control Commissioner may request of
the Alcohol/Tobacco Committee, and establish procedures as to other relative operations of the
Committee. The Alcohol/Tobacco Committee shall make appropriate recommendations to Liquor
Control Commissioner in regards to all such matters. (2001-3)
.26 REVOCATION. (renumbered in 2001-3)
The Liquor Control Commissioner, with the advice and consent of the Alcohol/Tobacco Committee, may
revoke any retail liquor dealer’s license for any violation of any provision of this chapter or for any
violation of any state law pertaining to the sale of alcoholic liquor, or any applicable rule or regulation
established by the State Liquor Control Commission which is not inconsistent with law. (2001-3)
.27 PENALTY. (renumbered in 2001-3)
(a) Whenever any licensee shall have been convicted by any court of a willful violation of any provision of
this chapter, or of the state law, he shall, in addition to the penalties for such offense, incur a forfeiture
of his local license and all monies that have been paid therefor. The Local Liquor Control
Commissioner shall thereupon revoke his license.
(b) Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a
Class C Misdemeanor as provided in Illinois Revised Statutes, and penalized accordingly.
.28 PROHIBITION ON SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS TO PERSONS UNDER 21. (2019-6)
(a) Definitions:
1. The term “tobacco products” means any cigar, cigarette, electronic cigarette, smokeless tobacco,
tobacco, or any alternative nicotine product in any of its forms. (2019-6)
2. The term “smokeless tobacco” means any finely cut, ground, powdered, or leaf tobacco that is
intended to be placed in the oral cavity.
3. The term “electronic cigarette” means any device that employs a battery or other mechanism to
heat a solution or substance to produce a vapor or aerosol intended for inhalation; any cartridge
or container of a solution or substance intended to be used with or in the device or to refill the
device. (2019-6)
4. The term “alternative nicotine product” means a product or device not consisting of or containing
tobacco that provides for the ingestion in to the body of nicotine, whether by chewing, smoking,
absorbing, dissolving, inhaling, snorting, sniffing, or by any other means. (2019-6)
(b) Prohibition on sale or distribution of tobacco products to persons under 21 years of age and the use
and possession of tobacco products by persons under 21 years of age:
1. No person under 21 years of age shall buy or possess any tobacco products.
2. No person shall sell to, buy for, distribute samples of, or furnish or give any tobacco products to
any person under 21 years of age.
3. No person under 21 years of age may sell any tobacco products at a retail establishment selling
tobacco products. This subsection does not apply to a sales clerk in a family-owned business
which can prove that the sales clerk is in fact a son or daughter of the owner.
(c) Tobacco products may be sold through a vending machine only in the following locations:
1. Places to which persons under 21 years of age are not permitted access. (renumbered 2019-6)
2. Places where alcoholic beverages are sold and consumed on the premises.
3. The term “vending machine” means any mechanical device used or intended to be used for retail
sales of any tobacco products, the operation of which is governed or controlled by the deposit of
Fairbury Code Ch. 8 Page - 10 Dec-19
currency, a coin, or a token. (2019-6)
4. The term “vending machine” means any mechanical device used or intended to be used for retail
sales of any tobacco products, the operation of which is governed or controlled by the deposit of
currency, a coin, or a token.
(d) The sale of tobacco products or the distribution at no charge of tobacco products from a lunch wagon
engaging in any sales activity within 1,000 feet of any public or private elementary or secondary
school grounds is prohibited. For the purpose of this Section, “lunch wagon” means a mobile vehicle
designed and constructed to transport food and from which food is sold to the general public.
(e) Use of identification cards. No person in the furtherance or facilitation of obtaining tobacco products
shall display or use a false or forged identification card or transfer, alter, or deface an identification
card.
(f) Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of sub-sections (a) – (e) of this Section .28 is guilty of
a petty offense and for the first offense shall be fined $200 if his or her employer has a training
program that facilitates compliance with minimum-age tobacco laws. For the second offense in a 24-
month period, the person shall be fined $400, the third offense in a 24-month period, the person shall
be fined $600, and fined $800 for the fourth or any subsequent offense in a 24-month period. (2019-
6)
(g) Display of Warning Signs.
1. No person may sell cigarettes at retail using a cigarette vending machine unless a sign with the
message “SURGEON GENERAL’S WARNING: SMOKING BY PREGNANT WOMEN MAY
RESULT IN FETAL INJURY, PREMATURE BIRTH, AND LOW BIRTH WEIGHT” is displayed in
plain view on the machine.
2. No person may sell or offer to sell cigarettes at retail unless a sign with the message “SURGEON
GENERAL’S WARNING: SMOKING BY PREGNANT WOMEN MAY RESULT IN FETAL
INJURY, PREMATURE BIRTH, AND LOW BIRTH WEIGHT” is posted in a conspicuous place
upon the premises. This subsection (b) does not apply to sales of cigarettes through cigarette
vending machines to which subsection (a) applies.
3. Specifications Regarding Signs. All signs required under this Act shall be printed on white cards
in red letters at least one-half inch in height.
4. Penalties for failure to display warning signs. Failure to display a warning sign as required by this
Section is a business offense for which a fine not to exceed $1,000 may be imposed. Each day of
failure to display a warning sign as required by this Section constitutes a separate offense.
.29 VIDEO GAMING.
(a) DEFINITIONS:
1. BOARD. The Illinois Gaming Board.
2. LICENSED ESTABLISHMENT. Any licensed retail establishment where alcoholic liquor is drawn,
poured, mixed, or otherwise served for consumption on the premises.
3. LICENSED FRATERNAL ESTABLISHMENT. The location where a qualified fraternal organization
that derives its charter from a national fraternal organization regularly meets.
4. LICENSED VETERANS ESTABLISHMENT. The location where a qualified veterans’ organization
that derives its charter from a national veterans’ organization regularly meets.
5. VIDEO GAMING ACT. Gaming (230 ILCS 40/)
6. VIDEO GAMING TERMINAL. Any electronic video game machine that, upon insertion of cash, is
available to play or simulate the play of a video game, including but not limited to video poker, line up, and
blackjack, as authorized by the board utilizing a video display and microprocessors in which the player
may receive free games or credits that can be redeemed for cash. The term does not include a machine
that directly dispenses coins, cash, or tokens or is for amusement purposes only.
.30 VIDEO GAMING TERMINALS ALLOWED.
Fairbury Code Ch. 8 Page - 11 Dec-19
(a) Video gaming terminals are permitted within the corporate limits of the City of Fairbury only if licensed
and registered by the Illinois Gaming Board under the Video Gaming Act.
(b) The number of video gaming terminals permitted to be operated in each establishment licensed by the
Illinois Gaming Board at any time is the number established by the Video Gaming Act.
(c) Regulations of the Illinois Video Gaming Act, 230 Illinois Compiled Statutes 40/1 et seq., as amended,
and title 11 of the Administrative Code, subtitle D, Video Gaming, chapter 1, Illinois Gaming Board, article
1800, Video Gaming (General) (11 Ill. Adm. Code 1800.110 et seq., as amended) be and are hereby
adopted and incorporated by reference herein. Such laws and regulations relating to video gaming, as
amended, are referred to in this chapter collectively as video gaming regulations.
.31 PERMIT REQUIRED.
(a) It shall be unlawful to operate any video gaming terminal in any licensed establishment, licensed
veterans’ establishment, or licensed fraternal establishment within the corporate limits of the City of
Fairbury without having first obtained a video gaming terminal permit signed by the Mayor of the City of
Fairbury. Maximum number of video gaming terminals at such establishment is six.
(b) Each video gaming terminal shall require a separate permit.
.32 FILING OF APPLICATION AND FEE PROVISIONS.
(a) Every applicant for a permit to place a video gaming terminal in a licensed establishment, licensed
veterans’ establishment, or licensed fraternal establishment shall file an application with the Municipal
Clerk upon a form provided by the Clerk.
(b) There is hereby established a $25 annual fee for the operation of each video gaming terminal located
in the City pursuant to the provisions of the Illinois Video Gaming Act.
(c) The annual video gaming terminal fee, as established hereby, shall be paid to the City on or before the
initial date of terminal operation, and for terminals then in operation, on or before April 30th of each year
thereafter. The annual video gaming terminal fee shall not be prorated for periods of less than 12 months.
.33 DISPLAY OF PERMIT.
Every permit issued shall be hung in a conspicuous place in the permitted premises.
.34 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
The Chief of Police, or his designee, has the power to and shall inspect any licensed establishment,
licensed veterans’ establishment, or licensed fraternal establishment within the corporate limits of the City
of Fairbury at such times and intervals as he may deem necessary for the proper enforcement of this
Ordinance.
.35 CONDITIONS OF VIDEO GAMING PERMIT.
(a) In addition to any other conditions or regulations contained in this chapter, each and every video
gaming terminal shall be licensed by the State of Illinois and the license of each and every video gaming
terminal shall be maintained at the licensed premises where the video gaming terminal is operated.
(b) Video gaming terminals shall be placed and every video gaming terminal licensee shall be
responsible to ensure that video gaming terminals are placed and operated in strict compliance with video
gaming regulations, the requirements of this chapter, and any other applicable requirements of law.
.36 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTY.
Persons violating the provisions of this Section will be accountable to the same provisions set
forth in regard to liquor licenses as set forth in this Chapter 8.
Fairbury Code Ch. 9 Page - 1 Dec-11
CHAPTER 9
PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS
.01 PROTECTION OF PARK AND PLAYGROUND PROPERTY.
No person in a park in the city shall willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, or displace or
remove any trees, shrubs, flowers, buildings, tables, benches, fireplaces, railings, paving or paving
material, waterlines or other public utilities or parts or appurtenances thereof, signs, notices or placards
whether temporary or permanent, monuments, stakes, posts, or other boundary markers, or other
structures or equipment, facilities or park property or appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal.
.02 REFUSE.
No person shall bring in, have brought in to a park, or dump, deposit, or leave in a park any bottles,
broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, or refuse, or other trash. No such
refuse or trash shall be left anywhere on the grounds thereof, but shall be placed in the proper
receptacles where these are provided; where receptacles are not so provided, all such rubbish or waste
shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence, and properly disposed of
elsewhere.
.03 OPERATING POLICY.
(a) The City parks shall open daily to the public during the hours of 7:00 A.M. to 10:00 P.M. of any day;
and it shall be unlawful for any person other than City personnel conducting City business therein to
occupy or be present in the park during any hours in which the park is not open to the public, except
as amended by the Committee for Parks upon issuing an application as prescribed in subsection (c)
below.
(b) Any section, part of a park, may be declared closed to the public by the Mayor or the City Council at
any time and for any interval of time, either temporarily or at regular or stated intervals.
(c) Whenever any group, association or organization desires to use the park facilities for a particular
purpose, such as picnics, parties or theatrical or entertainment performances, a representative of the
group, association or organization shall first obtain permission from the City Clerk for such purposes.
The City Council may adopt an application form to be used by the City Clerk for such situations,
assess a fee for the issuance of such permit.
(d) The City Clerk shall grant the application if it appears that the group, association, or organization will
not interfere with the general use of the park by the individual members of the public and if the group,
association or organization meets all other conditions contained in the application. The application
may contain a requirement for an indemnity bond to protect the City from any liability of any kind or
character and to protect the City property from damage.
.04 USE OF PARK AREAS.
(a) No person in a park shall picnic or lunch in a place other than those designated for that purpose.
Attendants shall have the authority to regulate the activities in such areas when necessary to prevent
congestion and to secure the maximum use for the comfort and convenience of all. Visitors shall
comply with any directions given to achieve this end.
(b) No person shall bring into, possess, or consume in any park, parking lot or other city property any
wine, beer or other alcoholic liquor.
(c) (1) Vehicle means every device in, upon, or by which any person, or property is or may be
transported or drawn, either upon or off a highway, except devices moved by human power and
including snowmobiles as defined in the Snowmobile Registration and Safety Act. (2001-13)
(2) Motorized vehicle means every vehicle which is self-propelled except for vehicles moved solely by
human power and motorized wheelchairs. (2001-13)
Fairbury Code Ch. 9 Page - 2 Dec-11
(3) Motorized wheelchair means any self-propelled vehicle, including a three-wheeled vehicle,
designed for and used by a person with disabilities, that is incapable of a speed in excess of 8 miles
per hour on level ground. (2001-13)
(4) Authorized motorized vehicle means city maintenance, mowing, and cleaning vehicles;
emergency police, fire, and ambulance vehicles while responding to a call; and other vehicles as
authorized by the City Superintendent. (2001-13)
(5) It shall be unlawful to ride any horse or other animal or to operate or park a motorized vehicle,
except for authorized motorized vehicles, in any park maintained by the City of Fairbury except in
designated parking areas. (2001-13)
(6) It shall be unlawful to ride any horse or other animal or to operate or park a motorized vehicle,
except for authorized motorized vehicles, on any bicycle/walking trail maintained by the City of
Fairbury. (2001-13)
(d) No person shall ride any bicycle in any park in this town, except on established roads or driveways
therein.
(e) No person shall post or affix any placard, bill, notice, poster or sign upon any structure, tree or thing
within any park of this city, or upon any of the fences or enclosures thereof.
(f) Without permission from the City Council, it shall be unlawful or any person to build, light or maintain
any fire. The term “fire” as used in this subsection shall not be construed to mean or include a fire in
a furnace; stove; boiler; fireplace; charcoal burner, grill or brazier; or in other flame enclosed facilities
constructed of suitable fire proof materials. No person shall leave a picnic area before the fire is
completely extinguished and before all trash in the nature of boxes, paper, cans, bottles, garbage and
other refuse is placed in the disposal receptacles where provided. If no such trash receptacles are
available, then refuse and trash shall be carried away from the park area by the picnicker to be
properly disposed of elsewhere.
.05 PENALTIES.
(A) Any person who violates any part of Chapter 9 of this Code shall be deemed guilty of a Class C
misdemeanor as provided in Illinois Compiled Statutes and shall be subject to a fine up to $500.00 for
each offense. (2001-13)
(B) Any person in violation of Section .04(c) of Chapter 9 of this Code shall be a Class A Misdemeanor as
provided in the Illinois Compiled Statutes and shall be subject to a fine not less than $250.00 nor
more than $1,000.00 for each offense. (2001-13)
(C) Furthermore, the violation of Chapter 9 of this Code is declared to be a public nuisance to be abated
in the manner provided by law. (2001-13)
Fairbury Code Ch. 10 Page - 1 Dec-11
CHAPTER 10
SUBDIVISION AND PLATTING OF LANDS amended in Ordinance 1998-2 dated
March 4, 1998
.01 PURPOSE.
That for the purpose of the present and future development of the City of Fairbury, and for the promotion
of the public health, and the safety, comfort, and welfare of persons living within the territory governed,
the provisions and regulations hereinafter contained which shall govern the subdividing the platting of
lands lying within the corporate limits of the City of Fairbury as now or hereafter existing or within the area
of jurisdiction of Fairbury as now or hereafter established under the provisions of the Statutes of the State
of Illinois, are hereby adopted as part of the Official Plan of the City of Fairbury.
.02 DEFINITION OF TERMS:
For the Purpose of this Chapter, certain words, phrases and terms shall be construed as follows:
ANNEXATION is the process of incorporating certain described property into the City of Fairbury.
BOND shall be in the amount of the Engineers estimate plus 15% engineering and contingencies; of
which 10% is to be retained 1 year after acceptance of subdivision. Bonds shall be approved by the City
Attorney and City Engineer before acceptance by the City. Attorney and City Engineer fees for review of
bonds shall be paid by the subdivider to the City.
CITY is the City of Fairbury, Illinois.
CITY ATTORNEY is the duly appointed attorney for the City of Fairbury.
CITY ENGINEER is a Professional Engineer, employed by the City of Fairbury and licensed to practice in
the State of Illinois.
COUNCIL is the City Council of the City of Fairbury, Illinois.
DOCUMENT RECORDINGS are Final Plat, Annexation Ordinance and other documents as determined
by the City Attorney to be recorded at the County Seat. All recording and attorney fees shall be paid by
the developer.
DRAINAGE EASEMENT shall be those easements recorded for stormwater drainage only.
ENGINEER is a Professional Engineer, employed by the subdivider and licensed to practice in the State
of Illinois.
FINAL PLAT is a drawing of a subdivision which has been accurately surveyed and such survey marked
on the ground so that streets, alleys, blocks, lots, easements or other divisions thereof can be identified.
FIRE LANE is a twenty (20) foot lane used for fire apparatus.
FLOODPLAIN is that area designated by the Flood Insurance Study compiled by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency that is known to be in a flood hazard area.
IRREVOCABLE LETTER OF CREDIT shall be in the amount of the Engineers estimate; plus 15%
engineering and contingencies of which 10% is to be a retainer for 1 year; after acceptance of
subdivision. It shall be automatically renewable yearly and approved by the City Attorney before
acceptance by the City. Attorney and City Engineer fees for review of Letter of Credits shall be paid by
the subdivider to the City.
LIFT STATION is an underground appurtenance to pump waste water.
OUTLOT is an area of land that cannot be developed as a lot by City of Fairbury zoning definition.
Fairbury Code Ch. 10 Page - 2 Dec-11
OWNER is any person or persons, firm association, partnership, private corporation, or combination of
the preceding having any legal, equitable or beneficial interest in the land to be subdivided.
PLANNING COMMISSION is a group of individuals appointed by the City. This commission shall
recommend land development and growth for the City of Fairbury.
PRE-ANNEXATION AGREEMENT is an agreement between the CITY and the owner/developer - prior to
annexation and or any development.
PRELIMINARY PLAN is a preliminary drawing and supporting data, indicating the proposed layout of the
subdivision in sufficient detail to provide adequate basis for review by the City, meeting the requirements
of these regulations.
RECORD DRAWINGS are drawings of all utilities, streets, water, sewer, easements, lots, etc. as they
were constructed.
RETAINER is 10% of total of the Engineers estimate including engineering and contingencies held for 1
year after acceptance of subdivision. Retainer to be released after 1 year with final approval of
subdivision.
SUBDIVIDER is any individual, legal entity or agent thereof which undertakes the subdivision of land.
SUBDIVISION means the configuration of lots of record, outlots, public rights-of-way and public
improvements which result from subdividing land in accordance with the procedures, requirements and
standards of this Code.
SURVEYOR is a land surveyor registered as such in the State of Illinois as provided in the Illinois
Revised Statutes.
UTILITY EASEMENT shall be a minimum of 15’in width easement on designated lots for utilities to use.
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS is the entity that hears and decides appeals for changes in zoning.
.03 SUITABILITY OF LAND FOR SUBDIVIDING.
Lands subject to flooding, or land in a Flood Plan, and land deemed to be topographically unsuitable
should not be subdivided for residential purposes, nor for such other uses as may increase danger to
health, life or property, or aggravate erosion or flood hazard.
The Council shall not approve the subdivision of land if upon adequate investigation and the opinion of
the City Engineer, it has been determined that in the best interest of the public, the site is not suitable for
subdivision and development of the kind proposed.
(a) Pre-application Conference. Prior to the submission of a Preliminary Plan as required by the Code,
the owner or developer of a proposed subdivision or planned unit development shall prepare a sketch
plan of such proposed subdivision or planned unit development and consult with the City
Superintendent for the purpose of reviewing such sketch plan. It shall be the responsibility of the City
Superintendent to contact and invite the City Engineer and the Zoning officer to a pre-application
conference with the owner or developer. The purpose of such pre-application conference is to review
such sketch plan which is a preliminary concept and which, after such pre-application conference,
then be refined by the owner or developer into a preliminary plan as required by Section .04 (a) of this
code. Said sketch plan shall be drawn to engineering scale and shall show the conceptual layout of
the proposed subdivision including the general layout of streets, drainage, sewage and land uses and
the present location of major natural features such as streams and lakes. The City Superintendent,
City Engineer, and Zoning Officer shall advise the owner or developer at the pre-application
conference whether the sketch plan is consistent with he subdivision principles of planning defined in
this Code and with the Official Comprehensive Plan, Zoning Code, this Code and other applicable
Codes of the City in order to assist the owner or developer prior to the preparation of the Preliminary
Plan required by Section .04 (a) of this Code.
Fairbury Code Ch. 10 Page - 3 Dec-11
.04 PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL OF SUBDIVISION.
Prior to consideration, all property to be subdivided shall be annexed or subject to a Preannexation
Agreement within the corporate limits. No development shall be initiated until the annexation is
completed. The steps and proceedings hereinafter set forth are hereby adopted as the procedure to be
followed for the approval of subdivision of lands.
(a) Preliminary Plan. When any owner of land lying within the corporate limits of the City of Fairbury or
within the area of jurisdiction of the City desires to subdivide such lands, the owner shall submit to the
City Council, a minimum of 45 days in advance of the Council meeting at which presentation is to be
made, a reproducible copy and six prints of a preliminary plan, to a scale of not less than 100 feet to
the inch, with supporting sheets which shall constitute a part thereof, showing the proposed plan of
subdivision and all properties owned by the developer adjacent to said development. Such plat shall
show and give the following information insofar as possible:
1. The boundaries of the proposed subdivision and the distances between corners; the total acreage
contained therein;
2. The name of the proposed subdivision; the name, address, phone number, and license number of
the engineer who prepared the plat; the name, address, and phone number of the developer and
the name, address, and phone number of the owner, if different from developer.
3. The location of existing corporate boundary lines at or near the proposed subdivision;
4. The character of the lands immediately adjoining the proposed subdivision, showing the
subdivision thereof, if subdivided, and the location and dimensions of public streets, alleys, fire
lanes, public utility easements, street pavements, sanitary sewers, storm sewers or drainage
ways, water supply mains, if any, adjoining the proposed subdivision;
5. The existing and proposed Zoning Classification under the applicable Zoning Chapter for the site
and the zoning of adjacent property; zoning will be contiguous to adjacent property. A hearing by
the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be required if zoning changes are desired or if property is
contiguous to two (2) or more different zoning districts.
6. The location within the proposed subdivision of any existing public streets, alleys, public utility
easements, street pavements, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, water supply mains, water
courses, bridges, culverts and similar facilities; the location of existing buildings, utilities and
major cultural features; dimensions including size of all mains, water or sewer, street width and
alleys, dimensions of utility easements and existing field tiles. The City shall require the developer
to have a title search company produce an acknowledgment of easements and property
description.
7. The names, location, widths and other dimensions of proposed streets, alleys, easements, parks,
playgrounds and other open spaces proposed to be dedicated for public use. NOTE: Established
names of streets shall continue when in line with existing streets. Parks, playgrounds and green
spaces may or may not be accepted for ownership by the City.
8. The blocks and lots into which the project is proposed to be subdivided, with the approximate
dimensions. Lot numbers shall be approved by City and U.S. Post Office prior to final acceptance.
9. Contours at vertical intervals of not more than two feet on U.S.G.S. datum;
10. A general description of the type, kind, character and extent of required improvements proposed
to be constructed or installed. Included, shall be an itemized engineer’s estimate of proposed
improvements plus 15% engineering and contingencies.
11. Summary of all restrictions intended to be imposed by the Final Plat or by deeds of conveyance
as to the use of all property within the subdivision;
12. A north arrow, scale, legend, date, and legal description of property to be developed.
13. Such other information or data as the City Superintendent, City Attorney or City Engineer may
require for the full and complete consideration of the proposed plan of subdivision. The developer
shall comply with the floodplain management requirements as outlined in the National Flood
Insurance Study on file with the City where applicable.
14. The following supporting documents and data, in triplicate, shall be submitted within twelve (12)
months after approval of said preliminary plat:
Construction plans prepared by a registered professional engineer licensed to practice in the State of
Illinois containing at least the following:
Fairbury Code Ch. 10 Page - 4 Dec-11
a. Plan and profiles showing the existing and proposed centerline or top of curb elevations of all
streets, fire lanes and alleys in the subdivision;
b. Plan and profiles of all proposed sanitary and storm sewers and storm drainage including
ditches, detention ponds, etc. Elevations shall be referred to some permanent benchmark on
U.S.G.S. Datum. Whenever practical, profiles shall be drawn to a horizontal scale of 50 feet
to one inch and vertical scale of five feet to one inch. Sanitary sewers shall be located in
street right-of-ways only.
c. Location plan of all proposed water mains and appurtenances, and necessary details.
Elevations shall be referred to some permanent benchmark on U.S.G.S. Datum. Whenever
necessary profiles shall be drawn to a horizontal scale of 50 feet to one inch and vertical
scale of five feet to one inch. Water mains shall be located in street right-of-ways only.
d. Utility easements shall be shown on the front of all lots and as otherwise required; minimum
15’ wide for gas, telephone, cable TV, electric, etc. No water or sewer mains shall be allowed
in a utility easement.
(b) City Council Action on Preliminary Plan. The Council shall, by motion, act on the preliminary plan for
approval or denial within 60 days after presentation. In the event the City establishes a Planning
Commission, all plans shall be submitted to said commission prior to Council approval; subject to
modifications or denial.
(c) Disapproval of Preliminary Plan. If the proposed plan of subdivision as shown by said preliminary
plan is disapproved, the original plat shall be returned to the subdivider, with a written statement of
the reasons for such disapproval within 10 days of such action.
(d) Approval of Preliminary Plan. If the proposed preliminary plan of subdivision is approved, the original
plat and one print or copy of the plat shall be so endorsed. The original of the preliminary plan, so
endorsed, shall remain on file with the Council and the copy of the plat so endorsed shall be returned
to the subdivider. This plan shall be valid for 24 months. If an extension is needed, it shall require
resubmittal to Council for approval. If approved, the following notices shall be typed or stamped on
the Preliminary Plan:
(In the event a Planning Commission is established, the following signature block shall apply.)
RECOMMENDATION OF PRELIMINARY PLAN APPROVAL BY THE PLANNING COMMISSION
OF FAIRBURY, ILLINOIS:
“Notice is hereby given that this Preliminary Plan of the subdivision or planned unit
development shown hereon is recommended by the Planning Commission of Fairbury, Illinois,
for City Council approval with the modifications contained in Appendix A (if any), which is
attached hereto.”
The Planning Commission of Fairbury, Illinois
Date _______________________________, 20______.
By __________________________________, Chairman
By __________________________________, Exec. Secretary
NOTICE OF APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAN BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF FAIRBURY,
ILLINOIS:
“The Preliminary Plan of the subdivision shown hereon has received approval by the City
Council of Fairbury, Illinois, subject to the modifications contained in Appendix A which is
attached hereto.”
Fairbury Code Ch. 10 Page - 5 Dec-11
The City Council of Fairbury, Illinois
Date ________________________________, 20______.
By __________________________________, Mayor
Attest:
____________________________, City Clerk
(e) Waiver of Preliminary Plan Requirement. For subdivision developments of less than 2 acres, the
Council may accept the construction plans for review in lieu of the preliminary plan. Final Plat may be
accepted when the subdivision is completed and approved by City Engineers. Justification for a
waiver must be proven, and submitted 30 days prior to Council action in writing. Notification of
approval or denial shall be given within 30 days of Council decision. In the event the City establishes
a Planning Commission, all plans shall be submitted to said commission prior to City approval, for
review and comment.
(f) Final Plat. After approval of the preliminary plan, the subdivider shall, within twenty-four (24) months
thereafter, submit to the Council an original reproducible copy of the final plat of the subdivision in
final form for recording, which shall be in substantial accordance with the preliminary plan, as
approved including modifications, together with 6 prints thereof. If the developer prefers to develop
the subdivision in stages, the final plat shall constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary
plan which he proposes to record and develop at that time, and provided further, that such portion
conforms in all respects to all matters and things included in the preliminary plan insofar as they
pertain to the portion of the entire subdivision which is desired to be developed at that time. There
shall be twelve (12) print reductions, 8 ½”x11”, of Final Plat and supporting documents furnished to
Council. The owner submitting a Final Plat shall provide all information required by this Section in the
form specified. Failure of an owner to provide this information in the form specified herein shall be
sufficient grounds for the City to refuse to accept the filing of a Final Plat or to reject a Final Plat in
any stage of the review and approval process.
Said final plat shall be drawn in black ink on a stable plastic film to a scale of not more than 100 feet
to one inch. It shall specifically show the following:
1. The name of the subdivision (no duplications shall be allowed), and the name(s), address, and
phone number of the owner and/or subdivider of said subdivision.
2. The name, address, phone number and Illinois certification/license number of the registered land
surveyor who prepared the plat and the date thereof.
3. The legal description of the property subdivided and acreage contained therein; easements,
alleys, fire lanes and restrictions shall be included.
4. Boundary of the plat, based on accurate traverse with an error of closure not larger that 1/5000
with angular and linear dimensions;
5. Location of all permanent survey monuments;
6. All other measurements, dimensions, data and certificate required by Chapter 109 Plats, of the
Revised Statutes of the State of Illinois, and all amendments thereof.
a. Angular error shall not exceed plus or minus twenty (20) seconds;
b. Lot line dimensions shall be shown in feet and hundredths of a foot;
c. Angles occurring in any lot line between lot corners shall be shown in degrees, minutes, and
seconds;
d. The radii, arcs, or chords, points of tangency, and central angles for all curvilinear streets and
radii for rounded corners;
e. Field references
1) The nearest established street lines and official monuments which shall be accurately
described in the plat by location, size, and elevation;
Fairbury Code Ch. 10 Page - 6 Dec-11
2) Township and section lines, if the same, are within the boundary of the Final Plat or
within one hundred (100) feet therefrom, referenced accurately to the lines of the
subdivision or planned unit development by distances and angles;
7. On any such plat showing a tract or tracts dedicated for park, playground or similar public use, if
such tract or tracts are not located within the corporate limits of Fairbury, the certificate of
dedication shall provide that the future official act of annexation of such tract or tracts to the City
of Fairbury shall constitute an option to transfer the title to such tract or tracts upon approval of
the Council for such public use. The City may or may not accept transfer with clear and free title
to the City.
8. An EPA approved erosion control document shall be submitted for said plat.
(g) Supporting Documents with Final Plat. The following supporting documents and data, in triplicate,
shall be submitted with said final plat:
1. Construction plans prepared by a registered professional engineer licensed to practice in the
State of Illinois containing at least the following:
a. Plan and profiles showing the existing and proposed centerline elevations of all streets and
alleys in the subdivision;
b. Plan and profiles of all proposed sanitary and storm sewers and storm drainage, detention
ponds, etc. Elevations shall be referred to some permanent benchmark on U.S.G.S. Datum.
Whenever practical, profiles shall be drawn to a horizontal scale of 50 feet to one inch and
vertical scale of five feet to one inch. Sanitary sewers shall be located in street right-of-way
only. (2001-16)
c. Location plan of all proposed water mains and appurtenances, and necessary details.
Elevations shall be referred to some permanent benchmark on U.S.G.S. Datum. Whenever
necessary, profiles shall be drawn to a horizontal scale of 50 feet to one inch and vertical
scale of five feet to one inch. Water mains shall be located in street right-of-ways only.
d. Utility easements shall be shown on the front of all lots and as otherwise required; minimum
15’ wide. No water or sewer mains shall be allowed in a utility easement.
2. A detailed statement by the subdivider setting forth the nature, kind, character and extent of all
the improvements that will be constructed in the subdivision, including specifications clearly
describing the same with agreement to construct the same in accordance therewith, at his own
expense, within the time limit fixed by the Council. The time limit shall be 1 year from notice to
proceed with construction.
3. A statement by a Professional Engineer giving an itemized estimate of the total cost of the
construction or installation of all such improvements, plus a 15% engineering and contingency
shall be included and the cost of engineering and inspection incurred by the City.
4. A certificate by the City Engineer certifying that the improvements described in the subdivider’s
statement and as shown by the plans, profiles and specifications, meet the minimum
requirements of this Chapter, and that the estimate of cost of construction and installation in his
opinion is substantially correct.
5. A duly executed completion bond by the subdivider, with corporate surety, to be approved by the
City Council, to be filed with the City Clerk of the City of Fairbury in an amount equal to the
estimate of the costs of construction plus a 15% engineering and contingency of all said
improvements, certified by the City Attorney of the City, as good, valid and enforceable by the
City, securing the satisfactory completion of all said improvements in accordance with the
description, plans, profiles and specifications submitted by the subdivider and approved by the
City Council. Upon completion and acceptance, there shall be required a 10% retainer for 1 year
for a warranty period to be used to repair or replace any defects.
6. An Irrevocable Letter of Credit shall be allowed until final acceptance of subdivision and 10%
retainer for 1 year thereafter of a completion bond. It shall be automatically renewed every year. It
shall be approved by the City Attorney prior to City Council acceptance. It shall be for the amount
of the engineer estimate plus 15% engineering and contingency of all said improvements,
Fairbury Code Ch. 10 Page - 7 Dec-11
certified by the City Attorney of the City, as good, valid and enforceable by the City, securing the
satisfactory completion of all said improvements in accordance with the description, plans,
profiles and specifications submitted by the subdivider and approved by the City Council. Upon
completion and acceptance, there shall be required a 10% retainer for 1 year. This, a warranty
period to be used to repair or replace any defects.
(h) Approval of Final Plat by City Council. Within sixty (60) days of submittal of final plat, the City Council
is required to approve or deny said plat. If the City Council approves the final plat with all proposed
improvements, conditions and documents pertaining to the subdivision, the Council shall, by
ordinance, approve the said plat and authorize and direct the Mayor and City Clerk to sign the plat
and in the name of the City of Fairbury and attach thereto the Corporate Seal.
1. In the event the Final Plat is approved prior to construction, all property pins shall be replaced
and pinned prior to final approval and any building allowed. The City will require Record drawing
plans of all works. Record drawings will be required of all utilities prior to final acceptance.
2. In the event the Council allows the subdivision construction first, the final plat approval is implied.
The Final Plat process would follow with all property pins being installed prior to submittal of Final
Plat. The City will require Record drawing plans of all works. Record drawings will be required of
all utilities prior to final acceptance.
(i) Recording of Final Plant. The City Clerk shall retain such final plat so approved, and upon payment
by the subdivider to the Clerk of the estimated cost of recording and attorney fees. The City Attorney
shall record the plat in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds, Livingston County, Illinois. The support
documents transmitted with said final plat to the City Council shall be filed in the Office of the City
Clerk. Said final plat, after recording, shall remain on file in the Office of the City Clerk. The print or
copy of the final plat, with copy of the approval thereof by the City Council, and one copy of all
supporting documents shall be delivered to the subdivider.
.05 PLAT INVALID WITHOUT APPROVAL.
After the passing of this Chapter, no plat of any subdivision shall be valid nor entitled to record unless and
until the same has been approved by the Council of the City of Fairbury, Illinois in accordance with the
procedure as provided in this chapter, and no plat of a subdivision shall be approved without compliance
with the standards of design and improvements required as provided in this chapter.
.06 STANDARDS OF DESIGN AND REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS.
The following requirements are hereby adopted as the minimum standards of design of a subdivision and
of improvements required to be constructed or installed therein.
(a) Design Standards - Streets.
1. A public street or streets shall be provided to afford convenient access to all property within the
subdivision. No private street, thoroughfare, or access by easement or fire lane shall be
permitted. All lots shall front on a public street.
2. The proposed street system shall extend existing adjoining streets unless the extension thereof
would not be practical. Any deviation shall require a written request and supporting
documentation prior to approval.
3. Where, in the opinion of the Council, it is desirable to provide for street access to adjoining
property, the proposed streets shall be extended, dedicated, and constructed to the boundary of
such property.
4. Street Widths - The minimum width of right-of-way of streets, measured at right angles between
the lines of property abutting upon the right-of-way, shall not be less than the following:
a. Major streets, a high average daily traffic; a high potential for the location of significant
community facilitators as well as retail, commercial, and industrial facilities; 80 feet;
b. Residential streets, 60 feet with curb and gutter, shall be required.
Fairbury Code Ch. 10 Page - 8 Dec-11
c. Cul-de-sacs, which are permanent dead end streets, shall not be over 500 feet in length and
have permanent turn-arounds having an inside diameter of not less that 110 feet.
d. Alleys, to serve business, commercial, industrial and multiple family areas, 20 feet and shall
be of 8” gravel base minimum.
e. All dead end streets shall require the developer to place permanent reflective barricades and
signs warning of deadends.
f. Industrial streets; 70 feet width with curb and gutter, cul-de-sac inside diameter 140 feet.
5. In the case of the extension of an existing adjoining street right-of-way having a width less than
the minimum requirement, the Council may approve the extension thereof at the same width.
6. The entire right-of-way shall be provided where any part of the subdivision is on both sides of the
right-of-way.
7. When the subdivision is located on only one side of an existing right-of-way, which is less than
the required width, the subdivider shall dedicate additional right-of-way to meet the requirement,
but not exceeding one-half of the total required width.
8. In cases where topography or other conditions make the dedication of a street or part thereof of
the required minimum width impractical, the Council may modify the above requirements.
9. Street intersections shall be as near to the perpendicular as possible, but in no instance more that
5
o
+ from perpendicular.
10. Street Grades - Grades of major streets shall not exceed 7 percent. Grades of other streets shall
not exceed 10 percent. Minimum grade to be 0.40 percent.
11. Curves in Streets - Horizontal and vertical curves in streets shall not be sharper than that
specified by the Illinois Department of Transportation Design Manual as reasonably safe for traffic
at the particular location of the curve.
12. Street Jogs - Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall not be permitted if the
same can be reasonably avoided.
13. Street Names - Proposed streets which are obviously in alignment or a continuation of existing
streets already named, shall bear the name of such existing streets. In no case shall the name
for proposed streets duplicate existing street names, irrespective of the use of the suffix street,
avenue, road, boulevard, way, drive, place or court or an abbreviation thereof.
14. Blocks.
a. Blocks shall not be less than 250 feet nor more than 1000 feet in length, except as the
Council considers necessary to secure efficient use of land or desired features of the street
pattern.
b. In blocks 600 feet or more in length, the Council may require a public easement for
pedestrian travel, of not less than 10 feet in width, with a four (4) foot sidewalk to extend
entirely across the block at the location deemed necessary.
c. Blocks shall be wide enough to allow two tiers of lots, except where fronting on major streets
or prevented by topographical conditions or size of the property, in which case the Council
will approve a single tier of lots.
15. Lots.
a. Side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight street lines or radial on curved street lines.
b. The size of lots laid out and intended for business or multi-family use shall be adequate to
provide for off-street service and parking facilities required by the type of use and
development contemplated. See: Zoning Ordinance
c. The size and width of lots shall be in no case less than the minimum requirements of the
applicable zoning ordinance.
d. No outlots shall be allowed without the Council and City Engineer approval. Outlots must be
reviewed and substantial evidence provided for their need of existence. Outlots may not be
used to restrict extensions of planned streets or utilities to areas beyond the subdivision.
Fairbury Code Ch. 10 Page - 9 Dec-11
16. Easements.
a. Easements shall be at least fifteen (15) feet width for utilities (other than water, sewer, or
storm sewer). Fifteen (15) feet wide easements (7.5 feet on each side of the lot line) shall be
dedicated along the side lot lines where necessary. The easements shall be so laid out that a
proper continuity may be had for such utilities from lot to lot and from block to block. No
buildings shall be constructed upon the easements.
17. Fire Lane - Fire Lanes may be required having a width of twenty (20) feet provided at the rear of
lots whose intended use is for business, commercial, industrial or multiple family housing. Fire
Lanes shall not be provided in a single family residential block except where the subdivider
produces evidence satisfactory to Council for the need of fire lanes. Fire Lanes shall be
constructed with a minimum of 8” gravel base with 3” Bituminous concrete or 8” concrete.
18. Public Utilities - Telephone, cable television, electric service lines, and any other transmission
lines shall be placed underground entirely throughout a subdivided area. Said conduits or cables
shall be placed within easements only; in a manner which will not conflict with other underground
service.
19. Dead End Streets - All dead end streets shall require the developer to place permanent reflective
barricades and signs warning of deadends.
(b) Construction Standards - Streets.
1. The latest edition of the Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction as adopted by
the Illinois Department of Transportation shall govern the construction of streets.
2. Curb and gutter shall be provided, streets shall be graded and furnished with a base course of
compacted crushed stone or gravel to an eight (8) inch thickness, bituminous concrete surface of
1 ½” thickness and 1 ½” bituminous concrete binder course; minimum three (3) inch, compacted
in place in accordance with the State of Illinois specification or bituminous sub-class A-3.
Concrete can be used; minimum six (6) inch total thickness, eight (8) inch total thickness for
industrial. Minimum width shall be 30 feet back of curb to back of curb. Additional width may be
required by the City at subdivider’s expense if traffic projections and City planning indicate a
need. The base course of compacted stone shall winter (1) one year prior to acceptance and final
coats applied. A-3 shall have (2) two coats of oil and chips applied the first year and the third coat
of same applied the following year prior to acceptance by the City.
3. All Cul-de-sac turn-a-rounds shall have a minimum back of curb radius of fifty (50) feet (onehundred
(100) feet diameter), industrial areas-radius is sixty (60) feet (one-hundred twenty (120)
feet diameter). All street intersections shall have a minimum back of curb radius of thirty (30) feet.
4. After grading of the streets is completed and approved, and before the base course of the
roadway pavement is laid, all of the underground work, such as sewer, water and gas mains,
building service connections, and any underground conduits for electric and telephone lines, etc.,
shall be completely installed in place and approved. It shall be test rolled and approved by the
City Engineer prior to base course being applied.
5. The surface course of the roadway pavement shall not be laid until the backfilling of all trenches
dug for the installation of the aforementioned utility services have completely settled, or
compacted to the satisfaction of the City Engineer. All back fill through and in road ways shall be
granular fill approved by the City of Fairbury Street Commissioner and City Engineer. It shall be
jetted or mechanically compacted in six (6) inch lifts. The base course shall be test rolled and
approved by the City Engineer prior to surface course being applied.
6. Before the surface course of the roadway pavement is laid, all depressions in the base course
shall be properly filled and brought to the required grade so as to create a level surface. The base
course shall be test rolled and approved by the City Engineer prior to surface course being
applied.
7. Signs - The subdivider shall provide signs at each intersection of a type approved by the Council,
giving the name of each street.
8. Curb and Gutter - The type of curb and gutter shall be subject to the approval of the City Engineer
and/or City Superintendent.
Fairbury Code Ch. 10 Page - 10 Dec-11
9. Sidewalks - If the property subdivided is located within the corporate limits of the City, or
immediately adjacent thereto, sidewalks, 4 feet wide and 4 inches thick (6 inches thick across
driveways) shall be required by the Council on both sides of street.
10. Sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with the specifications approved and used by the
City of Fairbury for sidewalk construction.
11. Trees - If any trees are proposed to be planted on any part of the subdivision devoted to public
use, the species of trees and the location thereof shall be subject to the approval and direction of
the Council.
12. Permits - No construction shall begin without necessary State and/or Federal permits, where
applicable.
13. Inspection - All public improvements to be made under the provisions of this Chapter shall be
inspected during the course of construction by the City Engineer or other competent person
appointed by the City Council. No construction shall begin without approved construction plans,
shop drawings, and specifications. The subdivider shall notify the City a minimum of two (2) days
in advance of commencing construction of sanitary sewers, water mains, storm sewers and
streets, etc. The compensation for such inspection and other costs incurred in connection
with such inspection shall be paid by the subdivider to the City of Fairbury. The final
completion of all such improvements shall be subject to the approval thereof by the City Engineer
and the Council.
14. Main Thoroughfare - There shall be two (2) entrances and/or exits to a main thoroughfare. The
main thoroughfare and/or street, highway, shall be designated by the City Engineer and approved
by the Council.
15. Street Lights - All developments shall include plans designed so that street lights are provided at
such locations in a manner as to accomplish the following:
a. Provide a street light at every cross intersection or T-intersection and at the end of every culde-
sac.
b. Provide such additional street lights as may be necessary so that lights are not more than two
hundred fifty (250) feet apart when the distance between street intersections exceeds three
hundred fifty (350) feet; for developments. Commercial / Industrial: two hundred fifty (250)
feet spacing intensity shall be 250 watt, metal halide.
c. Provide an average illumination of 1.0 foot candles on the street surface in commercial or
industrial areas and along all major or collector streets;
d. Street Lights in all subdivisions shall be affixed to wood, concrete, or metal poles and shall
meet or exceed the following height and illumination standards:
Metal Halide - Along minor streets, ten thousand three hundred five (10,305) lumen, one hundred
seventy-five (175) watt lamps shall be mounted with an eight (8) foot upsweep arm on a pole in such a
way as to allow for a height of twenty-five (25) feet above street surface. Along major or collector streets,
seventeen thousand five hundred (17,500) lumen, two hundred fifty (250) watt lamps shall be mounted
with an eight (8) foot upsweep arm on a pole in such a way to allow for a height of thirty (30) feet above
street surface.
Construction and Installation - All street lights shall meet or exceed all applicable City of Fairbury,
Illinois Commerce Commission or accepted industrial standards for metal halide lights, whichever
imposes the more demanding requirement for the protection and preservation of the public health, safety
and welfare.
(c) Construction Standards - Sanitary Sewers.
1. When located within the area of the City sanitary sewerage systems, sanitary sewer mains shall
be constructed throughout the entire subdivision in such manner as to serve adequately all lots
and tracts with connection to such public system.
2. The latest edition of the Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois
shall govern the construction of sanitary sewers and/or City of Fairbury/City Engineer standard
practices.
Fairbury Code Ch. 10 Page - 11 Dec-11
3. Main sewer size shall be eight (8) inches minimum and larger if required by the Council to serve
future areas. Service sewers shall be a minimum of six (6) inches.
4. Pipe may be extra strength vitrified clay pipe ASTM C-700 with flexible gasket, eight (8) inch SDR
26 min. pipe, ASTM D3034 with min. SDR 26 (no ABS composite) -epoxy lined ductile and
flexible joints. All pipe gasketed for services; no solvent weld. Six (6) inch SDR 35 minimum for
service lines. Pipes shall require sand backfill when in or crossing roads; to surface with top eight
(8) inch of road gravel. All ditches shall be jetted or mechanically compacted in six (6) inch lifts.
All sewers six (6) feet in depth or less shall require marking tape or be color coded: green
designates sewer. All fittings, castings, and pipe shall be manufactured in the United States.
5. Manholes shall be provided with 400 feet maximum spacing. Manhole minimum: four (4) foot on
straight run, five (5) foot on corner. A junction manhole (more than two sewers and one manhole)
shall be sized by the City Superintendent and the City Engineer and approved by the City
Council. Manholes shall be cement sealed at all joints and seams. Pipe inlets shall be cemented
smooth with interior manhole wall. Manholes shall require permanent steel markers when not in
the subdivision and/or lids placed below grade. They shall be tied in at property lines. Manholes
shall have no more than eight (8) inch of adjusting rings.
6. Minimum grades for eight (8) inch sewer shall be 0.40 percent; for six (6) inch service sewer, 1.0
percent.
7. If pumping station is required, it shall meet the requirements as set by the City Engineer and
approved by the City Superintendent. The City shall be provided with four (4) operation and
maintenance manuals, spare parts and start up service as specified by the City Superintendent.
All pump stations shall require emergency back-up power.
8. Any over sizing of pipe required by the City; the City shall pay for cost differences in size of pipe
only up to twelve (12) inches. All other over twelve (12) inches shall be negotiated prior to any
construction and approval by Council.
9. Three (3) sets of record drawings and one (1) set Mylar shall be required and supplied by the
developer to the City. Drawings will be reviewed and approved by the City Engineer and the City
Superintendent prior to acceptance of said subdivision.
10. The City Superintendent and the City Engineer shall review all specifications and shop drawings
of materials prior to approval of construction. The City will be supplied three (3) three sets of shop
drawings.
11. Sewer mains shall be placed in City right-of-ways, if practical; not under street pavements.
12. All field tile shall be located and replaced when broken or cut by all contractors and utilities.
Replacement and costs are the responsibility of the developer.
13. Proof of all EPA permits shall be required prior to construction; water, sewer, storm drainage, etc.
Letters of other state and local agencies required for sign off shall be provided to the City prior to
construction.
14. Sewer services shall be stubbed beyond the utility easement and at an elevation to eliminate
basement hook-ups. Sewers shall be marked with 2”x4” boards, painted green, extending four (4)
feet above ground level and four (4) feet below with a four (4) foot steel post wired one foot below
grade.
15. There shall be a minimum water/sewer tap-on inspection fee per lot as established by City
ordinance.
16. All sewers shall be televised and recorded on tape. TV shall be color with rotating lens and head
of 180 degree minimum. Tapes shall be given to the City Superintendent. The tape is not in lieu
of pressure test, mandrel, lamping or any other requirement as set forth in construction
standards. The City Superintendent and/or City Engineer shall be present during televising.
17. No ground water will be allowed to enter the City sewer system during construction. All newly
constructed sewers shall be cleaned prior to acceptance. In the event water was let into existing
sewers, the City Engineer and/or City Superintendent may require the city sewer to be televised
and cleaned.
18. All contractors and sub-contractors will submit to the City their name, address, phone number,
along with copies of all insurance, bonds, etc. required by the Developer.
Fairbury Code Ch. 10 Page - 12 Dec-11
(d) Construction Standards - Water Supply.
1. When located within the service area of the City water supply system, water mains shall be
constructed throughout the entire subdivision in such a manner as to serve adequately all lots
and tracts with connection to such system.
2. The latest edition of the Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Construction in Illinois shall
govern the construction of water mains and/or City of Fairbury/City Engineer standard practices.
3. Water mains shall be not less than eight (8) inch main lines as specified by the City and six (6)
inch branch lines. If the Council determines that a larger size is necessary in order to adequately
serve the area, the subdivider shall provide such larger size main at his expense.
4. Water mains may be constructed of Ductile Iron ANSI A21.51, C1 50 or PVC ASTM 2241, SDR
21 minimum. All pipe gasketed for services; no solvent weld. They shall be laid at Five (5) foot
minimum cover. Pipe shall have mechanical or single-gasket type joints, ductile pipe shall be
cement lined and seal coated. Non-metallic pipe, color coded by blue marking tape or pipe solid
blue in color shall be provided with adequate tracer-line from all mains and service line curb
stops. All pipe, valves, fittings, and hydrants shall be manufactured in the United States.
5. Three-way fire hydrants shall be provided spaced at intervals not exceeding four-hundred (400)
feet, three hundred (300) foot intervals for industrial areas. They shall conform to AWWA
Specifications with National STD thread. Hydrants shall be Mueller, Super Centurion 250, or Clow
Medallion; three way. There shall be an anchor tee with valve placed on main stub pipe to
hydrant. In the event the hydrants are not available, the City Superintendent and/or City Engineer
shall specify type.
6. Resilient seat gate valves and boxes shall be provided with a maximum spacing of 900 feet or
where specified by the City Superintendent. Valves shall be provided at each street and/or main
intersection to isolate each block. They shall conform to AWWA Specifications.
7. Water services shall be a minimum of one (1) inch copper tubing and shall have compressions
joints. Each service shall be provided with bronze curb stop and a telescopic box of cast iron or
first grade steel with hex nut lid. All services one (1) inch through two (2) inch shall be K copper.
Service shall be marked with 2”x4” boards, painted blue, extending a minimum of four (4) feet
above ground level
8. Any over sizing of pipe required by the City, the City shall pay for cost differences in size of pipe
only up to twelve (12) inches. All other over 12” shall be negotiated prior to any construction and
approval by Council.
9. Three (3) sets of shop drawings shall be required and supplied by the developer to the City. The
drawings will be reviewed and approved by the City Engineer and City Superintendent prior to
construction of subdivision and/or acceptance of said subdivision.
10. The City Superintendent and City Engineer shall review all specifications and shop drawings of
materials prior to approval of construction. The City shall be furnished three (3) sets.
11. Water mains shall be placed in City right-of-ways (if practical); not under street pavements.
Approved granular back-fill shall be required where mains cross streets or are in streets to
surface with top eight (8) inches of road gravel. All ditches shall be jetted or mechanically
compacted in six (6) inch lifts.
12. All field tile shall be located and replaced when broken or cut by all contractors and utilities.
Replacement and costs are the responsibility of the developer.
13. Proof of all EPA permits shall be required prior to construction; water, sewer, storm drainage, etc.
Letters of other state and local agencies required for sign off shall be provided to the City prior to
construction.
14. Water services shall be stubbed to the property line and at five (5) feet below grade to eliminate
freeze-up. A five (5) foot cover shall be required in all ditches and ditch crossings. They shall be
marked with 2”x4” boards, painted blue, extending a minimum of four (4) feet above ground level.
15. There shall be a minimum water/sewer tap-on inspection fee per lot as established by City
ordinance.
16. Water mains shall be pressured tested at 2 times normal operating pressure of the City. Zero
leakage-a tight system-shall be required. Mains shall be tested after service connections and
services are installed to the property line. Mains shall be tested in the presence of the City
Engineer and/or City Superintendent.
Fairbury Code Ch. 10 Page - 13 Dec-11
17. Water mains encased shall require centering devices and end caps as per City Superintendent
specs.
18. Retainer glands may be used. Blocking shall be required with or without retainer glands on all
Tees, valves, fittings, hydrants, etc., as specified by the City Engineer and/or City Superintendent.
(e) Construction Standards - Storm Drainage.
An adequate system of storm water drainage shall be constructed and installed, consisting of pipes,
culverts, tiles, manholes, inlets and other necessary facilities, that will adequately drain the
subdivisions and protect roadway pavements and will prevent the accumulation of storm water at any
place under normal conditions. Open drainage ditches are prohibited. Storm sewer system design
shall be based on a five (5) year storm frequency. The maximum distance between storm sewer
manholes shall be 400 feet. The minimum pipe size shall be twelve (12) inch I.D. The latest edition
of the Standard Specifications of Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois shall govern the
construction of storm sewers. Such drainage system shall be subject to the approval of the City
Engineer. Proof of storm drainage permit and applications shall be furnished from IEPA. Any future
storm water drainage for new development shall be documented with plans. (2001-16)
Photos of all drainage current and future and all easement agreements shall be provided. All storm
detention basin shall be approved by the City Engineer. The City will not take ownership of said
basins. Detention basin easement and maintenance is the responsibility of the property owner(s).
Drainage of Surface Water - The owner shall provide an evaluation by a registered professional
engineer of the drainage characteristics of the territory included within the proposed subdivision
together with a description of the proposed storm water runoff system, structures and other facilities
which will control drainage from the subdivision. The evaluation shall include computations of the
drainage area, the area of the subdivision, the percent of the total drainage basin area occupied by
the subdivision and the basis of the internal drainage system including detention and/or retention
facilities. Plans and profiles showing the proposed drainage system drawn to a convenient scale and
adequately dimensioned shall be submitted along wit the calculations used by the engineer in
preparing such documentation. In general, the proposed drainage system shall be designed to
channel the flow of storm waters in the natural drainage way by gravity and shall, in addition, be
designed to prevent increases in velocity of water discharged onto adjoining lands or decrease in time
of concentration on the property being subdivided. In particular, detention of storm waters must be
provided as necessary to satisfy the following:
1. Storm waters which enter the City’s drainage system from developed property must not exceed
that which would naturally enter from the natural tributary area during and immediately after the
maximum storm event which can be expected to occur once every five (5) years and also
immediately after the maximum storm event which can be expected to occur once every twentyfive
(25) years. Runoff co-efficients and time of concentration factors shall be those approved by
the City Engineer.
2. Owner’s proposed facilities must be designed and constructed to prevent the overtaxing or
otherwise damaging of the City’s drainage system.
3. When any part of the storm waters to be discharged by any of the owner’s facilities into the City’s
drainage system constitutes a diversion, the owner must provide detention facilities of sufficient
capacity to limit the flow reaching the drainage system to the rate of flow which would have
occurred previously from that portion of the area to be drained which is naturally tributary.
Overflow in the course of natural drainage for the diverted flow must be provided.
4. Connections to the City’s storm sewers must be at the manhole or catch basin nearest the
owner’s property. If no such structure exists, the owner must build a structure at the point of
connection conforming to the Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction
published from time to time by the Illinois Department of Transportation.
5. Connections to the City’s drainage system must prevent sedimentation from occurring. Proper
staging or the use of siltation basins must be provide to show that sedimentation will nor occur.
6. Connections to roadside ditches must have adequate protection features to prevent erosion and
washing of the ditch bottom and banks.
Fairbury Code Ch. 10 Page - 14 Dec-11
7. If in the reasonable opinion of the City Engineer, the proposed storm water runoff system
inappropriately diverts water from its natural drainageway, increases the velocity of storm waters
discharged onto adjoining lands or decreases the time of concentration on the property being
subdivided, then the Planning Commission shall not recommend and the City Council shall not
approve any subdivision until the owner of the property submits a plan for a storm water runoff
system which does comply with the requirements of this Section.
(f) Construction Standards - Building Services. Building services shall be constructed to connect with
the utility service mains constructed within any street or thoroughfare, to serve each adjoining lot,
tract, or building site; such house services shall extend from the main to a point at least two (2) feet
past utility easement or seventeen (17) feet into all lots and at least two (2) feet beyond the outside
lines of the proposed alley or easement.
All such building services connected with utility mains constructed within any street or thoroughfare,
shall be located at the approximate center of each lot for water, 1/3 road point for sanitary sewer, and
no deviation shall be made from these requirements except upon prior approval of the City Engineer
and/or City Superintendent.
Sanitary service shall be brought up to a grade/elevation which shall prevent basement hook ups and
be recorded in the covenant as such. No ground water or surface water shall be allowed to enter a
sanitary service. All service lines water or sewer shall be located with 2 x 4 boards extended to
bottom of service and four (4) feet above ground painted green for sewer or blue for water. Sewer
services shall have a metal post four (4) feet long (minimum) embedded by service for future location
one (1) foot below grade with the 2 x 4 board.
Upon completion of the construction in place of all such building service connections with utility
mains, 3 accurate maps showing the exact locations of all such mains, together with manholes, shutoff
valves and other similar facilities being a part thereof, by distance in feet from street lines, and all
of such house service connections in distances in feet from the side lot lines approved by the City
Engineer, shall be filed in the Office of the City Clerk.
.07 VARIANCE IN STANDARDS.
Where topographical conditions peculiar to the site or surrounding area would make the site unable to be
developed (for reasons other than monetary profit) under a strict application of this Chapter 10, the owner
may request a variance from the strict application of this Chapter 10. Said request for a variance shall be
in writing and state the variance requested and the reason therefor. The City Engineer shall review the
request for variance and make a recommendation thereon to the City Council. If, in the opinion of the
City Council, such variance is necessary in order for the property to be developed and such variance may
be made without destroying the intent of the provisions of this Chapter 10, then the City Council may
grant the variance as requested or as modified by the City Council and subject to such conditions and
restrictions as the City Council may deem appropriate. The City Council shall state in its minutes the
reasoning for either denying or granting the variance and any modifications, conditions, or restrictions
required for any variance which is granted. (2001-16)
.08 ACCEPTANCE OF STREETS, ETC. BY THE CITY.
If any plat of subdivision contains public streets or thoroughfares which are therein dedicated as such,
whether located within the corporate limits of Fairbury or outside thereof, or contains existing streets
outside of said corporate limits, the approval of the plat by the City Council, or the subsequent annexation
of the property to the City, shall not constitute an acceptance by the City of such streets or thoroughfares,
nor of the improvements constructed or installed thereon or therein, irrespective of any act or acts by any
officer, agent or employee of the City with respect to such streets or improvements. The acceptance of
such streets or thoroughfares shall be made only by the adoption of a Resolution by the City Council after
approval by the City Attorney, and after there has been filed with the City Clerk a certificate by the City
Engineer certifying that all improvements required to be constructed or installed in or upon such streets or
thoroughfares in connection with the approval of the plat of subdivision by the City Council, have been
fully completed and the construction or installation has been approved by him.
Fairbury Code Ch. 10 Page - 15 Dec-11
No permanent connection shall have made or maintained with the sanitary or storm sewer or water
supply systems of the City to serve property within the subdivision until the systems have been properly
tested and the certificate by the Engineer of the City as hereinabove provided has been filed, and not until
any money owing to the City for permit fees for the connections with said systems or any of them have
been paid.
.09 DIVISION OF LANDS WITHOUT PLATTING UNLAWFUL.
From and after the effective date of this Chapter, no lot or tract of land located within the City or within the
area of jurisdiction of Fairbury, and which contains an area of more than one-half acre, shall be divided or
re-divided in any manner into two or more lesser tracts for building site purposes, without subdividing or
re-subdividing and platting such tract in the manner provided by the Statutes of the State of Illinois.
.10 CITY COUNCIL APPROVAL OF SUBDIVISION OF SMALL TRACTS.
When there is presented to the City Council for approval a plat of subdivision of re-subdivision of a small
tract of land, if the Council, after consideration thereof, is of the opinion that the intent and purpose of the
provisions of this Chapter are not violated by such plat, and the construction of the improvements herein
required cannot be reasonably enforced, the Council may waive the application or enforcement of the
provisions of this Chapter and approve such a plat. This will require a hearing (in the event one is
established) of the Planning Commission and approval prior to acceptance.
.11 ENFORCEMENT OF CHAPTER.
The Council of the City of Fairbury, by Resolution, shall appoint the enforcing officer of this Chapter, and
it shall be his duty to enforce the provisions hereof. The enforcing officer may call upon any department
or official of the City of Fairbury to furnish him with such information and assistance as he may deem
necessary for the observance or enforcement of this Chapter, and it shall be the duty of such department
of officer to furnish such information and assistance whenever required. In the event an enforcing officer
is not appointed, the City Superintendent shall assume this responsibility.
.12 PENALTY.
Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed guilty of a Class
C Misdemeanor as provided in Illinois Compiled Statutes, and penalized accordingly.
.13 PLANNING COMMISSION.
In the event a Planning Commission is established, written approval prior to annexation and final plat
approval for any subdivision of land or plats in the City of Fairbury will be required of said commission.
Fairbury Code Ch. 10A Page - 1 Dec-11
CHAPTER 10A
PLANNING COMMISSION adopted in Ordinance 1998-9 on July 15, 1998
.01 ESTABLISHMENT OF PLANNING COMMISSION.
The City of Fairbury hereby establishes a Planning Commission to exercise powers granted by this
Ordinance and by Division 12 of Article XI of the Illinois Municipal code (65 ILCS 5/11-12-1 et seg.)
.02 MEMBERSHIP.
The members of the Planning Commission shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to confirmation by the
City Council. All members of the Planning Commission shall reside within the City of Fairbury or within
territory contiguous to the City of Fairbury and not more than one and one-half miles beyond the
corporate limits, and not included within any other municipality. The Planning Commission shall consist
of seven members. The members of the Commission shall choose one of their number to serve as
Chairman. The members will serve a term of four years and until their respective successors are
appointed and qualified. If a vacancy occurs in the office of any Commission member, a successor shall
be appointed by the Mayor and subject to confirmation by the City Council to serve for the unexpired term
of the vacancy.
Upon their first meeting the members of the Planning Commission shall draw lots to stagger their terms
so that one member shall have an initial term of one year, two members shall have an initial term of two
years, two members shall have an initial term of three years, and two members shall have an initial term
of four years. Thereafter as each member’s initial term expires, the succeeding member of the Planning
Commission shall serve for a four year term.
In addition to said membership the Mayor may appoint from time to time with the consent of the City
Council, non-voting advisory members who reside more than one and one-half miles beyond the
corporate limits but who have a personal, business, or property interest in the City of Fairbury and the
area within one and one-half miles of its corporate limits or who have knowledge, expertise or experience
which would be beneficial to the work of the Planning Commission.
The Planning Commission may hire a secretary subject to approval of the City Council.
Compensation of the members of the Planning Commission and secretary of the Planning Commission
shall be established from time to time by ordinance or resolution of the City Council.
.03 MEETINGS.
All meetings of the Planning Commission shall be held at the call of the Chairman and at such times as
the Planning Commission may determine. The Planning Commission shall hold one meeting per year for
the purpose of reviewing the official Comprehensive Plan and official map to determine whether any
amendments or modifications should be made to them. The Planning Commission shall keep minutes of
its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question or, if absent or failing to vote,
indicating such fact, and shall also keep records of its hearings and other official actions. A copy of every
rule or regulation, every amendment and every order, requirement, decision or determination of the
Planning Commission shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk within three days of approval. The
Planning Commission shall adopt its own rules and procedures not in conflict with ordinances of the City
nor with the applicable state statutes.
.04 POWERS.
The Planning Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
(a) To prepare and recommend to the City Council a comprehensive plan for the present and future
development or redevelopment of the City of Fairbury. The plan may be made applicable by the
terms thereof to the land situated within the corporate limits and contiguous territory not more than
one and one-half miles beyond the corporate limits and not included in any other municipality. The
Fairbury Code Ch. 10A Page - 2 Dec-11
plan may include reasonable requirements with reference to streets, alleys, public grounds, and other
improvements hereinafter specified. Such a plan may establish reasonable standards of design for
subdivisions and for re-subdivisions of unimproved land and of areas subject to re-development in
respect to public improvements; may establish reasonable requirements governing the location,
width, course, and surfacing of public streets and highways, alleys, ways for public service facilities,
curbs, gutters, sidewalks, street lights, parks, playgrounds, school grounds, size of lots to be used for
residential purposes, storm water drainage, water supply and distribution, sanitary sewers, and
sewage collection and treatment; and may designate lands suitable for annexation to the municipality
and the recommended zoning classifications for such land upon annexation. Such recommended
zoning classifications shall be made only after consulting with the Zoning Board of Appeals. Such
plan and recommendations shall be implemented by ordinances adopted by the City Council.
(b) To review all pre-annexation agreements and the subdivision plans and plats for compliance with the
official comprehensive plan and map and to make recommendations to the City Council in regard to
such pre-annexation agreements and plans and plats of subdivisions.
(c) To recommend changes from time to time in the official comprehensive plan.
(d) To prepare and recommend to the City Council from time to time plans for specific improvements in
pursuance of the official comprehensive plan.
(e) To give aid to the municipal officials charged with the direction of projects for improvements
embraced with in the official plan, to further the makings of these projects, and generally, to promote
the realization of the official comprehensive plan.
(f) To employ the services of the City Engineer and City Attorney as necessary in the performance of the
Commission’s duties subject to approval of the City Council.
(g) To hold public hearings on its own initiative or upon recommendation by the City Council to review
and make recommendations to the City Council concerning (a) the comprehensive plan of the City;
(b) development needs that will be occasioned by future growth of the City; (c) proposed apartment,
planned unit or cluster development or subdivision of property; (d) proposed annexations to the City;
(e) policies and procedures concerning planning and development; (f) other related projects as
directed by the City Council or raised by the Planning Commission on its own initiative. Hearings
shall be open to the public except where such matters may be legally heard in closed session under
the Illinois Open Meetings Act and the Planning Commission moves to go into closed session in
accordance with the Illinois Open Meetings Act. Any person may appear and testify at a hearing,
either in person or by an attorney.
(h) To exercise such other powers germane to the powers granted by this ordinance as may be
conferred by the City Council.
(i) To provide the Planning Commission and Zoning Boards of Livingston County with copies of the
official comprehensive plan and official map when they have been adopted by the City Council and to
seek the input of drainage districts and other governmental units whose territory would be affected by
the official comprehensive plan and official map.
.05 OFFICIAL COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND OFFICIAL MAP.
(a) No official comprehensive plan or amendment thereto or official map or amendment thereto shall be
adopted that has not been first submitted to the Planning Commission. The official comprehensive
plan and map shall be adopted in accordance with the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/11-12-7.
(b) No official comprehensive plan, or and amendments thereto, or additions thereto, proposed by the
Planning Commission shall be effective in the City of Fairbury and contiguous territory not more than
one and one-half miles beyond the corporate limits and not included in any municipality only after its
formation adoption by the City Council. Such plan shall be advisory and in and of itself shall not be
construed to regulate or control the use of private property in any way, except as such part thereof as
has been adopted by ordinance duly enacted by the City Council. The City Council may designate by
ordinance an official map as provided in Section 65 ILCS 5/11-12-6 of the Illinois Municipal Code.
(c) The official comprehensive plan and official map may be adopted in whole or in separate
geographical or functional parts, each of which, when adopted by City Council shall be the official
comprehensive plan or map, or part thereof, of the City of Fairbury.
(d) The official map or parts thereof as adopted by City Council, shall specifically state the standard
requirements of the City relating to size of streets, public ways, parks and other public grounds and
Fairbury Code Ch. 10A Page - 3 Dec-11
ways for public service facilities and shall contain the standards required for drainage and sanitary
sewers. The official map shall also identify existing and proposed streets and recommended names
of proposed streets, existing and proposed drainage systems, existing and proposed parks and
playgrounds, permanent monuments, existing and proposed section corners and numbers, streams
and other waterways, and other existing and proposed public improvements scheduled for immediate
or imminent acquisition or construction. The official map shall be drawn to scale.
.06 SUBDIVISIONS AND PLATS TO COMPLY WITH OFFICIAL PLAN AND MAP.
(a) The City Council shall not approve any subdivision or plat of territory within the corporate limits or
within contiguous territory not more than one and one-half miles beyond the corporate limits and not
included in any municipality until such subdivision or plat has been submitted to the Planning
Commission for its recommendations.
(b) In the case of the approval or disapproval by the Planning Commission of any such subdivision or
plat, the reasons for such approval or disapproval shall be submitted to the City Council. The City
Council may accept or reject the Planning Commission’s recommendation or may make amendments
or changes thereto and accept such subdivision or plat, as amended or changed. The approval of the
Planning Commission, confirmed by the City Council, shall be deemed an acceptance of the
proposed plat or dedication of land. No sewers, water or gas mains or pipes or other improvements
shall be voted or made, nor shall any public money be expended for such improvement, until the plat
is approved in the manner prescribed. The approval of the plan or plat by the City Council shall be
sufficient to entitle the plan or plat to be reviewed for record.
Fairbury Code Ch. 11 Page - 1 1/28/2008
CHAPTER 11
REGULATING DEVELOPMENT IN SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD
AREAS Ordinance 2007-10 passed on November 21, 2007.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Section .01 Purpose
Section .02 Definitions
Section .03 Base Flood Elevation
Section .04 Duties of the Responsible Official
Section .05 Development Permit
Section .06 Preventing Increased Flood Heights and Resulting Damages
Section .07 Protecting Buildings
A. All Buildings
B. Residential/Non-residential Buildings
C. Non-Residential
D. Manufactured Homes
E. Travel Trailers and Recreational Vehicles
F. Garages or Sheds and Other Accessory Structures
Section .08 Subdivision Requirements
Section .09 Public Health and Other Standards
Section .10 Carrying Capacity and Notification
Section .11 Variances
Section .12 Disclaimer of Liability
Section .13 Penalty
Section .14 Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
Section .15 Severability
Section .16 Effective Date
Fairbury Code Ch. 11 Page - 2 1/28/2008
.01 Purpose.
This ordinance is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to this City by the Illinois Municipal Code
(65 ILCS 5/1-2-1, 5/11-12-12, 5/11-30-2, 5/11-30-8 and 5/11-31-2) in order to accomplish the following
purposes:
To prevent unwise developments from increasing flood or drainage hazards to others;
protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from flood damage;
to promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens from the hazards
of flooding;
to lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control, repairs to public facilities and utilities, and flood
rescue and relief operations;
maintain property values and a stable tax base by minimizing the potential for creating blight areas;
make federally subsidized flood insurance available, and
to preserve the natural characteristics and functions of watercourses and floodplains in order to
moderate flood and storm water impacts, improve water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic
and riparian habitat, provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance
community and economic development.
.02 Definitions.
For the purposes of this ordinance, the following definitions are adopted:
Base Flood- The flood having a one percent (1%) probability of being equaled or exceeded in any given
year. The base flood is also known as the 100-year flood. The base flood elevation at any location is as
defined in Section 3 of this ordinance.
Base Flood Elevation (BFE) - The elevation in relation to mean sea level of the crest of the base flood.
Basement- That portion of a building having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all sides.
Building- A walled and roofed structure, including gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above
ground, including manufactured homes, prefabricated buildings and gas or liquid storage tanks. The term
also includes recreational vehicles and travel trailers installed on a site for more than one hundred eighty
(180) days per year.
Critical Facility- Any facility which is critical to the health and welfare of the population and, if flooded,
would create an added dimension to the disaster. Damage to these critical facilities can impact the
delivery of vital services, can cause greater damage to other sectors of the community, or can put special
populations at risk.
Examples of critical facilities where flood protection should be required include: emergency services
facilities (such as fire and police stations), schools, hospitals retirement homes and senior care facilities,
major roads and bridges, critical utility sites (telephone switching stations or electrical transformers, and
hazardous material storage facilities (chemicals, petrochemicals, hazardous or toxic substances).
Development- Any man-made change to real estate including, but not necessarily limited to:
1. Demolition, construction, reconstruction, repair, placement of a building, or any structural
alteration to a building;
2. substantial improvement of an existing building;
3. installation of a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a manufactured home, or
installing a travel trailer on a site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days per year;
4. installation of utilities, construction of roads, bridges, culverts or similar projects;
5. construction or erection of levees, dams walls or fences;
6. drilling, mining, filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving, or other alterations of the ground
surface;
7. storage of materials including the placement of gas and liquid storage tanks, and channel
modifications or any other activity that might change the direction, height, or velocity of flood or
surface waters.
Fairbury Code Ch. 11 Page - 3 1/28/2008
“Development” does not include routine maintenance of existing buildings and facilities, resurfacing
roads, or gardening, plowing, and similar practices that do not involve filing, grading, or construction of
levees.
Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision- A manufactured home park or subdivision for which
the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or
buildings to be constructed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets,
and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the
floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
Expansion to an Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision- The preparation of additional
sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads).
FEMA- Federal Emergency Management Agency
Flood- A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas
from the overflow, the unusual and rapid accumulation, or the runoff of surface waters from any source.
Flood Fringe- That portion of the floodplain outside of the regulatory floodway.
Flood Insurance Rate Map- A map prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency that
depicts the floodplain or special flood hazard area (SFHA) within a community. This map includes
insurance rate zones and may or may not depict floodways and show base flood elevations.
Flood Insurance Study- An examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if
appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
Floodplain and Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) - These two terms are synonymous. Those lands
within the jurisdiction of the City of Fairbury, the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City of Fairbury, or that
may be annexed into the City of Fairbury, that are subject to inundation by the base flood. The
floodplains of the City of Fairbury, are generally identified as such on panel number(s) 450, 463, 532,
550, 575 of the countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map of Livingston County prepared by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency and dated December 18, 2007. Floodplain also includes those areas of
known flooding as identified by the community.
The floodplains of those parts of unincorporated Livingston County that are within the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the City of Fairbury or that may be annexed into the City of Fairbury, are generally identified
as such on the Flood Insurance Rate map prepared for Livingston County by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency and dated December 18, 2007.
Floodproofing- Any combination of structural or nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to
structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate, property and their contents.
Floodproofing Certificate- A form published by the Federal Emergency management agency that is
used to certify that a building has been designed and constructed to be structurally dry flood proofed to
the flood protection elevation.
Flood Protection Elevation (FPE) - The elevation of the base flood plus one foot of freeboard at any
given location in the floodplain.
Floodway- That portion of the floodplain required to store and convey the base flood. The floodway for
the floodplains of Indian Creek shall be as delineated on the countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map of
Livingston County prepared by FEMA and dated December 18, 2007. The floodways for each of the
remaining floodplains of the City of Fairbury, shall be according to the best data available from the
Federal, State, or other sources.
Freeboard- An increment of elevation added to the base flood elevation to provide a factor of safety for
uncertainties in calculations, future watershed development, unknown localized conditions, wave actions
and unpredictable effects such as those caused by ice or debris jams.
Historic Structure- Any structure that is:
1. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or preliminarily determined by the
Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National
Register.
Fairbury Code Ch. 11 Page - 4 1/28/2008
2. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic
district.
3. Individually listed on the state inventory of historic places by the Illinois Historic Preservation
Agency.
4. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places that has been certified by the Illinois
Historic Preservation Agency.
IDNR/OWR- Illinois Department of Natural Resources/Office of Water Resources.
Lowest Floor- the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood
resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than
a basement area is not considered a building’s lowest floor. Provided that such enclosure is not built so
as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of Section 7 of
this ordinance.
Manufactured Home- A structure transportable in one or more sections, that is built on a permanent
chassis and is designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to required
utilities.
Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision- A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or
more lots for rent or sale.
New Construction- Structures for which the start of construction commenced or after the effective date
of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community and includes any subsequent
improvements of such structures.
New Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision- A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or
buildings to be constructed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets,
and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of
the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
NFIP- National Flood Insurance Program.
Recreational Vehicle or Travel Trailer- A vehicle which is:
1. built on a single chassis;
2. four hundred (400) square feet or less in size;
3. designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck and designed primarily
not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping,
travel or seasonal use.
Repetitive Loss- Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a
ten year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event on the average equals or
exceeds twenty-five percent (25%) of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
SFHA- See definition of floodplain.
Start of Construction- Includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was
issued. This, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition
placement or other improvement, was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The
actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as
the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns or any work beyond
the stage of excavation or placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. For a substantial
improvement, actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other
structural part oaf a building whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
Structure (see “Building”)
Substantial Damage- Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cumulative percentage
of subsequent to the adoption of this ordinance equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value
of the structure before the damage occurred regardless of actual repair work performed. Volunteer labor
and materials must be included in this determination. The term includes “Repetitive Loss Buildings” (see
definition).
Fairbury Code Ch. 11 Page - 5 1/28/2008
Substantial Improvement- Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or improvement of a structure
taking place subsequent to the adoption of this ordinance in which the cumulative percentage of
improvements:
equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the improvement or
repair is started, or
increases the floor area by more than twenty percent (20%).
“Substantial improvement” is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or
other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the structure. This term includes structures which have incurred repetitive loss or
substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work done.
The term does not include:
1. Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local
health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure
safe living conditions, or
2. any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the
Illinois Register of Historic Places.
Violation- The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community’s
floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the required federal, state,
and/or local permits and elevation certification is presumed to be in violation until such time as the
documentation is provided.
.03 Base Flood Elevation.
This ordinance’s protection standard is the base flood. The best available base flood data are listed
below. Whenever a party disagrees with the best available data, the party shall finance the detailed
engineering study needed to replace the existing data with better data and submit it to the FEMA and
IDNR/OWR for approval prior to any development of the site.
A. The base flood elevation for the floodplains of Indian Creek shall be as delineated on the 100-
year flood profiles in the countywide Flood Insurance Study of Livingston County prepared by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency and December 18, 2007.
B. The base flood elevation for each floodplain delineated as an “AH Zone” or AO Zone” shall be
that elevation (or depth) delineated on the county wide Flood Insurance Rate Map of Livingston
County.
C. The base flood elevation for each of the remaining floodplains delineated as an “A Zone” on the
countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map of Livingston County shall be according to the best data
available from federal, state or sources. Should no other data exist, an engineering study must
be financed by the applicant to determine base flood elevations.
D. The base flood elevation for the floodplains of those parts of unincorporated Livingston County
that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City of Fairbury, or that may be annexed into
the City of Fairbury, shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the Flood Insurance
Study of Livingston County prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated
December 18, 2007.
.04 Duties of the Zoning Administrator.
The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for the general administration of this ordinance and ensure
that all development activities within the floodplains under the jurisdiction of the City of Fairbury, meet the
requirements of this ordinance. Specifically, the Zoning Administrator shall:
A. Process development permits in accordance with Section 5;
B. ensure that all development in a floodway (or a floodplain with no delineated floodway) meets the
damage prevention requirements of Section 6;
Fairbury Code Ch. 11 Page - 6 1/28/2008
C. ensure that the building protection requirements for all buildings subject to Section 7 are met and
maintain a record of the “as-built” elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) or floodproof
certificate;
D. assure that all subdivisions and annexations meet the requirements of Section 8;
E. ensure that water supply and waste disposal systems meet the Public Health standards of
Section 9;
F. if a variance is requested, ensure that the requirements of Section 11 are met and maintain
documentation of any variances granted;
G. inspect all development projects and take any and all penalty actions outlined in Section 13 as a
necessary to ensure compliance with this ordinance;
H. assure that applicants are aware of and obtain any and all other required local, state, and federal
permits;
I. notify IDNR/OWR and any neighboring communities prior to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse;
J. provide information and assistance to citizens upon request about permit procedures and
floodplain construction techniques;
K. cooperate with state and federal floodplain management agencies to coordinate base flood data
and to improve the administration of this ordinance;
L. maintain for public inspection base flood data, floodplain maps, copies of state and federal
permits, and documentation of compliance for development activities subject to this ordinance;
M. perform site inspections to ensure compliance with this ordinance and make substantial damage
determinations for structures within the floodplain, and
N. maintain the accuracy of floodplain maps including notifying IDNR/OWR and/or submitting
information to FEMA within six months whenever a modification of the floodplain may change the
base flood elevation or result in a change to the floodplain map.
.05 Development Permit.
No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body not exempted by law shall commence any
development in the floodplain without first obtaining a development permit from the Zoning Administrator.
The Zoning Administrator shall not issue a development permit if the proposed development does not
meet the requirements of this ordinance.
A. The application for development permit shall be accompanied by:
1. drawings of the site, drawn to scale showing property line dimensions;
2. existing grade elevations and all changes in grade resulting from excavation or filling;
3. the location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings;
4. the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all proposed buildings subject to the
requirements of Section 7 of this ordinance, and
5. cost of project or improvements as estimated by a licensed engineer or architect. A signed
estimate by a contractor may also meet this requirement.
B. Upon receipt of an application for a development permit, the Zoning Administrator shall compare
the elevation of the site to the base flood elevation. Any development located on land that can be
shown by the base flood elevation. Any development located on land that can be shown by
survey data to be higher than the current base flood elevation and which has not been filled after
the date of the site’s first Flood Insurance Rate Map is not in the floodplain and therefore not
subject to the requirements of this ordinance. Conversely, any development located on land
Fairbury Code Ch. 11 Page - 7 1/28/2008
shown to be below the base flood elevation and hydraulically connected, but not shown on the
current Flood Insurance Rate Map, is subject to the provisions of this ordinance.
The Zoning Administrator shall maintain documentation of the existing ground elevation at the
development site and certification that this ground elevation existed prior to the date of the site’s
first Flood Insurance Rate Map identification.
The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for obtaining from the applicant copies of all other
federal, state, and local permits, approvals or permit-not-required letters that may be required for
this type of activity. The Zoning Administrator shall not issue a permit unless all other federal,
state, and local permits have been obtained.
.06 Preventing Increased Flood Heights and Resulting Damages.
Within any floodway identified on the countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map, and within all other
floodplains where a floodway has not been delineated, the following standards shall apply:
A. Except as provided in Section 6(B) of this ordinance, no development shall be allowed which,
acting in combination with existing and anticipated development will cause any increase in flood
heights or velocities or threat to public health and safety. The following specific development
activities shall be considered as meeting this requirement:
1. Bridge and culvert crossings of streams in rural areas meeting the following conditions of the
Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Office of Water Resources Statewide Permit
Number 2:
a. the crossing will not result in an increase in water surface profile elevation in excess of
1.0 feet, and
b. the crossing will not result in an increase in water surface profile elevation in excess of
one half (0.5) feet at a point one thousand (1,000) feet upstream of the proposed
structure.
c. There are no buildings in the area impacted by the increases in water surface profile.
d. The proposed bridge or culvert crossing will not involve straightening, enlarging, or
relocating the existing channel.
e. The design must be certified by a licensed professional engineer in the State of Illinois
and the designs must meet the conditions of an IDNR/OWR permit.
f. The design must be certified by a second licensed professional engineer.
2. Barge fleeting facilities meeting the following conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit
Number 3:
a. The permit is only applicable when deadmen, pier cells, or other similar anchorage
devices have been permitted by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.
3. Aerial utility crossings meeting the following conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit
Number 4;
a. The utility line must be constructed above the existing 100-year flood elevation or
attached to an existing bridge.
b. A utility line attached to an existing bridge shall be constructed above the low cord
elevation of the bridge.
c. No supporting towers or poles shall be located in a river, lake or stream.
d. Supporting towers including foundation and poles shall be designed and located so as to
not cause an obstruction of flood flows by trapping debris.
e. All disturbed areas shall be returned to pre-construction grades and re-vegetated.
f. All Illinois Commerce Commission, National Electrical Safety Code, and federal
requirements must be met.
4. Minor boat docks meeting the following conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number
5:
a. The boat dock must not extend more than fifty (50) feet into a waterway and no more
than one quarter (1/4) of the width of the waterway and shall not extend beyond the
navigational limited established by the IDNR and Corps of Engineers.
b. The width of the boat dock shall not be more than ten (10) feet.
c. For L-Shaped or T-shaped docks, the length of that portion parallel to the shoreline must
not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the landowner’s shoreline frontage nor fifty (50) feet.
d. Docks must be aligned so as not to cross the projection of property lines into the
waterway or come within ten (10) feet of the projected property line.
e. Dock posts must be marked by reflective devices.
Fairbury Code Ch. 11 Page - 8 1/28/2008
f. The boat dock must be securely anchored to prevent detachment during times of high
wind or water.
g. Metal drums or containers may not be used as buoyancy units unless they are filled with
floatation foam. Containers which previously stored pesticides, herbicides, or any other
toxic chemicals are not permissible.
h. This permit does not authorize any other related construction activity such as shore
protection or fill.
i. Non-floating boat docks must be constructed in a manner which will minimize obstruction
to flow.
j. At any future date, the permittee must agree to make necessary modifications to the dock
as determined by the IDNR or Corp of Engineers
5. Minor, non-obstructive activities meeting the following conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide
Permit Number 6:
a. the following activities (not involving fill or positive change in grade) are covered by this
permit:
i. The construction of underground utility lines, wells, or septic tanks not crossing a lake
or stream.
ii. The construction of light poles, sign posts, and similar structures.
iii. The construction of sidewalks, driveways, athletic fields (excluding fences), patios,
and similar structures.
iv. The construction of properly anchored, unwalled, open structures such as playground
equipment, pavilions, and carports.
v. The placement of properly anchored buildings not exceeding seventy (70) square
feet in size, nor ten (10) square feet in any dimension. Only one such building on a
property is authorized by this statewide permit.
vi. The raising of existing buildings, provided no changes are made to the outside
dimensions of the building and the placement of fill is not involved.
6. Outfall Structures and drainage ditch outlets meeting the following conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit Number 7
a. Any outfall structure, including any headwall or end-section, shall not extend riverward or
lakeward of the existing adjacent natural bank slope or adjacent bank protection.
b. The velocity of the discharge shall not exceed the scour velocity of the channel soil,
unless channel erosion would be prevented by the use of riprap or other design
measures.
c. Outlets from drainage ditches shall not be opened to a stream until the ditch is vegetated
or otherwise stabilized to minimize stream sedimentation.
d. Disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during construction to
prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed floodway areas, including the stream
banks, shall be restored to their original contours and seeded or otherwise stabilized
upon completion of construction.
7. Underground pipeline and utility crossings meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide
Permit Number 8:
a. In all cases, the crossing shall be placed beneath the bed of the river, lake or stream and,
unless the crossing is encased in concrete or entrenched in bedrock, a minimum of three
(3) feet of cover shall be provided. The river, lake or stream bed shall be returned to its
original condition.
b. Disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during construction to
prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed floodway areas, including stream
banks, shall be restored to their original contours and seeded or otherwise stabilized
upon completion of construction.
c. Any utility crossing carrying material which may cause water pollution, as defined by the
Environmental Protection Act (415 ILCS 5), shall be provided with shut-off valves on each
side of the body of water to be crossed.
d. If blasting is to be utilized in the construction of the crossing, the permittee shall notify the
IDNR/OWR at least ten (10) days prior to the blasting date to allow monitoring of any
related fish kills.
8. Bank stabilization projects meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number
9:
Fairbury Code Ch. 11 Page - 9 1/28/2008
a. Only the following materials may be utilized in urban areas: stone and concrete riprap,
steel sheet piling, cellular blocks, fabric-formed concrete, gabion baskets, rock and wire
mattresses, sand/cement filled bags, geotechnical fabric materials, natural vegetation
and treated timber. Urban areas are defined as: areas of the State where residential,
commercial, or industrial development currently exists or, based on land use plans or
controls, is expected to occur within ten (10) years. (The Department should be
consulted if there is a question of whether or not an area is considered urban).
b. In addition to the materials listed in Section 6 (A) (8) (a), other materials (e.g. tire
revetments) may be utilized in rural areas provided all other conditions of this permit are
met.
c. The following materials shall not be used in any case: auto bodies, garbage of debris,
scrap lumber, metal refuse, roofing materials, asphalt or other bituminous materials, or
any material which would cause water pollution as defined by the Environmental
Protections Act (415 ILCS 5).
d. The affected length of shoreline, stream bank, or channel to be protected shall not
exceed, either singularly or cumulatively, one thousand (1000) feet.
e. All material utilized shall be properly sized or anchored to resist anticipated forces of
current and wave action.
f. Materials shall be placed in a way which would not cause erosion or the accumulation of
debris on properties adjacent to or opposite the project.
g. Materials shall not be placed higher than the existing top of the bank.
h. Materials shall be placed so that the modified bank full-width and cross-sectional area of
the channel will conform to or be no more restrictive than that of the natural channel
upstream and downstream of the site.
For projects involving continuous placement of riprap along the bank, toe of the bank or
other similar applications, in no case shall the cross-sectional area of the natural channel
be reduced by more than ten percent (10%) nor the volume of material placed exceed
two (2) cubic yards per lineal foot of the stream bank or shoreline. The bank may be
graded to obtain a flatter slope and to lessen the quantity of material required.
i. If broken concrete is used, all protruding materials such as reinforcing rods shall be cut
flush with the surface of the concrete and removed from the construction area.
j. Disturbance of vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during construction to prevent
erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed areas shall be seeded or otherwise stabilized
upon completion of construction.
k. In the case of seawalls and gabion structures on lakes, the structure shall be constructed
at or landward of the water line as determined by the normal pool elevation, unless:
i. It is constructed in alignment with an existing seawall(s) or gabion structure(s), and
ii. the volume of material placed, including the structure, would not exceed two (2) cubic
yards per lineal foot.
l. Excess material excavated during the construction of the bank or shoreline protection
shall be placed in accordance with local, state, and federal laws and rules, shall not be
placed in a floodway.
9. Accessory structures and additions to existing residential buildings meeting the conditions of
IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 10:
a. The accessory structure or building addition must comply with the requirements of the
local floodplain ordinance.
b. The principle structure to which the project is being added must have been in existence
on the effective date of this permit (July 25, 1988).
c. The accessory structure or addition must not exceed five hundred (500) square feet in
size and must not deflect floodwaters onto another property, and
d. must not involve the placement of any fill material.
e. No construction shall be undertaken in, or within fifty (50) feet of the bank of the stream
channel.
f. The accessory structure or addition must be properly anchored to prevent its movement
during flood conditions.
g. Only one accessory structure or addition to an existing structure shall be authorized by
this permit; plans for any subsequent addition must be submitted to IDNR/OWR for
review.
Fairbury Code Ch. 11 Page - 10 1/28/2008
h. Disturbances of vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during construction to prevent
erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed floodway areas shall be seeded or otherwise
stabilized upon completion of construction.
10. Minor maintenance dredging activities meeting the following conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit Number 11:
a. The affected length of the stream shall not either singularly or cumulatively exceed one
thousand (1000) feet.
b. The project shall not include the construction of any new channel; all work must be
confined to the existing channel or to reestablishing flows in the natural stream channel,
and
c. the cross-sectional area of the dredged channel shall conform to that of the natural
channel upstream and down stream of the site.
d. Dredged or spoil material shall not be disposed of in a wetland and shall be either:
i. removed from the floodway;
ii. used to stabilize an existing bank provided no materials would be placed higher than
the existing top of bank and provided the cross-sectional area of the natural channel
would not be reduced by more than ten percent (10%), nor the volume of material
placed exceed two (2) cubic yards per lineal foot of streambank;
iii. used to fill an existing washed out or scoured floodplain area such that the average
natural floodplain elevation is not increased;
iv. used to stabilize and existing levee provided the height of the levee would not be
increased nor its alignment changed;
v. placed in a disposal site previously approved by the Department in accordance with
the conditions of the approval, or
vi. used for beach nourishment, provided the material meets all applicable water quality
standards.
e. Disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during construction to
prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed floodway areas, including the stream
banks, shall be seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction.
11. Bridge and culvert replacement structures and bridge widening meeting the following
conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide Permit Number 12:
a. A licensed professional engineer shall determine and document that the existing structure
has not been the cause of demonstrable flood damage. Such documentation shall
include, at a minimum, confirmation that:
i. No buildings or structures have been impacted by the backwater induced by the
existing structure, and
ii. there is no record of complaints of flood damages associated with the existing
structure.
b. A licensed professional engineer shall determine that the new structure will provide the
same or greater effective waterway opening as the existing structure. For bridge
widening projects the existing piers and the proposed pier extensions must be in line with
the direction of the approaching flow upstream of the bridge.
c. The project shall not include any appreciable raising of the approach roads. (This
condition does not apply if all points on the approaches exist at an elevation equal to or
higher than the 100-year frequency flood headwater elevation as determined by a FEMA
flood insurance study completed or approved by IDNR/OWR).
d. The project shall not involve the straightening, enlargement or relocation of the existing
channel of the river or stream except as permitted by the Department’s Statewide Permit
Number 9 (Minor Shoreline, channel and Streambank Protection Activities) or Statewide
Permit Number 11 (Minor Maintenance Dredging Activities).
e. The permittee shall maintain records of projects authorized by this permit necessary to
document compliance with the above conditions.
12. Temporary construction activities meeting the following conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide Permit
Number 13:
a. No temporary construction activity shall be commenced until the individual permittee
determines that the permanent structure (if any) for which the work is being performed
has received all required federal, state and local authorizations.
b. The term “temporary” shall mean not more than one construction season. All temporary
construction materials must be removed from the stream and floodway within one year of
Fairbury Code Ch. 11 Page - 11 1/28/2008
their placement and the area returned to the conditions existing prior to the beginning of
construction. Any desired subsequent or repetitive material placement shall not occur
without the review and approval of the IDNR/OWR.
c. The temporary project shall be constructed such that it will not cause erosion or damage
due to increases in water surface profiles to adjacent properties. For locations where
there are structures in the upstream floodplain, the temporary project shall be constructed
such that all water surface profile increases, due to the temporary project, are contained
within the channel banks.
d. This permit does not authorize the placement or construction of any solid embankment or
wall such as a dam, roadway, levee, or dike across any channel or floodway.
e. No temporary structure shall be placed within any river or stream channel until a licensed
professional engineer determines and documents that the temporary structure will meet
the requirements of Special Condition Number 3 of this statewide permit. Such
documentation shall include, at a minimum, confirmation that no buildings or structures
will be impacted by the backwater induced by the temporary structure.
f. The permittee shall maintain records of projects authorized by this permit necessary to
document compliance with the above condition.
g. Disturbance of vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during construction to prevent
erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed areas shall be seeded or otherwise stabilized
upon completion of the removal of the temporary construction.
h. Materials used for the project shall not cause water pollution as defined by the
Environmental Protection Act (415 ILCS 5).
13. Any Development determined by IDNR/OWR to be located entirely within a flood fringe area
shall be exempt from State Floodway permit requirements.
B. Other development activities not listed in 6(A) may be permitted only if:
1. permit has been issued for the work by IDNR/OWR (or written documentation is provided that
an IDNR/OWR permit is not required), or
2. sufficient data has been provided to FEMA when necessary, and approval obtained from
FEMA for a revision of the regulatory map and base flood elevation.
.07 Protecting Buildings.
A. In addition to the damage prevention requirements of Section 6 of this ordinance, all buildings
located in the floodplain shall be protected from flood damage below the flood protection
elevation. This building protection requirement applies to the following situations:
1. Construction or placement of a new building or alteration or addition to an existing building
valued at more than one thousand dollars ($1,000) or seventy (70) square feet.
2. Substantial improvements or structural alterations made to an existing building that increase
the floor area by more than twenty percent (20%) or equal or exceed the market value by fifty
percent (50%). Alteration shall be figured cumulatively during a 10- year period. If
substantially improved, the existing structure and the addition must meet the flood protection
standards of this section.
3. Repairs made to a substantially damaged building. These repairs shall be figured
cumulatively during a 10- year period. If substantially damaged the entire structure must
meet the flood protection standards of this section.
4. Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured home on an existing
site. (The building protection requirements do not apply to returning a manufactured home to
the same site it lawfully occupied before it was removed to avoid flood damage).
5. Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a site for more than one hundred eighty
(180) days per year.
6. Repetitive loss to an existing building as defined in Section 2.
B. Residential or non-residential buildings can meet the building protection requirements by one of
the following methods:
1. The building may be constructed on permanent land fill in accordance with the following:
a. The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at or above the flood protection elevation.
Fairbury Code Ch. 11 Page - 12 1/28/2008
b. The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than six inches before compaction and should
extend at least ten (10) feet beyond the foundation before sloping below the flood
protection elevation.
c. The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during flooding by vegetative cover,
riprap, or other structural measure.
d. The fill shall be composed of rock or soil and not incorporated debris or refuse material,
and
e. shall not adversely affect the flow of surface drainage from or onto neighboring properties
and when necessary stormwater management techniques such as swales or basins shall
be incorporated.
2. The building may be elevated on solid walls in accordance with the following:
a. The building or improvements shall be elevated on stilts, piles, walls, crawlspace, or other
foundation that is permanently open to flood waters.
b. The lowest floor and all electrical, heating, ventilating, plumbing, and air conditioning
equipment and utility meters shall be located at or above the flood protection elevation.
c. If walls are used, all enclosed areas below the flood protection elevation shall address
hydrostatic pressures by allowing the automatic entry and exit of flood waters. Designs
must either be certified by a licensed professional engineer or by having a minimum of
one (1) permanent opening on each wall no more than one (1) foot above grade with a
minimum of two (2) openings. The openings shall provide a total net area of not less
than one (1) square inch for every one (1) square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding below the base flood elevation, and
d. the foundation and supporting members shall be anchored, designed, and certified so as
to minimize exposure to hydrodynamic forces such as current, waves, ice, and floating
debris.
i. All structural components below the flood protection elevation shall be constructed of
materials resistant to flood damage.
ii. Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines, submersible pumps, and other
service facilities may be located below the flood protection elevation provided they
are waterproofed.
iii. The area below the flood protection elevation shall be used solely for parking or
building access and not later modified or occupied as habitable space, or
iv. in lieu of the above criteria, the design methods to comply with these requirements
may be certified by a licensed professional engineer or architect.
3. The building may be constructed with a crawlspace located below the flood protection
elevation provided that the following conditions are met:
4. The building must be designed and adequately anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and
lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy.
5. Any enclosed area below the flood protection elevation shall have openings that equalize
hydrostatic pressures by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. A minimum
of one opening on each wall having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch per
one (1) square foot of enclosed area. The openings shall be no more than one (1) foot above
grade.
6. The interior grade of the crawlspace below the flood protection elevation must not be more
than two (2) feet below the lowest adjacent exterior grade.
7. The interior height of the crawlspace measured from the interior grade of the crawl to the top
of the foundations wall must not exceed four (4) feet at any point.
8. An adequate drainage system must be installed to remove floodwaters from the interior area
of the crawlspace within a reasonable period of time after a flood event.
9. Portions of the building below the flood protection elevation must be constructed with
materials resistant to flood damage, and
10. utility systems within the crawlspace must be elevated above the flood protection elevation.
C. Non-residential buildings may be structurally dry floodproofed (in lieu of elevation) provided a
licensed professional engineer or architect certifies that:
1. Below the flood protection elevation the structure and attendant utility facilities are watertight
and capable of resisting the effects of the base flood.
Fairbury Code Ch. 11 Page - 13 1/28/2008
2. The building design accounts for flood velocities, duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy, and the impact from debris and ice.
3. Floodproofing measures will be incorporated into the building design and operable without
human intervention and without an outside source of electricity.
4. Levees, berms, floodwalls and similar works are not considered floodproofing for the purpose
of this subsection.
D. Manufactured homes or travel trailers to be permanently installed on site shall be:
1. Elevated to or above the flood protection elevation in accordance with Section 7(B), and
2. anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by being tied down in accordance
with the rules and regulations for the Illinois Mobile Home Tie-Down Act issued pursuant to
77 Ill. Adm. Code § 870.
E. Travel trailers and recreational vehicles on site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days per
year shall meet the elevation requirements of section 7(D) unless the following conditions are
met:
1. The vehicle must be either self-propelled or towable by a light duty truck.
2. The hitch must remain on the vehicle at all times.
3. The vehicle must not be attached to external structures such as decks and porches
4. The vehicle must be designed solely for recreation, camping, travel, or seasonal use rather
than as a permanent dwelling.
5. The vehicles largest horizontal projections must be no larger than four hundred (400) square
feet.
6. The vehicle’s wheels must remain on axles and inflated.
7. Air conditioning units must be attached to the frame so as to be safe for movement of the
floodplain.
8. Propane tanks as well as electrical and sewage connections must be quick-disconnect and
above the 100-year flood elevation.
9. The vehicle must be licensed and titled as a recreational vehicle or park model, and
10. must either:
a. entirely be supported by jacks, or
b. have a hitch jack permanently mounted, have the tires touching the ground and be
supported by block in a manner that will allow the block to be easily removed by used of
the hitch jack.
F. Garages, sheds or other minor accessory structures constructed ancillary to an existing
residential use may be permitted provided the following conditions are met:
1. The garage or shed must be non-habitable.
2. The garage or shed must be used only for the storage of vehicles and tools and cannot be
modified later into another use.
3. The garage or shed must be located outside of the floodway or have the appropriate state
and/or federal permits.
4. The garage or shed must be on a single family lot and be accessory to an existing principle
structure on the same lot.
5. Below the base flood elevation, the garage or shed must be built of materials not susceptible
to flood damage.
6. All utilities, plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical must be elevated above the flood
protection elevation.
7. The garage or shed must have at least one permanent opening on each wall not more than
one (1) foot above grade with one (1) square inch of opening for every one (1) square foot of
floor area.
8. The garage or shed must be less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000) in market value or
replacement cost whichever is greater or less than five hundred (500) square feet.
9. The structure shall be anchored to resist floatation and overturning.
10. All flammable or toxic materials (gasoline, paint, insecticides, fertilizers, etc.) shall be stored
above the flood protection elevation.
11. The lowest floor elevation should be documented and the owner advised of the flood
insurance implications.
Fairbury Code Ch. 11 Page - 14 1/28/2008
.08 Subdivision Requirements
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall take into account hazards, to the extent that they are known, in all
official actions related to land management use and development.
A. New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation agreements, planned unit
developments, and additions to manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet the damage
prevention and building protections standards of Sections 6 and 7 of this ordinance. Any proposal for
such development shall include the following data:
1. The base flood elevation and the boundary of the floodplain, where the base flood elevation is not
available from an existing study, the applicant shall be responsible for calculating the base flood
elevation;
2. the boundary of the floodway when applicable, and
3. a signed statement by a Registered Professional Engineer that the proposed plat or plan
accounts for changes in the drainage of surface waters in accordance with the Plat Act (765
ILCS 205/2).
Streets, blocks lots, parks and other public grounds shall be located and laid out in such a manner as
to preserve and utilize natural streams and channels. Wherever possible the floodplains shall be
included within parks or other public grounds.
.09 Public Health and Other Standards
A. Public health standards must be met for all floodplain development. In addition to the
requirements of Sections 6 and 7 of this ordinance the following standards apply:
1. No development in the floodplain shall include locating or storing chemicals, explosives,
buoyant materials, flammable liquids, pollutants, or other hazardous or toxic materials below
the flood protection elevation unless such materials are stored in a floodproofed and
anchored storage tank and certified by a professional engineer or floodproofed building
constructed according to the requirements of Section 7 of this ordinance.
2. Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas and electric shall be located and constructed
to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
3. Public sanitary sewer systems and water supply systems shall be located and constructed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the
systems into flood waters.
4. New and replacement on-site sanitary sewer lines or waste disposal systems shall be located
and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
Manholes or other above ground openings located below the flood protection elevation shall
be watertight.
5. Construction of new or substantially improved critical facilities shall be located outside the
limits of the floodplain. Construction of new critical facilities shall be permissible within the
floodplain if no feasible alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the
SFHA shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or structurally dry
floodproofed to the 500-year flood frequency elevation or three feet above the level of the
100-year flood frequency elevation whichever is greater. Floodproofing and sealing
measures must be taken to ensure that toxic substances will not be displaced by or released
into floodwaters. Access routes elevated to or above the level of the base flood elevation
shall be provided to all critical facilities.
B. All other activities defined as development shall be designed so as not to alter flood flows or
increase potential flood damages.
.10 Carrying Capacity and Notification.
For all projects involving channel modification, fill, or stream maintenance (including levees), the flood
carrying capacity of the watercourse shall be maintained.
In addition, the City of Fairbury, shall notify adjacent communities in writing thirty (30) days prior to the
issuance of a permit for the alteration or relocation of the watercourse.
Fairbury Code Ch. 11 Page - 15 1/28/2008
.11 Variances.
Whenever the standards of this ordinance place undue hardship on a specific development proposal, the
applicant may apply to the Zoning Board of Appeals for a variance. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall
review the applicant’s request for a variance and shall submit its recommendation to the City Council.
The City Council may attach such conditions to granting of a variance as it deems necessary to further
the intent of this ordinance.
A. No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates that all of the following conditions
are met:
1. The development activity cannot be located outside the floodplain.
2. An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not granted.
3. The relief requested is the minimum necessary.
4. There will be no additional threat to public health, safety or creation of a nuisance.
5. There will be no additional public expense for flood protection, rescue or relief operations,
policing, or repairs to roads, utilities, or other public facilities.
6. The applicant’s circumstances are unique and do not establish a pattern inconsistent with the
intent of the NFIP, and
7. all other state and federal permits have been obtained.
B. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall notify an applicant in writing that a variance from the
requirements of the building protections standards of Section 7 that would lessen the degree of
protection to a building will:
1. Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to twenty-five dollars ($25) per one
hundred dollars ($100) of insurance coverage;
2. increase the risk to life and property, and
3. require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks and that the applicant
acknowledge in writing the assumption of the risk and liability.
C. Variances to the building protection requirements of Section 7 of this ordinance which are
requested in connection with reconstruction, repair, or alteration of a historic site or historic
structure as defined in “Historic Structures”, may be granted using criteria more permissive than
the requirements of Sections 6 and 7 of this ordinance subject to the conditions that:
1. The repair or rehabilitation is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and
design of the structure.
2. The repair or rehabilitation will not result in the structure being removed as a certified historic
structure.
.12 Disclaimer of Liability.
The degree of protection required by this ordinance is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and
is based on available information derived from engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods
may occur or flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This ordinance does not
imply that development either inside or outside of the floodplain will be free from flooding or damage.
This ordinance does not create liability on the part of the City of Fairbury, or any officer or employee
thereof for any flood damage that results from proper reliance on this ordinance or any administrative
decision made lawfully thereunder.
.13 Penalty.
Failure to obtain a permit for development in the floodplain or failure to comply with the conditions of a
permit or a variance shall be deemed to be a violation of this ordinance. Upon due investigation, the
Zoning Administrator may determine that a violation of the minimum standards of this ordinance exists.
The Zoning Administrator shall notify the owner in writing of such violation.
A. If such owner fails after ten (10) days notice to correct the violation:
1. The City of Fairbury, shall make application to the circuit court for an injunction requiring
conformance with this ordinance or make such other order as the court deems necessary to
secure compliance with the ordinance.
2. Any person who violates this ordinance shall upon conviction thereof be fined not less than
twenty-five dollars ($25) or more than two hundred ($200) for each offense.
Fairbury Code Ch. 11 Page - 16 1/28/2008
3. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues, and
4. the City of Fairbury, shall record a notice of violation on the title of the property.
B. The Zoning Administrator shall inform the owner that any such violation is considered a willful act
to increase flood damages and therefore may cause coverage by a Standard Flood Insurance
Policy to be suspended.
The Zoning Administrator is authorized to issue an order requiring the suspension of the subject
development. The stop-work order shall be in writing, indicate the reason for the issuance, and
shall order the action, if necessary, to resolve the circumstances requiring the stop-work order.
The stop-work order constitutes a suspension of the permit.
No site development permit shall be permanently suspended or revoked until a hearing is held by
the Zoning Board of Appeals. Written notice of such hearing shall be served on the permittee and
shall state:
1. The grounds for the complaint, reasons for suspension or revocation, and
2. the time and place of the hearing.
At such hearing the permittee shall be given an opportunity to present evidence on their behalf.
At the conclusion of the hearing, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall determine whether the permit
shall be suspended or revoked.
C. Nothing herein shall prevent the City of Fairbury, from taking such other lawful action to prevent
or remedy any violations. All costs connected therewith shall accrue to the person or persons
responsible.
.14 Abrogation and Greater Restrictions.
This ordinance repeals and replaces other ordinances adopted by the City of Fairbury, to fulfill the
requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program including: Ordinance 1986-7. However, this
ordinance does not repeal the original resolution or ordinance adopted to achieve eligibility in the
program. Nor does this ordinance repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or
deed restrictions. Where this ordinance and other ordinance easements, covenants or deed restrictions
conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
.15 Severabilility.
The provisions and sections of this ordinance shall be deemed separable and the invalidity of any portion
of this ordinance shall not affect the validity of the remainder.
Fairbury Code Ch. 13 Page - 1 Jul-12
CHAPTER 13
NUISANCES
.01 PUBLIC NUISANCES PROHIBITED.
No person shall erect, contrive, cause, continue, maintain or permit to exist any public nuisance within the
City or within the police jurisdiction of the City.
.02 PUBLIC NUISANCES DEFINED.
(a) Generally. A public nuisance is a thing, act, occupation, condition or use of property which shall
continue for such length of time as to:
1. Substantially annoy, injure or endanger the comfort, health, repose or safety of the public;
2. In any way render the public insecure in life or in the use of property;
3. Greatly offend the public morals or decency;
4. Unlawfully and substantially interfere with, obstruct or tend to obstruct or render dangerous for
passage any street, alley, highway, navigable body of water or other public way.
(b) Public nuisances affecting health. The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are
hereby specifically declared to be public health nuisances, but shall to be construed to exclude other
health nuisances coming within the definition of subsection (a) of this section:
1. All decayed, harmfully adulterated or unwholesome food or drink sold or offered for sale to the
public;
2. Carcasses of animals, birds or fowl not buried or otherwise disposed of in a sanitary manner
within 24 hours after death;
3. Accumulations of decayed animal or vegetable matter, trash, rubbish, rotting lumber, bedding,
packing material, inoperative, junked or abandoned vehicles or machinery, scrap metal or any
material in which flies, mosquitoes, disease-carrying insects, rats or other vermin may breed; or
which may constitute a fire hazard;
4. All stagnant water in which mosquitoes, flies or other insects can multiply;
5. Garbage cans which are not fly-tight;
6. The escape of smoke, soot, cinder, noxious acids, fumes, gases, fly ash or industrial dust within
the City limits in such quantities as to endanger the health of persons of ordinary sensibilities or to
threaten or cause substantial injury to property;
7. The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream, lake, canal or body of water by sewage,
creamery or industrial wastes or other substances;
8. Any use of property, substances or things within the City emitting or causing any foul, offensive,
noisome, nauseous, noxious, or disagreeable odors, effluvia or stenches extremely repulsive to
the physical senses of ordinary persons which annoy, discomfort, injure or inconvenience the
health of any appreciable number of persons within the City;
9. All abandoned wells not securely covered or secured from public use;
10. Any barn, stable or shed used for keeping animals;
11. Any obstruction in or across any water course, drainage ditch or ravine;
12. Any open burning contrary to the regulations of the Illinois Pollution Control Board;
13. The deposit of garbage, rubbish, junk, refuse or any offensive substance on any street, sidewalk
or public place, or on any private property, except as may be permitted by ordinance;
14. Any noxious weeds on private property, as defined by Chapter 18 of the Illinois Revised Statutes.
(c) Public Nuisances Offending Morals and Decency. The following acts, omissions, places, conditions
and things are hereby specifically declared to be public nuisances offending public morals and
decency, but such enumeration shall not be construed to exclude other nuisances offending public
morals and decency coming within the definition of subsection (a) of this section:
Fairbury Code Ch. 13 Page - 2 Jul-12
1. All disorderly houses, bawdy houses, houses of ill fame, gambling houses and buildings or
structures kept or resorted to for the purpose of prostitution, promiscuous sexual intercourse or
gambling; except for video gaming devices operated pursuant to a license or permit from the
Illinois Department of Revenue pursuant to the Illinois Video Gaming Act, 230 ILCS 40/1 et seq
so long as such video gaming is conducted in compliance with all requirements of said Act and all
rules and regulations of the Illinois Department of Revenue (2012-6)
2. All gambling devices and slot machines except for video gaming devices operated pursuant to a
license or permit from the Illinois Department of Revenue pursuant to the Illinois Video Gaming
Act, 230 ILCS 40/1 et seq so long as such video gaming is conducted in compliance with all
requirements of said Act and all rules and regulations of the Illinois Dept. of Revenue(2012-6)
3. All places where intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages are sold, possessed, stored,
brewed, bottled, manufactured or rectified without a permit or license as provided for by this
Code;
4. Any place or premises within the City where ordinances or state laws relating to public health,
safety, peace morals, or welfare are openly, continuously, repeatedly and intentionally violated;
(d) Public nuisances affecting peace and safety. The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and
things are hereby declared to be public nuisances affecting peace and safety, but such enumeration
shall not be construed to exclude other nuisances affecting public peace or safety coming within the
provisions of subsection (a) of this section:
1. All buildings erected, repaired or altered in violation of the provisions of the ordinances of the City
relating to materials and manner of construction of buildings and structures;
2. All unauthorized signs, signals, markings or devices which purport to be or may be mistaken as
official traffic control devices placed or maintained upon or in view of any public highway or
railway crossing;
3. All trees, hedges, billboards or other obstructions which prevent persons driving vehicles on
public streets, alleys or highways from obtaining a clear view of traffic when approaching an
intersection or pedestrian crosswalk;
4. All limbs of trees which project over a public sidewalk less than 8 feet above the surface thereof
or less than 10 feet above the surface of a public street;
5. All use or display of fireworks or explosives, except as provided by the laws of the State of Illinois
and ordinances of the City;
6. All buildings or structures so old, dilapidated or out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe,
unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human use;
7. All wires over streets, alleys or public grounds which are strung less than 15 feet above the
surface of the street or ground;
8. All loud and discordant noises or vibrations of any kind;
9. All obstructions of streets, alleys, sidewalks or crosswalks and all excavations in or under the
same, except as permitted by the ordinances of the City or which, although made in accordance
with such ordinances, are kept or maintained for an unreasonable length of time after the purpose
thereof has been accomplished;
10. All open and unguarded pits, wells, excavations or unused basements freely accessible from any
public street, alley or sidewalk;
11. All abandoned refrigerators or iceboxes from which the doors and other covers have not been
removed or which are not equipped with a device or opening from the inside by pushing only with
the strength of a small child;
12. Any unauthorized or unlawful use of property abutting on a public street, alley or sidewalk or of a
public street, alley or sidewalk which causes large crowds of people to gather, obstructing traffic
and free use of the streets or sidewalks;
13. Any advertisements or signs affixed to any building, wall, fence, sidewalk, street or other private
or public property without permission of the owner thereof;
14. Any sign, marquee, or awning which is in an unsafe condition, or which overhangs any roadway,
or which overhangs any sidewalk less then seven feet above the sidewalk surface;
15. Any condition or practice constituting a fire hazard;
16. Any nuisance so defined by the Illinois Revised Statues;
Fairbury Code Ch. 13 Page - 3 Jul-12
17. Any junk shop except as permitted in Section 9 of this chapter;
18. Parking or storing junk vehicles or disabled vehicles, including trailers and parts for vehicles or
trailers unless so licensed to do so, on either public or private property.
19. Any person or entity who violates Chapter 13, Section .02(d)18 shall be fined $100.00 for each
violation. Each junk vehicle or disabled vehicle, including trailers or parts for vehicles or trailers
parked or stored in violation of Chapter 13, Section .02(d) 18 shall constitute a separate violation.
Each day that said junk vehicles or disabled vehicles, including trailers or parts for vehicles or
trailers are not removed after second notice to do so shall constitute a separate violation. The
violator shall also be assessed the city’s attorneys fees for enforcement of this provision. (2009-4)
.03 ABATEMENT OF PUBLIC NUISANCES.
(a) Inspection of premises. Whenever complain is made to the Mayor that a public nuisance exists, or
has existed, within the City, he or his official designee shall promptly inspect or cause to be inspected
the premises and shall make a written report of his findings to the City Council. Whenever
practicable, the inspecting officer shall cause photographs to be made of the premises and shall file
the same in the office of the City Clerk.
(b) Summary Abatement.
1. Notice to Owner. If the inspecting officer shall determine that a public nuisance exists on private
property and that there is great and immediate danger to the public health, safety, peace, morals
or decency, the Mayor may direct the City Clerk, or a deputy sheriff, to serve a notice on the
owner, or if the owner cannot be found, on the occupant or person causing, permitting or
maintaining such nuisance and to post a copy of the notice on the premises. Such notice shall
direct the owner, occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining such nuisance to abate or
remove such nuisance within 24 hours and shall state that unless such nuisance is so abated, the
City will cause the same to be abated and will charge the cost thereof to the owner, occupant or
person causing, permitting or maintaining the same, as the case may be.
2. Abatement by City. If the nuisance is not abated within the time provided or if the owner,
occupant or person causing the nuisance cannot be found, the Street Commissioner, or some
other City official who the Mayor shall designate, shall cause the abatement or removal of such
public nuisance. This paragraph shall authorize the Police Department to tow and remove
abandoned or junk vehicles.
(c) Abatement by court action. If the inspecting officer shall determine that a public nuisance exists on
private premises but that the nature of such nuisance is not such as to threaten great and immediate
danger to the public health, safety, peace, morals or decency, he shall file a written report of his
findings with the Mayor, who shall cause an action to abate such nuisance to be commenced in the
name of the City.
.04 COST OF ABATEMENT.
The cost of abating a public nuisance shall be borne by the owner of the property or person causing,
permitting or maintaining the nuisance. Such cost shall be assessed against the real estate as other
special taxes and shall include the attorney fees of the City.
.05 PARKING MOTOR HOMES, TRAILERS, BOATS.
(a) No person shall park or store on any property owned or occupied by him any motor home, camper
vehicle, trailer or boat which is not owned by him or a member of his family. Storage by the owner of
any such item shall be only in the rear yard.
(b) No person shall locate more than one motor home on each undeveloped lot, as originally platted, or
on any area having less than fifty feet of frontage to the street.
(c) Guests of any owner or occupant of any dwelling in the City may park a motor home in the rear yard
of such dwelling for not more than 15 days, provided the motor home is used for sleeping purposes
only during such period.
Fairbury Code Ch. 13 Page - 4 Jul-12
.06 NOXIOUS PLANTS AND WEEDS.
(a) Noxious plants and weeds declared nuisance. Any weeds such as known as jimson, burdock,
ragweed, thistle, cocklebur, or other weeds of like kind, and plants or bushes of the species of tall,
common or European Barberry, otherwise known as Barberis Vulgaris, or its horticultural varieties,
found growing in any place or location within the corporate limits of the City, are declared to be a
nuisance. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit any such weeds, plants or bushes to
grow or remain in any place or location within the corporate limits of the City to a height in excess of
eight inches.
(b) Removal of noxious plants and weeds. It shall be the duty of every owner or occupant of every lot or
tract of land within the corporate limits of the City to cut, destroy or remove, or cause to be cut,
destroyed or removed, every such weed, plant or bush as hereinabove described upon every such lot
or tract of land in such manner and on or before such time as such weeds, bushes or plants reach or
exceed the height of twelve inches. Upon the failure of any such owner or occupant so to do, it shall
be the duty of the Mayor or the Chief of Police to serve or cause to be served a notice upon any such
owner or occupant of any premises upon which any such weeds, plants or bushes are caused or
permitted to grow in violation of the provisions of this section, demanding the abatement of such
growth as a nuisance, within a period of ten days from the date of such service. Failure of any owner
or occupant to comply with the provisions and demands of such notice shall constitute a violation of
the provisions of this section.
(c) Abatement. If, upon the expiration of the 10-day period provided in the notice to any owner or
occupant of any premises in the City upon which any such weeds, plants or bushes are caused or
permitted to grow in violation of the provision of this section, it shall be the duty of the Mayor or the
Chief of Police to proceed to abate the nuisance by cutting, destroying or otherwise removing the
weeds, plants or bushes, and to keep an account of the expense thereof, and such expense shall be
charged to the owner, or the owner and occupant jointly, of the premises, and it shall be the duty of
the owner or the owner and occupant jointly to pay such expense.
(d) Lien.
1. The City of Fairbury shall have a continuing lien upon the premises and real estate upon which
any noxious weeds, plants or bushes shall be caused or permitted to grown in violation of the
provisions of this section, for or on account of which it is necessary for any expense to be
suffered or incurred by the City for the cutting, destroying or otherwise removing of any weeds,
plants or bushes. Every lien shall, upon compliance with the conditions hereinafter set forth,
become and be prior and superior to the rights and interests of creditors, encumbrances,
purchasers and other parties in interest in such premises and real estate, except taxes.
2. Such lien may be preserved and enforced in the following manner: The City Clerk shall within 60
days after the accrual of such expense or cost or charge, file or cause to be filed with the
Livingston County Recorder of Deeds, a claim for lien, verified by the affidavit of himself or any
other officer of the City having knowledge of the facts, which shall consist of a brief statement of
the facts of the claim including the dates such expenses were incurred, the balance due after
allowing all credits, and a sufficiently correct description of the lot, lots, or tract or tracts of land or
real estate to properly identify such land or real estate. No such lien shall be defeated in the
proper amount thereof because of error or overcharging on the part of the City, nor shall any such
lien be defeated upon proof that the expense or cost or charge resulted from or was incurred by
reason or fault of any tenant or occupant or other person in possession other that the owner.
(e) Foreclosure of lien.
1. If payment shall not be made as provided in this section of any amount due by virtue of its
provisions when the same shall become due, the City may file or cause to be filed a petition or bill
in the appropriate court for a foreclosure of such lien, and the City may proceed in it’s corporate
name to foreclose such lien in like manner and with like effect as provided by the Illinois Revised
Statutes in foreclosure of mortgages. Such suit shall be commenced within one year after the
accrual of such expense or cost or charge. Any decree rendered in court may be enforced and
collected as other decrees or judgments in such court.
Fairbury Code Ch. 13 Page - 5 Jul-12
2. The remedy provided in this section shall not be construed to abridge or in any manner interfere
with the right and power of the City to enforce the collection thereof by an action at law or as
otherwise provided in this section, but the remedy herein provided shall be taken and held as an
additional means to enforce payment of such delinquent expense or cost or charge.
.07 BURNING OF MATERIALS.
(a) Fires regulated. It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or negligently make, use or leave any
fire, or depositor leave any ashes, or other combustible or inflammable material, liquid or substance;
or use or leave any lighted fire, lamp, gas or electric light at such time or in such manner as to
endanger any building or other property, or so as to cause any damage or injury to any building or
other property; or make, kindle or use any fire in any shed, or in any barn, not fire-proof, except in a
secure fireplace, furnace or stove built for that purpose; or make or kindle any outdoor fire, near any
building or other property likely to be endangered thereby; unless in a secure furnace or enclosure
made for that purpose; or leave any outdoor fire unattended; or in any such fire burn or cause to be
consumed anything productive of foul, noxious or unpleasant odors, to the annoyance and discomfort
of those being or residing in the vicinity of such fire. No person shall start or maintain any fire
whatsoever after dark.
(b) Burning trash. It shall be unlawful for any person to burn any trash or waste matter within the City,
except material such as paper, cardboard, tree trimmings and other products which burn freely and
without objectionable quantities of smoke and obnoxious odors.
(c) Penalty. Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a Class C Misdemeanor as provided in Illinois Revised Statutes, and penalized accordingly.
Furthermore, the violation of this chapter is declared to be a public nuisance to be abated in the
manner provided by law.
(d) Outdoor burning and fires prohibited. Whenever the Mayor of the City of Fairbury determines, after
consultation with the Fire Chief of the City of Fairbury, that it would be a danger to allow outdoor
burning or fires because of excessive dryness for an extended length of time or because of reduced
water capacity, for whatever reason, of the Waterworks System of the City of Fairbury, then the
Mayor shall issue a proclamation prohibiting all outdoor fires and all burning of any and all types of
materials within the City of Fairbury commencing immediately upon issuance of the proclamation and
continuing until the Mayor shall determine that the conditions no longer exist which required the
proclamation. Any person who orders, permits, starts, or oversees any outdoor fire or any outdoor
burning of any types of materials in violation of said proclamation shall be punished by a fine of
$100.00 for the first offense, and a fine of $500.00 for any second and each subsequent offense. If
any fine imposed hereunder is not paid within thirty days after issuance of a citation by the Mayor,
then the Mayor or City Council may instruct the City Attorney to take such legal action as is necessary
to collect said fine. (1988-19)
(e) Limitations on Burning Leaves.
1. From September 15 to December 15 of each year and from March 15 to May 15 of each year, the
burning of leaves shall be allowed in the City of Fairbury only on Tuesday, Thursday, and
Saturday of each week during daylight hours only. The burning of leaves on any other days or
times during those months is prohibited. (2003-13)
2. Any person who burns leaves or orders, permits, or oversees the burning of leaves in the City of
Fairbury on any prohibited day or time shall be subject to the following penalties: (2003-13)
First offense – a written warning shall be given. (2003-13)
Second offense – a fine of Seventy-Five Dollars ($75.00) if paid to the City Clerk within 30 days of
the issue date of the ticket for such offense and if not paid to the City Clerk within 30 days of the
issue date of the ticket for such offense, then the fine for such offense shall be not less than One
Hundred Dollars ($100.00) nor more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00). (2003-13)
Third offense and all subsequent offenses - a fine of Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00) if paid
to the City Clerk within 30 days of the issue date of the ticket for each such offense and if not paid
Fairbury Code Ch. 13 Page - 6 Jul-12
to the City Clerk within 30 days of the issue date of the ticket for each such offense, then the fine
for such offense shall be not less than Three Hundred Dollars ($300.00) nor more than Five
Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for each such offense. (2003-13)
3. If any fine imposed by this subsection (e) is not paid within thirty days of the issue date of the
ticket for such offense, then the Mayor or City Council may instruct the City Attorney to take such
legal action as is necessary to collect said fine. (2003-13)
.08 JUNK DEALERS.
(a) License required. It shall be unlawful to operate or carry on the business of junk dealer or to keep
any junk shop, store or place for the purchase or sale of junk, rags, old rope, paper or bagging, old
iron, brass, copper or empty bottles, without having obtained a license therefore, as herein provided.
(b) Applications. Applications for such licenses shall be made to the City Clerk, and upon forms
approved by the City Council. Licenses shall be granted to all applicants upon payment of the
required fee, provided that the operation of the business of each licensee shall not violate any of the
provisions of this ordinance, or of any other ordinance of the City.
(c) Fee. The fee to be paid for such license shall be $25.00.
(d) Stolen goods. Every keeper of junk shop who shall receive or be in possession of any goods, articles
or things of value which may have been lost or stolen shall upon demand produce such goods,
articles or things to any law enforcement officer for examination.
(e) Penalty. Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a Class C Misdemeanor punishable by a fine not less than $50.00 nor in excess of $500.00.
Furthermore, the violation of this chapter is declared to be a public nuisance to be abated in the
manner provided by law.
.09 INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES
(a) Inoperable motor vehicles, whether on public or private property, and in view of the general public are
hereby declared to be a public nuisance. (1988-7)
(b) Inoperable motor vehicles means any motor vehicle from which, for a period of at least seven days,
the engine, wheels, or other parts have been removed, or on which the engine, wheels, or other parts
have been altered, damaged, or otherwise so treated that the vehicle is incapable of being driven
under its own motor power. Inoperable motor vehicle shall not include a motor vehicle which has
been rendered temporarily incapable of being driven under its own power in order to perform ordinary
service or repair operations. (1988-7)
(c) Whenever any person or entity maintains an inoperable motor vehicle under their control in view of
the general public on either public or private property for at least seven days, the Mayor of the City of
Fairbury is hereby authorized to notify said person or entity that such inoperable motor vehicle
constitutes a public nuisance and such person or entity shall dispose of said inoperable motor vehicle
within seven days after issuance of such notice. If said inoperable motor vehicle is not removed
within seven days after such notice, then the Chief of Police of the Police Department of the City of
Fairbury shall remove said inoperable motor vehicle at the cost of such person or entity. (1988-7)
(d) If such person or entity fails or refuses to pay the cost of removal and storage of such inoperable
motor vehicle or parts thereof, then the Mayor is authorized to direct the City Attorney payment of
such costs of removal and storage. (1988-7)
(e) Nothing in this Section .09 shall apply to any motor vehicle which is kept within a building when not in
use, to operable historic vehicles over 25 years of age, or to a motor vehicle on the premises of a
place of business engaged in the wrecking or junking of motor vehicles. (1988-7)
(f) In lieu of following the procedures of this Section .09, the Mayor may seek to have such nuisance
abated as in Sections .03 and .04 of this Chapter 13. (1988-7)
(g) Any person or entity who violates paragraph (c) of Chapter 13, Section .09 shall be fined $100.00 for
each violation. Each inoperable motor vehicle shall constitute a separate violation. Each day that
said inoperable motor vehicle is not removed after second notice to do so shall constitute a separate
violation. The violator shall also be assessed the city’s attorneys fees for enforcement of this
provision. (2009-4)
Fairbury Code Ch. 14 Page - 1 Dec-11
CHAPTER 14
DOGS
.01 DEFINITIONS.
(a) At Large. Any dog shall be deemed to be at large when he is off the property of his owner and not
under the control of a responsible person.
(b) Restraint. A dog is under restraint if he is controlled by a leash; at “heel” beside a responsible
person, or obedient to that person’s commands; within a vehicle being driven or parked on the
streets, or within the property limits of his owner or keeper.
.02 RUNNING AT LARGE.
No dog shall be permitted to run at large in the City. Every dog within any city park, recreational area, or
trail shall be restrained by a leash. (2003-12)
.03 REMOVAL OF EXCRETA.
The owner of a dog and the person who has control of a dog at any given time shall remove the
excrement deposited by his or her dog upon public property or upon the property of any person other than
the owner of the dog without that person’s consent. This section shall not apply to a blind person while
walking with his or her guide dog. (2003-12)
.04 DISTURBING THE PEACE.
No person owning any dog shall permit such dog to disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood by
barking or making other loud noises or by running through or across bushes, landscaping, cultivated
gardens or fields, or in any manner damaging or destroying property of other persons.
.05 LICENSES.
The City of Fairbury will not issue dog licenses, but will rely on rabies tags issued by Livingston County for
identification purposes. (1999-1)
.06 NUISANCES. Amended (2003-12)
(a) A dog found within the corporate limits of the City of Fairbury shall be classed as a nuisance, and its
owner in violation of this Section when the dog shall commit and repeat any of the following acts:
1. Molesting persons or moving vehicles by chasing or barking or otherwise encumbering them.
2. Attaching other animals that are being maintained in a lawful and otherwise proper way on the
premises of their owner or that are away from the owner’s premises but under restraint of their
owner or other authorized.
3. Damaging property other than that of the dog’s owner.
4. Disturbing the peace as provided in Section .04 of this Chapter.
(b) When a dog is found running at large, unlicensed, disturbing the peace, or in violation of Section
.06(a), such dog shall be impounded, at the discretion of the Police or dogcatcher, but the owner of
the dog shall be cited for violation of this chapter.
.07 POUNDKEEPER.
A poundkeeper shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council, and the
duties of such poundkeeper shall including the impounding of any and all dogs found in violation of this
chapter.
.08 FEES FOR IMPOUNDING AND KEEPING.
The charge for each day any dog is impounded under this chapter shall be $3.00. (1999-1)
Fairbury Code Ch. 14 Page - 2 Dec-11
.09 HOW REDEEMED.
The owner or owners of any dogs impounded hereunder may redeem the same by paying all charges
accrued, plus a redemption fee of $20.00. When all said charges and fees have been paid, the
poundkeeper shall release the dog to the owner. (1999-1)
.10 PUBLIC NOTICE.
Appropriate records shall be kept of each dog impounded, and a description of each dog impounded, and
the date thereof shall be posted at the City Hall. The poundkeeper shall give notice by mail to the owner
or keeper of such dog as disclosed by the tag records of the City Hall. Any impounded dog not redeemed
within seven days shall be humanely destroyed or otherwise disposed of by the poundkeeper.
.11 RABIES PROTECTION.
Each calendar year, or at such intervals as may hereafter be promulgated by the Department of
Agriculture of the State of Illinois, every owner or keeper of a dog four months or more of age shall cause
such dog to be inoculated against rabies. The tag issued to the owner or keeper of said dog by a
veterinarian inoculating such dog shall be attached to the collar or harness worn by the dog. Such
inoculation shall be performed by a veterinarian duly licensed to practice his profession in the state, and
shall be performed in accordance with the regulation promulgated by the said Department of Agriculture.
In the event any dog impounded in accordance with this chapter does not wear a tag certifying to his
inoculation in accordance herewith, such dog shall not be released until he has been inoculated in
accordance with this chapter.
.12 ENFORCEMENT.
The Police Department is charged with the duty of enforcing the provision of this chapter. The
poundkeeper shall work under the jurisdiction of the Police Department, and any violations of this chapter
may be enforced by the poundkeeper in the same manner as a duly constituted policeman.
.13 FACILITIES FOR IMPOUNDING.
The City shall provide suitable facilities for the impounding of dogs.
.14 IMPOUNDMENT OF DOGS WHICH HAVE BITTEN PERSONS.
Any dog which shall have bitten or otherwise injured any person shall be immediately taken, impounded
and kept separated from other dogs for fourteen days. If such dog is or becomes rabid, he shall be
destroyed and his head sent to the Department of Agriculture. The owner of such dog shall pay any
veterinary and impoundment fees incurred hereunder.
.14A DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS DOGS. (section added 1999-12)
(a) “Dangerous dog” means
(i) any individual dog which when either unmuzzled or muzzled, unleashed or leashed, or whether
attended by its owner, or a member of its owner’s family or unattended, and in a vicious or
terrorizing manner, approaches any person in an apparent attitude of attack upon the streets,
sidewalks, or any public grounds or places in the corporate limits of Fairbury, or
(ii) any individual dog which has been declared or found to be a dangerous dog by the proper
authorities of any other jurisdiction in accordance with the statutes or ordinances of such other
jurisdiction
(b) The Chief of Police of Fairbury may conduct an investigation and recommend to the Fire and Police
Committee of the City Council of the City of Fairbury that a particular dog be declared a dangerous
dog. Based upon that investigation the Fire and Police Committee may find and declare in writing
that a dog is a dangerous dog as defined in paragraph (a) of this section.
(c) It is unlawful for any person to permit any dangerous dog to leave the premises of its owner when not
under control by leash or other recognized means
(d) “Vicious dog” means
Fairbury Code Ch. 14 Page - 3 Dec-11
(i) any individual dog that when unprovoked inflicts bites or attacks a human being or other animal
either on public or private property, or
(ii) any individual dog with a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack without
provocation, to cause injury, or to otherwise endanger the safety of human beings or domestic
animals, or
(iii) any individual dog that has as a trait or characteristic and a generally known reputation for
viciousness, dangerousness, or unprovoked attacks upon humans beings or other animals,
unless handled in a particular manner or with special equipment, or
(iv) any individual dog which attacks a human being or domestic animal without provocation or
(v) any individual dog which has been found to be a “dangerous dog” upon three separate occasions
by the Fire and Police Committee of the City Council of Fairbury or the proper authorities of any
other jurisdiction in accordance with the statutes or ordinances of that jurisdiction. Said three
separate occasions do not have to be all by the same authority or jurisdiction, or
(vi) any individual dog which has been found to be a vicious dog by the proper authority of any other
jurisdiction in accordance with the statutes or ordinances of that jurisdiction.
(e) No dog shall be deemed vicious if it bites, attacks, or menaces a trespasser on the property of its
owner or harms or menaces anyone who has tormented or abused it or is a professionally trained dog
for law enforcement or guard duties and which is maintained by its owner for those purposes. Vicious
dogs shall not be classified in a manner that is specific as to breed.
(f) “Found to be a vicious dog” means that the Chief of Police of Fairbury has conducted an investigation
and made a recommendation that a particular dog is a vicious dog as defined in paragraph (d) of this
Section and, based upon that investigation and recommendation, the Fire and Police Committee of
the City Council of Fairbury has declared in writing that the dog is a vicious dog, or that the Circuit
Court of any county in Illinois which had jurisdiction over the dog has found the dog to be a vicious
dog in accordance with the Animal Control Act of Illinois.
(g) Any dog which has been found to be a vicious dog shall be kept in an enclosure. When a dog has
been found to be a vicious dog the owner shall surrender the dog to the police who shall keep it in a
secure facility until the owner has prepared an enclosure for the dog. If the owner does not surrender
the dog to the police, then the police may enter onto the owner’s premises or any other premises
where the dog may be to take custody of the dog. The owner may appeal the finding of the Fire and
Police Committee of the City Council that the dog is a vicious dog to the Circuit Court of Livingston
County in seven working days of the finding. If the owner tells the police that he does not want the
dog returned or if he does not prepare an enclosure within 14 days of the police taking the dog, then
the dog shall be turned over to a licensed veterinarian for destruction by lethal injection. The dog
shall not be released to the owner until the Chief of Police approves the enclosure as defined in this
Section.
(h) “Enclosure” means a fence or structure of at least six feet in height, forming or causing an enclosure
suitable to prevent the entry of young children, and suitable to confine a vicious dog within the
enclosure. Such enclosure shall be securely enclosed and locked and designed with secure sides,
top, and bottom and shall be designed to prevent the animal from escaping from the enclosure. The
enclosure shall have affixed to it a sign reading “WARNING! VICIOUS DOG.”
(i) It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any dog which has been found to be a vicious
dog unless such dog is at all times kept in an enclosure. The only times that a vicious dog may be
allowed out of the enclosure are (1) if it is necessary for the owner or keeper to obtain veterinary care
for the dog or (2) to comply with the order of a court of competent jurisdiction, provided that the dog is
securely muzzled and restrained with a chain having a tensile strength of 300 pounds and not
exceeding three feet in length, and shall be under the direct control and supervision of the owner or
keeper of the dog.
(j) Any dog which has been found to be a vicious dog and which is not confined to an enclosure shall be
impounded by the police and shall be turned over to a licensed veterinarian for destruction by lethal
injection. The owner may appeal the impoundment order to the Circuit Court of Livingston County
within seven working days and if the owner does not appeal within that time then the dog may be
humanely dispatched.
(k) All fees and costs which the City incurs on account of any dog pursuant to this Section of the City
Code shall be paid by the owner of the dog whether or not the dog is returned to the owner.
Fairbury Code Ch. 14 Page - 4 Dec-11
.15 DISPOSITION OF FEES COLLECTED.
All fees or fines collected shall be paid to the City Clerk.
.16 SEVERANCE CLAUSE.
If any section, paragraph, clause or provision of this chapter shall be held invalid, the invalidity thereof
shall not affect any of the other provisions of this chapter.
.17 PENALTIES.
(a) The following penalties are hereby established for violations of this chapter:
1. For any dog not carrying a tag certifying to his inoculation in accordance with the provision
hereof. . $5.00. (1999-1)
2. For any other violation of Chapter 14: amended 2003-12
(a) $20.00 for the first offense. (1999-1)
(b) Each offense thereafter shall be considered a Class C misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of
at least $75.00 but not to exceed $750.00. (1999-1)
3. If legal action is required to collect fines for the above described offenses, the owner of the
offending dog shall be responsible for any cost and fees incurred to collect said fine. (1999-1)
Sections .03-.16 were renumber in ordinance 2003-12
Fairbury Code Ch. 15 Page - 1 Dec-11
CHAPTER 15
STREETS
.01 NAMES OF STREETS.
(a) There is hereby established a uniform system for street naming or renaming and for numbering
property and buildings on all streets, lanes, roads, highways, and public ways in the City of Fairbury.
(1996-4)
(b) All streets, lanes, roads, highways, and public ways in the City of Fairbury shall be know and
designated by the names applied thereto, respectively, on the map of the City kept on file in the office
of the City Clerk. The street names designated on such map shall continue to be the names of
streets unless and until changed by ordinance of the City Council. The naming of all such streets,
lanes, roads, highways, and public ways shall be coordinated by the City, the Livingston County
Emergency Telephone System Board, and the United States Postal Service. (1996-4)
(c) Signs designating the names of public streets, lanes, roads, and highways shall be erected and
maintained by the City of Fairbury. (1996-4)
(d) Signs designating the names of private streets, lanes, roads, and highways shall be erected and
maintained at the expense of the property owner or owners occupying such private streets, lanes,
roads, and highways. Said signs shall be located to be easily visible to emergency personnel
traveling from a public access road into the private roadway. All signs shall be of the same or similar
construction as the signs erected by the City of Fairbury and shall be installed within ninety days of
notification to the private property owner or owners. (1996-4)
.02 (1) NUMBERING.
(a) All buildings shall be numbered in accordance with the provisions set forth herein. All numbers for
property shall be assigned in a manner mutually agreed upon by the City, the Livingston County
Emergency Telephone System Board, and the United States Postal Service. (1996-4)
(b) Each house, building or other occupied structure shall be assigned a separate number. A number or
alphabetical letter shall be assigned for each separate occupant (i.e. apartment, company, etc.) within
a building or other occupied structure. (1996-4)
(c) Existing numbers shall be changed only as necessary to ensure the effectiveness and efficiency of
the Enhanced 911 system in the City of Fairbury, as determined in the judgment of the Livingston
County Emergency Telephone System Board. (1996-4)
(d) Written notification of the proper address of each house, building or structure shall be given to its
owner, occupant or agent in all instances where a new number has been assigned under the terms of
this ordinance. (1996-4)
.02 (2) PLACEMENT OF NUMBERING.
(a) The owner, occupant or agent of each house, building or other structure assigned a number under
the uniform numbering system provided in this ordinance shall place or cause to be placed such
number on or near the house, building or other structure within 90 days after receiving notification of
the proper number assignment. (1996-4)
(b) Cost and installation of the numbers for the structures shall be paid for by the property owner.
Numbers shall not be less that three (3) inches in height. All numbers shall be made of a durable and
clearly visible material. (1996-4)
(c) All numbers shall be conspicuously placed immediately above, on or at the side of the appropriate
door to the house, building or other structure so that the number is clearly visible form the street. In
cases where the structure is situated so that numbers placed upon it cannot be clearly visible from
the street, the structure number shall be placed near the walk, driveway, or common entrance to the
structure and upon the mailbox, gatepost, fence or other appropriate place so as to be clearly visible
for the street. (1996-4)
Fairbury Code Ch. 15 Page - 2 Dec-11
.03 DAMAGE TO STREETS.
No person shall damage or deface any street, alley, sidewalk, public way, park or other City of public
property, or any post, wire, lamp, street sign, traffic sign, tree, grass, vegetation, gutter, drain, manhole or
any other appurtenance thereon, except as may be authorized by the City.
.04 ENCROACHMENTS ON STREET.
(a) No person shall erect or maintain any structure or thing on, over or under any street, alley, sidewalk
or public way except by permit from the City Council. Application for such permit shall describe the
nature of the encroachment in such detail as the City Council shall require. The council in its
discretion may issue or deny the permit, and may impose any conditions to such permit as it deems
appropriate.
(b) Awnings made of pliable substance attached to a building and extending not less than seven feet
above the surface of the sidewalk may be erected and maintained without a permit.
(c) Any encroachment on any street, alley, sidewalk or public way shall be maintained so that it does not
endanger or obstruct the public.
(d) Any encroachment maintained in violation of this section is declared a nuisance and may be abated
by the City.
.05 OBSTRUCTING STREETS.
(a) No person shall obstruct or endanger, the free passage or proper use of the public on any street,
sidewalk, alley or public place, except as may be permitted by this chapter.
(b) Goods, wares and merchandise any be placed on sidewalks for such reasonable time as may be
necessary while loading and unloading, provided pedestrian traffic is not totally obstructed.
(c) No street or part of any street in the City of Fairbury shall be closed for any private function until the
persons sponsoring such function shall petition the City Council for permission to close such streets
or parts of streets. Such petition must be filed in time to be heard at a City Council meeting at least
two weeks prior to the date that such persons desire to close such streets or parts of streets. The
petition shall state the name and address of the persons or entity seeking to close said streets or
parts of streets, the name of the individual who will be responsible for such street closing, shall list the
streets or part of streets to be closed and the hours during which they would be closed, and shall
state the purpose for which the closure is desired. The City Council may grant or deny said request
or grant it subject to such terms and conditions as the City Council deems appropriate as shall appear
to be in the best interests of the citizens of the City of Fairbury. (1987-11)
.06 MATERIALS IN STREETS.
(a) No person shall place any materials on or over any street, sidewalk or public place without a permit
therefor from the City Council.
(b) The permittee shall conform to all conditions the City may impose upon granting of the permits.
.07 ADVERTISING ON STREETS.
No person shall paint or post any signs or bills on any streets, poles or other structures in any street or on
the surface of any street or sidewalk.
.08 DEBRIS IN STREETS.
(a) No person shall litter or deposit any foreign matter on any street, alley, sidewalk, park, or public place,
except building materials and merchandise as permitted under this chapter, or as may be permitted
by the Mayor.
(b) Any person violating this section shall be liable for the cost of removal of the foreign matter in addition
to the penalty provided for violation of this code.
.09 EXCAVATIONS IN STREETS.
No person shall excavate in or tunnel under any street in the City without first securing a permit at least
24 hours in advance of such work from the Street Commissioner. The fee for the permit will be
Fairbury Code Ch. 15 Page - 3 Dec-11
established and reviewed each year by the Street & Alley Committee and approved by City Council by
resolution. (2009-1)
.10 PROTECTION OF WORK IN STREETS.
(a) Any person constructing of repairing, or making any excavation in or tunnel under, or placing any
material on or over any street, sidewalk or other public place shall maintain suitable barricades and
other protective devices as shall properly prevent injury to any person or property. Suitable lights
shall be maintained during the nighttime to warn the public. No unauthorized person shall interfere
with or disturb any such protective devices.
(b) A permit shall be secured from the Street Commissioner at least 24 hours in advance of placing any
barricades in any street.
.11 MOVING STRUCTURES.
No person shall move any building or structure on any street without a permit from the Mayor. The Mayor
may impose such conditions as he deems appropriate to protect the City and the public upon granting
such permit. The applicant for such permit shall deposit $1000 in cash with the City Clerk as security for
the protection of the streets and other City property.
.12 TREES.
(a) No person shall plant, trim or remove any tree or shrub in any street or parkway or other public place
without a permit therefor from the Mayor. The Mayor shall approve the species of tree to be planted.
(b) No person shall injure any tree or shrub planted in any street, parkway or public place. No person
shall attach any sign or wire to any such tree or shrub without permission of the Mayor.
.13 SNOW ON SIDEWALKS.
The person occupying the ground floor of any building, the user of any lot without a structure thereon, and
the owner of any vacant building or other premises shall remove the snow and ice accumulating on the
abutting sidewalks within 24 hours after any snowfall has ceased. If snow or ice cannot be removed, the
surface shall be sanded or otherwise treated to lessen the hazard for pedestrians until the climate permits
removal.
.14 BURNING LEAVES AND RUBBISH.
No person shall burn any leaves, paper, rubbish or other substances upon any street, sidewalk, or alley.
.15 DRIVEWAYS. Ordinance 1991-15 Requiring Driveway Culverts and Providing for the
Authorization of Roadside Underdrains and Curb Cuts Approved December 4, 1991.
Section 1: DRIVEWAY CULVERTS
(a) All driveways except those leading onto streets improved with curb and gutter shall have culverts
installed in accordance with the following standards unless otherwise approved by the Street
Commissioner.
(b) Pipe material shall conform to Illinois Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for Road
and Bridge Construction for pipe culverts type 1A. The culvert shall be sized adequately to handle
the drainage area to be served and shall be at least equal in diameter to the nearest crossroad
culvert serving this drainage area. In no case, however, shall a pipe culvert of less than 12 inches in
diameter be installed. The culvert shall be placed in line with the existing road ditch horizontally and
shall be placed at a vertical depth to provide the necessary drainage of the existing water way.
Minimum depth of cover over the top of the culvert pipe to the surface of the driveway shall be 6
inches. If the existing ditch is not of sufficient depth to provide these minimum standards, the builder
shall regrade the existing ditch as directed by the Street Commissioner to provide the necessary
drainageway.
(c) All areas disturbed in the course of this construction shall be repaired to their original condition and all
waterways shall be hand raked and seeded as directed by the Street Commissioner.
(d) Culvert pipe shall be of sufficient length to extend from toe of slope to toe of slope of the driveway
Fairbury Code Ch. 15 Page - 4 Dec-11
cross section. In no case shall these slopes be steeper than 3 feet horizontal per each vertical foot
as measured from the flow line or invert of the culvert to the edge of the driveway.
(e) The driveway surface shall be graded so that it meets the edge of the existing street surface and
drains toward the culvert at a minimum slope of 0.50%. The low point of the driveway shall not be
closer to the street than the existing ditch but in no case shall it be closer than 4 feet.
(f) All work and materials used on the City right-of-way shall be in accordance with the Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction as well as Exhibit “A” attached hereto.
(g) No fences, posts, retaining walls, shrubs or curbs shall be constructed along driveways between the
right-of-way line or property line and the street pavement, except a curb which does no project more
than 6 inches above the adjacent ground line may be construction between the existing road ditch
and the property line when approved by the Street Commissioner.
(h) Reflectors may be placed at the top of slope in line with the culverts. Reflectors shall not exceed 4
inches in any dimension and shall not project more than 24 inches above the low point of the
driveway surface.
(i) All driveways shall cross the existing or proposed sidewalk at sidewalk grade causing neither a
depression nor a hump in the sidewalk without the express permission of the Street Commissioner.
Section 2: ROADSIDE UNDERDRAIN
(a) Where authorized by the Street Commissioner, an underdrain system may be installed in lieu of the
roadside ditch, and shall be constructed in accordance with the following standards unless otherwise
approved by the Street Commissioner.
(b) Pipe material shall conform to Illinois Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for Road
and Bridge Construction for pipe culverts type 1A. The underdrain shall be sized adequately to
handle the drainage area to be served and shall be at least equal in diameter to the nearest
crossroad culvert serving this drainage area. In no case, however, shall an underdrain of less than
12 inches be installed. The minimum pipe slope shall be 0.20%.
(c) Each lot shall have, at minimum, an inlet structure on the downstream end of the underdrain.
Additional inlet structures shall be required, at the direction of the Street Commissioner, when
necessary to prevent the obstruction of other drainageways or to prevent ponding. Each inlet
structure shall be constructed with an inside dimension of 2 feet by 2 feet square. It shall be
constructed on block or brick and mortar with a minimum wall thickness of 4 inches where walls are
18 inches high or less. If greater than 18 inches high, wall thickness shall be 8 inches. It shall be set
on a Portland Cement Concrete base slab with a minimum thickness of 6 inches. The inlet shall be
covered with a frame and grate suitable for use in streets or trafficways (similar to Neenah Foundries
No. R3405 or approved equal). The surface of the grate shall be laid flush with the flow line of the
new surface drainage swale so as to deposit all surface waters from the adjacent road and lot area
into the underdrain system.
(d) Culvert pipe on the upstream end of the underdrain shall be connected to any existing inlet structure.
If no inlet structure exists on the upstream end, the ground at the upstream end shall be sloped from
the new surface drainage swale to the existing surface drainage swale with a slope not greater than 3
feet horizontal per each vertical foot. The ground on the downstream side of a downstream inlet
structure, if no adjoining underdrain exists, shall be similarly sloped. If a downstream inlet structure
exists between two driveways, as shown on Exhibit “B” attached hereto, and insufficient space exists
between the inlet structure and the downstream driveway to accommodate the required slope, then
the underdrain leading from the inlet structure shall be connected to the existing downstream
driveway culvert, and the entire area between the driveways shall be filled and graded so that the
surface of the inlet structure grate is flush with the new surface drainage swale.
(e) All areas disturbed in the course of this construction shall be repaired to their original condition and all
waterways shall be hand raked and seeded as directed by the Street Commissioner.
(f) All work and materials used on the City right-of-way shall be in accordance with the Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction as well as Exhibit “B” attached hereto.
Section 3: CURB CUTS
(a) Where authorized by the Street Commissioner, curbs may be cut to allow the construction of access
ways onto property from the street. All curb cuts shall be performed and access ways constructed in
Fairbury Code Ch. 15 Page - 5 Dec-11
accordance with the following standards unless otherwise approved by the Street Commissioner.
(b) The following standards shall apply to curb cuts and access ways affecting commercial property:
(1) No curb cut shall exceed 35 feet in width at the curb line.
(2) Where more than one curb cut on a single street serving a single parcel of land is contemplated,
there shall be no more than two cuts, each not to exceed 35 feet in width, and there shall be not
less than 6 feet of curb between the two cuts.
(3) On all corner lots in commercial zoning districts, or used for commercial purposes, access shall
be from the lower classified street, unless that lot has access frontage only on the major street.
(4) Commercial access ways shall meet or exceed the following minimum standards. Portland
Cement Concrete aprons shall have a minimum thickness of 6 inches and shall be constructed
with air entrainment cement, proportioned for a compressive strength of 4,500 psi in 28 days.
Bituminous concrete surfacing may be substituted for concrete provided there is an aggregate
base course of 8 inches minimum thickness, surfaced with 1 ½ inches of binder course and 1 ½
inches of surface course for a total thickness of 3 inches of Bituminous Concrete Class I.
(5) Commercial access ways shall be constructed in accordance with the details shown on Exhibits
“C” and “E”, attached hereto.
(c) The following standards shall apply to curb cuts and access ways affecting residential property:
(1) Where the proposed curb cut and access way is for residential use, the curb cut shall not be less
than 10 feet in width nor greater than 26 feet in width at the curb line. Where a circular access
way is to be constructed, the total of both curb cuts shall not exceed 26 feet. No curb cut shall
exceed the width of the driveway by more than 8 feet.
(2) Residential access ways shall meet or exceed the following minimum standards. Portland
Cement Concrete aprons shall have a minimum thickness of 4 inches and shall be constructed
with air entrainment cement, proportioned for a compressive strength of 4,500 psi in 28 days.
Bituminous concrete surfacing may be substituted for concrete provided there is an aggregate
base course of 7 inches minimum thickness and 2 ½ inches of Bituminous Concrete Surface
Course Type 5-5.
(3) Residential access ways shall be constructed in accordance with the details shown on Exhibits
“D” and “E”, attached hereto.
(d) On corner lots, a curb cut shall be permitted on a major or collector street if it is a minimum of 40 feet,
and on a minor street if it is a minimum of 24 feet, from the corner of the front and side property lines
nearest the street intersection.
(e) All materials furnished for constructing access ways between the curb and the property line shall
conform to Illinois Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction.
(f) Any person, firm or corporation receiving a curb cut permit must agree in writing to reconstruct the
curb and gutter to its original condition in the event that the access way usage is abandoned due to
abandonment of the property or a change in use which excludes the need for the access way.
Section 4: PERMITS
(a) No person shall begin construction of driveway culverts or roadside underdrains, nor shall any person
break or cut away any portion of any curb or gutter now or hereafter laid or established on any street,
alley or public way, without first having secured a permit from the Street Commissioner. The Street
Commissioner, however, shall not issue any permit under this Ordinance for any private access way
for the breaking or removing of any curb where the proposed opening would create any undue hazard
to pedestrians or create a traffic hazard.
(b) Any person intending to begin such construction or curb cut shall so notify the Street Commissioner in
writing, and shall submit plans or drawings showing the nature and location of the proposed
construction or curb cut. Also, before a permit will be issued for a curb cut onto a State right-of-way,
a copy of an approved permit from the State of Illinois Department of Transportation shall be
submitted to the Street Commissioner.
Fairbury Code Ch. 15 Page - 6 Dec-11
(c) Before issuance of the permit, the Street Commissioner shall inspect the site of the proposed
construction and shall inform the applicant in writing of any changes to the plans or drawings
necessary to insure compliance with this Ordinance. Also any person installing an access way
through a curb break shall notify the Street Commissioner not less than 24 hours prior to the pouring
of the concrete.
(d) After completion of the construction, the applicant shall so notify the Street Commissioner who shall
inspect the completed construction to insure that it has been built in compliance with this Ordinance
and with any requirements specified upon the issuance of the permit. If the completed construction is
satisfactory, the Street Commissioner shall issue a certificate of compliance so stating.
Section 5: VARIANCES
(a) The City Council may approve variances to the standards contained in this Ordinance, provided that
no variance shall be approved unless the City Council shall find that all of the following criteria have
been met:
(1) Because of special conditions or circumstances, a substantial hardship to the owner of the
property would result, as distinguished from purely a financial hardship or a mere inconvenience,
from strict compliance with the standards contained in this Ordinance.
(2) The conditions or circumstances upon which the request for a variance is based are unique to the
property affected and are not applicable generally to other property.
(3) The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public safety, health or welfare, or
injurious to other property.
(b) In approving variances, the City Council may require such other conditions as will, in its judgement,
secure substantially the objectives of the standards contained in this Ordinance.
(c) A petition for any variance shall be submitted in writing to the Street Commissioner, signed by the
person intending to undertake any activity governed by this Ordinance. The petition shall state fully
the grounds for the application and all facts relied upon by the petitioner. The Street Commissioner
shall promptly forward the petition and any available plans or drawings to the City Council, and notify
the petitioner of the date set for consideration of the petition.
(d) The City Council shall, within a reasonable time after receiving the petition, consider the matter at a
general or special meeting, at which time the petitioner and all interested parties shall have the right
to appear and present evidence or argument. The City Council shall grant or deny the petition within
35 days of the meeting and shall send written notice of its decision to the petitioner. The decision of
the City Council is final.
Section 6: NOTICE OF VIOLATION
Any person found to be in violation of any provision of this Ordinance shall be served by the Street
Commissioner with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time for
the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice,
make the necessary corrections and permanently cease all violations stated.
Section 7: PENALTIES
Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in Section 4 of this
Ordinance shall be fined in an amount not less than Ten Dollars ($10.00) nor more than One Hundred
Dollars ($100.00) for each violation. Each day in which a violation shall continue shall constitute a
separate offense.
Section 8: ADMINISTRATION
In the absence of a Street Commissioner, or in the event of his refusal or inability to perform the
administrative functions stated in this Ordinance, those functions shall be performed by any person
designated by the City Council.
(a) No person shall construct a driveway entering any street without a permit therefor from the Mayor.
The fee for such permit shall be as determined by the City Council.
Fairbury Code Ch. 15 Page - 7 Dec-11
(b) All new driveways which abut a street with curb and gutters must have a hard or a bituminous (not
gravel) surface for a distance of ten (10) feet from the edge of the street.
(c) On streets having curbs and gutters, damaged curbs must be repaired by the City of Fairbury, at the
expense of the owner of the driveway.
(d) On streets not having curbs and gutters, culverts shall be required at the point of the entrance of the
driveway to the public road. The length and width of the culvert shall be in accordance with good
engineering standards and subject to the approval of the City engineer. In the event driveways are
altered where there have been no previous culverts, or where the previous culverts are inadequate
according to good engineering standards, new culverts shall be installed by, and at the expense of
the owner of the property.
See diagrams at end of chapter
.16 REMOVAL OF SNOW AND DEBRIS. (renumber in 2000-4)
No person shall park any vehicle on any street within the city limits at any time when such parking will
prohibit removal of snow or other debris from the city streets. No parking whatsoever shall be allowed on
Locust, Hickory, First, Third and Seventh Streets between the hours of 1:00 A.M. and 6:00 A.M. on any
day during the month of December, January, and February, or at any other times when heavy snowfalls
are likely. No parking whatsoever shall be allowed on Fifth and Sixth Streets between Oak Street and
Pine Street between the hours of 1:00 A.M. and 6:00 A.M. on any day during the month of December,
January, and February, or at any other times when heavy snowfalls are likely. No parking whatsoever
shall be allowed on Locust Street on any Wednesday between the hours of 1:00 A.M. and 6:00 A.M. No
parking shall be allowed on Third Street between Maple and Walnut Streets on any Wednesday between
the hours of 1:00 A.M. and 6:00 A.M.
.17 ENFORCEMENTS; PENALTIES. (renumber in 2000-4)
Any person, firm or corporation in violation of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class C Misdemeanor,
punishable by the fine of not less that $50.00 nor more than $500.00. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each and every day during or on which a volition occurs or continues. Additionally,
the Superintendent of Streets or a Police Officer may take immediate action to remove any illegally
parked vehicles, obstructions, materials or debris. In the event that the Superintendent or Police Officer
takes such action, the person whose property, encroachments or debris are removed shall bear the cost
including towing or hauling or removal.
.18 SIDEWALKS. (renumber in 2000-4)
(a) No public sidewalk shall be installed, replaced or repaired by any person without such person first
filing a written application therefor with the City Clerk, on forms provided by the City Clerk. Said
application shall be forwarded to the Street Commissioner, who shall then inspect the sidewalk and
determine whether or not such sidewalk needs to be installed, replaced, or repaired. If the Street
Commissioner approved such installation, replacement, or repair, then the application shall be
forwarded to the City Council for its approval. The City shall not be liable for any costs of
replacement or repair that is done before such procedure has been followed or which replacement or
repair does not meet City standards. Every sidewalk shall comply with the following standards: It
shall be four feet wide and shall be four inches thick except that it shall be six inches thick wherever
such sidewalk shall cross a driveway. A copy of said standards shall be attached to all such
applications. (1991-9)
(b) The Street Commissioner shall be authorized to inspect all installation, replacement, and repair both
during the work and after completion and shall require that such work be done according to City
standards. If any person shall install, replace or repair any public sidewalk and such sidewalk does
not meet City standards, then the City may have such sidewalk replaced or repaired to bring into
conformity with City standards and the person who had caused the previous installation, replacement,
or repair shall be responsible for the full cost of bringing it into conformity with City standards. Every
application for the installation, replacement or repair of sidewalk shall require the applicant to install,
Fairbury Code Ch. 15 Page - 8 Dec-11
replace, or repair such sidewalk in conformity with City standards and shall further require the
applicant to reimburse the City the cost of bringing such portion of sidewalk into conformity with City
standards if the applicant fails to do so. Each such application shall require the applicant to complete
such work within sixty days after approval of the application. If any sidewalk replacement or repair is
not completed within sixty days after approval of the application, then the person must submit a new
application for approval in order to receive the reimbursement for sidewalk replacement or repair
provided in paragraph (c) of this section. (1991-9)
(c) The City shall pay a part of the cost of repair or replacement of public sidewalks, at a rate to be
determined by resolution of the City Council, if the Street Commissioner recommends that such part
of the sidewalk is in need of repair or replacement and the City Council approves such repair or
replacement. If the Street Commissioner does not recommend that such part of the sidewalk is in
need of repair or replacement or the City Council does not approve such repair or replacement, then
all cost of such installation, repair or replacement, shall be borne by the person seeking to install,
repair, or replace such portion of sidewalk. If the applicant fails to complete the approved work within
sixty days after approval of the application, then the City shall not pay a part of the cost of repair or
replacement as provided herein unless the person submits a new application for repair or
replacement. (2005-5)
(d) Any person who during the construction, repair, or demolition of any building, or in the providing or
repair of any utility service to any building, or for any other reason shall damage, remove or replace
any part of a public sidewalk shall be responsible for repairing and replacing such sidewalk at such
person’s expense in conformity with City standards. (1988-17)
(e) Any person installing, replacing, or repairing any sidewalk or making an excavation in any sidewalk
shall maintain suitable barricades to prevent injury to any person or vehicle by reason of such work
and such barricades shall be protected by a light at nighttime. (1988-17)
Fairbury Code Ch. 16 Page - 1 Dec-11
CHAPTER 16
TRAILER COURTS, TRAILERS, AND MOBILE HOMES
.01 DEFINITIONS.
The following terms shall have the meanings indicated below:
(a) Trailer or Mobile Home: Any structure used for living, sleeping, business or storage purposes and
designed for conveyance after fabrication, on streets and highways, on its own wheels or on flatbed
or other trailers, and arriving at the site where it is to be occupied as a dwelling unit complete and
ready for occupancy, except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations such as
locating on jacks or other foundation, for connection to utilities. This definition shall not include
prefabricated structures or Modular structures fixed on a solid, contiguous, enclosed masonry
foundation.
(b) Trailer Court: An area providing space where two or more trailers can be, or are intended to be
parked.
.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
It shall be unlawful to establish, maintain, or operate any trailer court in the municipality without first
having obtained a license therefor. Applications for such licenses shall be made in writing to the City
Clerk, and shall contain the name of the applicant, the location of the proposed park, and the number of
trailers to be accommodated.
.03 PLAN.
Each such application shall be accompanied by a plat or sketch showing the size and location of all
buildings and structures.
.04 FEE.
The annual fee for such licenses shall be $15.00 plus $5.00 for each trailer over one for which
accommodations are provided. Whenever the number of such accommodations is increased, this shall
be reported to the Clerk, and the additional fee, if any, necessitated by such increase shall be paid before
the additional spaces are put to use. When a license is applied for, or accommodations are increased
during the license year, the fee shall be prorated on the basis of the number of months remaining in
license year, which shall be the same as the fiscal year of the City.
.05 CHARACTER.
No such license shall be issued to any but a person of good character, nor to any corporation if any
officer thereof is not a person of good character.
It shall be unlawful to hire or keep as manager, superintendent, or person in charge of a trailer court any
person who is not a person of good character, or any person who has been convicted of a felony.
.06 SUPERVISION.
Each trailer court, while operated, shall be in the charge of responsible attendant or caretaker at all times,
who shall be responsible, with the licenses, for compliance with the provisions of this chapter related to
the conduct of such parks.
.07 SPACES.
Each trailer court shall be allotted a site of not less than 2,500 square feet. No trailer shall be parked
closer than 15 feet to the side lot lines of a trailer court, if the abutting property is improved property, and
not closer than 10 feet if the abutting property is unimproved property, nor closer than 20 feet to a public
street, alley or building. Each individual trailer site shall abut or face on a driveway or clear unoccupied
space of not less than 20 feet in width, which space shall have unobstructed access to a public highway
or alley. There shall be an open space of at least 20 feet between the sides of every trailer and at least
Fairbury Code Ch. 16 Page - 2 Dec-11
20 feet between the ends of every trailer.
.08 WATER SUPPLY.
Each trailer court shall comply, in all respects, with the ordinances of the City of Fairbury concerning the
combined waterworks and sewerage system of the City of Fairbury. Each trailer shall be equipped with
an individual water meter in accordance with the rules and regulations of the water department.
.09 SANITARY FACILITIES.
Each trailer must be individually connected to the sewerage system of the City of Fairbury.
.10 LIGHTS.
The courts shall be kept properly and adequately lighted at all times so that the grounds shall be safe for
occupants and visitors.
.11 PLACEMENT.
All trailers and mobile homes shall be confined into trailer courts, trailer parks, or trailer camps, and no
trailer shall be placed on any lot or part thereof, except when such land constitutes part of a trailer court,
park or camp.
.12 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS.
In compliance with the provisions of this chapter, it shall be the duty of the licensee and person in charge
of any trailer court to comply fully with the applicable provisions of this Code and with the applicable
provisions of the Illinois Revised Statutes.
.13 EXCEPTIONS.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit the storage of any trailer for any length of time when
said trailer is not used for living or sleeping purposes.
.14 PENALTY.
Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a Class C
Misdemeanor as provided in Illinois Revised Statutes, and penalized accordingly.
Fairbury Code Ch. 17 Page - 1 Dec-11
CHAPTER 17
TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE
FEE Chapter added Ordinance 1998-22
.01 DEFINITIONS
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
(a) “Gross Charges” means the amount paid to a telecommunications retailer for the act or privilege of
originating or receiving telecommunications within the City, and for all services rendered in
connection therewith, valued in money whether paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credits,
services, and property of every kind or nature, and shall be determined without any deduction on
account of the cost of such telecommunications, the cost of the materials used, labor or service costs
or any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is extended, the amount thereof shall be included
only as and when paid. “Gross charges” for private line service shall include charges imposed at
each channel point within the City, charges for the channel mileage between each channel point with
the City, and charges for that portion of the interstate inter-office channel provided within the City.
However, “gross charges” shall not include:
(1) any amounts added to a purchaser’s bill because of a charge made under: (i) the fee imposed by
this Section, (ii) additional charges added to a purchaser’s bill under Section 9-221 or 9-222 of
the Public Utilities Act, (iii) amounts collected under Section 8-11-17 of the Illinois Municipal
Code, (iv) the tax imposed by the Telecommunications Excise Tax Act, (v) 911 sur-charges, or
(vi) the tax imposed by Section 4251 of the Internal Revenue Code;
(2) charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside the City;
(3) charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of data or information or
subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or information intended to change its form or
content. Such equipment includes, but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data
processing equipment, tabulating equipment, or accounting equipment and also includes the
usage of computers under a time-sharing agreement;
(4) charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is leased or rented by the
customer from any source, wherein such charges are disaggregated and separately identified
from other charges;
(5) charges to business enterprises certified under Section 9-222.1 of the Public Utilities Act to the
extent of such exemption and during the period of time specified by the City;
(6) charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided in connection therewith
between a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned
subsidiaries, and only to the extent that the charges between the parent corporation and wholly
owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense allocation between
the corporations and not the generation of profit other than a regulatory required profit for the
corporation rendering such services;
(7) bad debts (“bad debt” means any portion of a debt that is related to a sale at retail for which gross
charges are not otherwise deductible or excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible,
as determined under applicable federal income tax standards; if the portion of the debt deemed to
be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that portion during the
reporting period in which the payment is made);
(8) charges paid by inserting coins in coin-operated telecommunications devices; or
(9) charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided to the City.
(b) “Public Right-of-Way” means any municipal street, alley, water or public right-of-way dedicated or
commonly used for utility purposes, including utility easements wherein the City has acquired the right
and authority to locate or permit the location of utilities consistent with telecommunications facilities.
Fairbury Code Ch. 17 Page - 2 Dec-11
“Public Right-of-Way shall not include any real or personal City property that is not specifically
described in the previous sentence and shall not include City buildings and other structures or
improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in the public right-of-way
(c) “Retailer maintaining a place of business in this State”, or any like term, means and includes any
retailer having or maintaining within the State of Illinois, directly or by a subsidiary, an office,
distribution facilities, transmission facilities, sales office, warehouse, or other place of business, or
any agent or other representative operating within this State under the authority of the retailer or its
subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place of business or agent or other representative is located
here permanently or temporarily, or whether such retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business in
this State.
(d) “Sale of telecommunications at retail” means the transmitting, supplying, or furnishing of
telecommunications and all services rendered in connection therewith for a consideration, other than
between a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned
subsidiaries, when the gross charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not
greater than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not for sale.
(e) “Service address” means the location of telecommunications equipment from which
telecommunications services are originated or at which telecommunications services are received. If
this is not a defined location, as in the case of wireless telecommunications, paging systems,
maritime systems, air-to-ground systems, and the like, “service address” shall mean the location of
the customer’s primary use of the telecommunications equipment as defined by the location in Illinois
were bills are sent.
(f) Telecommunications includes, but is not limited to, messages or information transmitted through use
of local, toll, and wide area telephone service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter
service, computer exchange services, private line services, specialized mobile radio services, or any
other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means, between or among
points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or similar facilities. Unless the
context clearly requires otherwise, “telecommunications” shall also include wireless
telecommunications as hereinafter defined. “Telecommunications” shall not include value added
services in which computer processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code, and
protocol of the information for purposes other than transmission. “Telecommunications” shall not
include purchase of telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a
component part of the service provided by him or her to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or
terminates the end-to-end communications. Retailer access charges, right of access charges,
charges for use of intercompany facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent
provision and used as a component of, or integrated into, end-to-end telecommunications service
shall not be included in gross charges as sales for resale. “Telecommunications” shall not included
the provision of cable services through a cable system as defined in the Cable Communication Act of
1984 (47 U.S.C. Sections 521 and following) as now or hereafter amended or cable or other
programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to the City through an open video
system as defined in the Rules of the Federal Communication Commission (47 C.D.F. 76.1550 and
following) as now or hereafter amended.
(g) “Telecommunications provider” means (1) any telecommunications retailer; and (2) any person that is
not a telecommunications retailer that installs, owns, operates or controls equipment in the public
right-of-way that is used of designed to be used to transmit telecommunications in any form.
(h) “Telecommunications retailer” or “retailer” or “carrier” means and includes every person engaged in
the business of making sales of telecommunications at retail as defined in this Section. The City
may, in its discretion, upon application, authorize the collection of the fee hereby imposed by any
retailer not maintaining a place of business within this State, who, to the satisfaction of the City,
furnishes adequate security to ensure collection and payment of the fee. When so authorized, it shall
be the duty of such retailer to pay the fee upon all of the gross charges for telecommunications in the
same manner and subject to the same requirements as a retailer maintaining a place of business
within the City.
(i) “Wireless telecommunications” includes cellular mobile telephone services, personal wireless
services as defined in Section 704 © of the Telecommunications Act of 1996 (Public Law No. 104-
104), 42 U.S.C. Sec. 332 ©(7), as now or hereafter amended, including all commercial mobile radio
services, and paging services.
Fairbury Code Ch. 17 Page - 3 Dec-11
.02 REGISTRATION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDERS.
(a) Every telecommunications provider as defined by this Chapter shall register with the City within 30
days after the effective date of this Chapter or becoming a telecommunications provider, whichever is
later, on a form to be provided by the City, provided, however, that any telecommunications retailer
that has filed a return pursuant to Section .04(c) of this Chapter shall be deemed to have registered in
accordance with this Section.
(b) Every telecommunications provider who has registered with the City pursuant to Section .02(a) has
an affirmative duty to submit an amended registration form or current return as required by Section
.04(c), as the case may be, to the City within 30 days from the date of the occurrence of any changes
in the information provided by the telecommunications provider in the registration form or most recent
return on file with the City.
.03 MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE.
(a) A City telecommunications maintenance fee is hereby imposed upon all telecommunications retailers
in the amount of (.75%) of all gross charges charged by the telecommunications retailer to service
addresses within the City for telecommunications originating or received in the City.
(b) Upon the effective date of the infrastructure maintenance fee authorized in this Chapter, the City
infrastructure maintenance fee authorized hereunder shall be the only fee or compensation for the
use of all public rights-of-way within the City by telecommunications retailers. Imposition of the
infrastructure maintenance fee provided under this Chapter does not, however, serve as a limitation
on the levying of any taxes or imposition of any fees other-wise authorized by law.
(c) The City telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee authorized by this Section shall be
collected, enforced, and administered as set forth in Section .04 of this Chapter.
.04 COLLECTION, ENFORCEMENT, AND ADMINISTRATION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS
INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEES.
(a) A telecommunications retailer shall charge to and collect from each customer an additional charge in
an amount equal to the City infrastructure maintenance fee attributable to that customer’s service
address.
(b) Unless otherwise approved by the City Superintendent the infrastructure maintenance fee shall be
remitted by the telecommunications retailer to the City not later than the last day of the month
subsequent to the month in which a bill is issued to the customer; provided, however, that the
telecommunications retailer may retain an amount not to exceed 2% of the City infrastructure
maintenance fee collected by it to reimburse itself for expenses incurred in accounting for and
remitting the fee.
(c) Remittance of the municipal infrastructure fee to the City shall be accompanied by a return, in a form
to be prescribed by the City Superintendent, which shall contain such information as the City
Superintendent may reasonably require.
(d) Any infrastructure maintenance fee required to be collected pursuant to this Chapter and any such
infrastructure maintenance fee collected by such telecommunications retailer shall constitute a debt
owed by the telecommunications retailer to the City. The charge imposed under Section .04(a) by the
telecommunications retailer pursuant to this Chapter shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the
telecommunications retailer who provides such services until paid and, if unpaid, is recoverable at law
in the same manner as the original charge for such services.
(e) If it shall appear that an amount of infrastructure maintenance fee has been paid that was not due
under the provision of this Chapter, whether as a result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then
such amount shall be credited against any infrastructure maintenance fee due, or to become due,
under this Chapter, from the telecommunications retailer who made the erroneous payment;
provided, however, the City Superintendent may request, and telecommunications retailer shall
provide, written substantiation for such credit. However, no claim for such credit may be made more
than three years after the date of the erroneous payment unless, (1) the credit is used only to offset a
claim of underpayment made by the City within the applicable statutory period of limitations, and (2)
the credit derives from an overpayment made by the same telecommunications retailer during the
Fairbury Code Ch. 17 Page - 4 Dec-11
applicable statutory period of limitations.
(f) Amounts paid under this Chapter by telecommunications retailers shall not be included in the tax
base under any of the following acts as described immediately below:
(1) “gross charges” for the purposes of the Telecommunications Excise Tax Act;
(2) “gross receipts” for purposes of the municipal utility tax as prescribed in Section 8-11-2 of the
Illinois Municipal code;
(3) “gross charges” for purposes of the municipal telecommunications tax as prescribed in Section 8-
11-17 of the Illinois Municipal code;
(4) “gross revenue” for purposes of the tax on annual gross revenue of public utilities prescribed in
Section 2-202 of the Public Utilities Act.
(g) The City shall have the right, in its discretion, to audit the books and records of all
telecommunications retailers subject to this Chapter to deter-mine whether the telecommunications
retailer has properly accounted to the City for the City infrastructure maintenance fee. Any
underpayment of the amount of the City infrastructure maintenance fee due to the City by the
telecommunications retailer shall be paid to the City plus five percent (5%) of the total amount of the
underpayment determined in an audit, plus any costs incurred by the City in conducting the audit, in
an amount not to exceed five percent (5%) of the total amount of the underpayment determined in an
audit. Said sum shall be paid to the City within twenty-one days after the date of issuance of an
invoice for the same.
(h) The City Superintendent, or his or her designee, may promulgate such further or additional
regulations concerning the administration and enforcement of this Chapter, consistent with its
provision, as may be required from time to time and shall notify all telecommunications retailers that
are registered pursuance to Section .02 of this Chapter of such regulations.
.05 COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER LAWS. Nothing in this Chapter shall excuse any person or entity from
obligations under any law, including but not limited to:
(a) generally applicable taxes; and
(b) standards for construction on, over, under, or within, use of or repair of the public right-of-way,
including standards relating to free standing towers and other structures upon the public right-of-way,
as provided; and
(c) any liability imposed for the failure to comply with such generally applicable taxes or standards
governing construction on, over, under, or within, use of or repair of the public rights-of-way; and
(d) compliance with any ordinance or provision of this Code concerning uses or structures not located on,
over, or within the right-of-way.
.06 EXISTING FRANCHISES AND LICENSES. Any franchise, license, or similar agreements between
telecommunications retailers and the City entered into before the effective date of this Chapter regarding
the use of public right-of-way shall remain valid according to and for their stated terms except for any
fees, charges or other compensation to the extent waived.
.07 PENALTIES. Any telecommunications provider who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to
comply with any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be subject to fine in accordance with the general
penalty provisions of the City Municipal Code.
.08 ENFORCEMENT. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional or further
remedies that the City may have for enforcement of this Chapter.
.09 SEVERABILITY. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this Chapter is for
any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be
deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of
the remaining portions hereof.
.10 CONFLICT. This Chapter supersedes all ordinances or parts of ordinances adopted prior hereto
which are in conflict herewith, to the extent of such conflict.
Fairbury Code Ch. 18 Page 1 Dec-11
CHAPTER 18
EMERGENCY SERVICES AND DISASTER AGENCY Chapter added
Ordinance 1999-6
.01 POLICY AND PROCEDURES.
(a) Because of the possibility of the occurrence of disasters of unprecedented size and destructiveness
resulting from the explosion in this or in a neighboring municipality of nuclear weapons or other
means from without, or by means of sabotage or other disloyal actions within, or from fire, flood,
earthquake, or other natural or manmade causes, and in order to insure that the municipality will be
prepared to and will adequately deal with any such disasters, preserve the lives and property of the
people of the City of Fairbury and protect the public peace, health and safety in the event of such a
disaster, it is found and declared to be necessary:
(1) To create a municipal emergency services and disaster agency;
(2) To confer upon the mayor the extraordinary power and authority set forth under Sec 11-1-6 of the
Illinois Municipal Code (65 Ill. Compiled Stat. 1996, 5/11-1-6).
(3) To provide for the rendering of mutual aid to other cities and political subdivisions with respect to
the carrying out of emergency services and disaster operations.
(b) Whenever the mayor determines, after an investigation, that a dangerous situation or a potentially
dangerous situation exists which could cause death to individuals or serious injury to property or the
health and welfare of the public, the mayor may declare that a state of emergency exists. The
extraordinary powers may not be exercised until an ordinance shall have been adopted which shall
establish standards for the determination by the mayor of when the state of emergency exists and
shall provide that the mayor may not exercise such extraordinary power and authority except after
signing under oath a statement finding that such standards have been met, setting forth facts to
substantiate such findings, describing the nature of the emergency and declaring that a state of
emergency exists. This statement shall be filed with the city clerk of Fairbury as soon as practical. A
state of emergency shall expire not later than the adjournment of the first regular meeting of the
Fairbury City Council after the state of emergency is declared. A subsequent state of emergency may
be declared if necessary.
(c) It is further declared to be the purpose of this ordinance and the policy of the City of Fairbury that all
disaster functions of this municipality be coordinated to the maximum extent with the comparable
functions of the federal and state governments, including their various departments and agencies, of
other municipalities and localities and private agencies of every type, to the end that the most
effective preparation and use may be made of the nation’s manpower, resources, and facilities for
dealing with any disaster that may occur.
.02 LIMITATIONS.
Nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed to:
(a) Interfere with the course or conduct of a private labor dispute, except that actions otherwise
authorized by this Ordinance or other laws may be taken when necessary to forestall or mitigate
imminent danger to public health or safety:
(b) Interfere with the dissemination of news or comment of public affairs; but any communications facility
or organization (including but not limited to radio and television stations, wire services, and
newspapers and local cable television services) may be requested to transmit or print public service
messages furnishing information or instructions in connection with a disaster;
(c) Affect the jurisdiction or responsibilities of police forces, units of the armed forces of the United
States, or of any personnel thereof, when on active duty; but state, local, and interjurisdictional
disaster emergency plans shall place reliance upon the forces available for performance of functions
related to disaster emergencies;
Fairbury Code Ch. 18 Page 2 Dec-11
(d) Limit, modify, or abridge the authority of the mayor and the municipal council to exercise any other
powers vested in them under the constitution, statutes, or common law of this state, independent of or
in conjunction with any provisions of this ordinance.
03. DEFINITIONS.
As used in this ordinance, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise., the following words and terms
shall have the definitions hereinafter ascribed:
(a) Emergency services means the preparation for and the carrying out of such functions, other than
functions for which military forces are responsible, as may be necessary or proper to prevent,
minimize,
repair and alleviate injury. and damage resulting from any natural or technological cause. These
functions include, without limitation, fire-fighting services, police services, medical and health
services,
rescue, engineering, air raid warning services, communications, radiological, chemical and other
special weapons defense, evacuation of persons from stricken areas, emergency assigned functions
of plant protection, temporary restoration of public utility services and other functions related to
civilian protection, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to the preparation for any
carrying out of the foregoing functions.
(b) Disaster means an occurrence or threat of widespread or severe damage, injury or loss of life or
property resulting from any natural or technological cause, including but not limited to fire; flood,
earthquake, wind, storm, hazardous materials spill, oil spill or other water contamination requiring
emergency action to avert danger or damage, epidemic, air contamination, blight, drought, infestation,
critical shortages of essential fuels and energy, explosion, riot, or hostile military or paramilitary
action. “Disaster” includes, but is not limited to, all occurrences and threats thereof which are
contemplated by the concept of “emergency services” and “disaster operations.”
(c) Disaster Operations means the functions created in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance
to be performed by the City of Fairbury; in cooperation with other political subdivisions to alleviate the
effects of disaster.
(d) Coordinator means the person appointed by the mayor with the duty of carrying out the requirements
of this ordinance.
(e) Political subdivision means any county, city, village, township, or incorporated town.
(f) United States means the several states and the District of Columbia.
.04 CITY OF FAIRBURY EMERGENCY SERVICES AND DISASTER AGENCY
(a) There is hereby created an emergency services and disaster agency and a coordinator of the
emergency services and disaster agency, herein called the “coordinator,” who shall be the head
thereof. The coordinator shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the Council.
The coordinator shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor.
(b) The city of Fairbury Emergency Services and Disaster Agency shall obtain, with Council approval,
such technical, clerical, and other administrative personnel and may make such expenditures within
their appropriation therefor as may be necessary to carry out the purpose of this ordinance.
(c) The coordinator, subject to the direction and control of the mayor, shall be the executive head of the
City of Fairbury Emergency Services and Disaster Agency, and shall be responsible under the
direction of the mayor. for carrying out the program for emergency services and disaster operations of
the City of Fairbury. The coordinator shall coordinate the activities of all organizations for emergency
services and disaster operations with the City of Fairbury and shall maintain liaison, and cooperate
with, the emergency service and disaster agencies and organization of Livingston County, other
counties and municipalities, and the federal and state government.
In the event of the absence, resignation, death, or inability to serve by the coordinator, the mayor or
any persons designated by the mayor, shall be and act as coordinator until a new appointment is
made as provided in this ordinance.
Fairbury Code Ch. 18 Page 3 Dec-11
(d) The City of Fairbury Emergency Services and Disaster Agency shall take an integral part in the
development and revision of the local emergency operations plan.
(e) In the development of the emergency operations plan, the City of Fairbury Emergency Services and
Disaster Agency shall interrelate with business, labor, industry, agriculture, civic and volunteer
organizations, and community leaders.
(f) The City of Fairbury Emergency Services and Disaster Agency shall:
(1) Determine the requirements of the City of Fairbury for food, clothing and other necessities in the
event of an emergency;
(2) Develop an Emergency Operation Plan (EOP) that meets the standards promulgated by the
Illinois Emergency Management Agency;
(3) Biannually review and revise the local Emergency Operations Plan;
(4) Establish a register of persons with types of training and skills in emergency prevention,
preparedness, response, and recovery;
(5) Establish a register of mobile and construction equipment, and temporary housing available for
use in a disaster;
(6) Prepare, for issuance by the mayor, ordinances, proclamations and regulations as necessary or
appropriate in coping with disasters;
(7) Cooperate with the federal, state, and county government and any public or private agency or
entity in achieving any purpose of this ordinance and in implementing programs for disaster
prevention, preparation, response and recovery;
(8) Initiate and coordinate planning for:
a. The establishment of an emergency operating center;
b. The implementation of a communication system.
(9) All other things necessary, incidental, or appropriate for the implementation of this ordinance.
.05 EMERGENCY SERVICES AND DISASTER POWER OF THE MAYOR.
(a) The mayor shall have the general direction and control of the emergency services and disaster
agency, and. shall be responsible for the carrying out of the provisions of this ordinance.
(b) In performing the duties under this ordinance, the mayor is authorized to cooperate with the state and
federal governments and with other municipalities and political subdivisions in all matters pertaining to
emergency services and disaster operations defined in this ordinance.
(c) In performing the duties under this ordinance, the mayor is further authorized:
(1) To make, amend, and rescind all lawful necessary orders, rules, and regulations of the local
disaster plan to carry out the provisions of this ordinance within the limits of the authority
conferred upon him.
(2) To cause to be prepared a comprehensive plan and program for the emergency services and
disaster preparedness, response, and recovery of the City of Fairbury. The plan and program
shall be integrated into and coordinated with disaster plans of the county, state and federal
governments and of other political subdivisions. The plan and program may include:
a. Prevention and minimization of injury and damage caused by disaster;
b. Prompt and effective response to disaster;
c. Emergency relief;
d. Identification of areas particularly vulnerable to disasters;
e. Recommendations for zoning, building, and other land-use controls, safety measures for
securing permanent structures and other preventive and preparedness measures designed to
eliminate or reduce disasters or their impact;
f. Assistance to local officials in designing local emergency action plans;
g. Authorization and procedures for the erection or other construction of temporary works
designed to protect against or mitigate damage or loss form flood, fire, or other disaster;
Fairbury Code Ch. 18 Page 4 Dec-11
h. Preparation and distribution to the appropriate municipal officials of a municipal catalog of
federal, state, and private assistance programs;
i. Organization of municipal manpower and chains of command;
j. Coordination of federal, state, county, and local disaster activities;
k. Other necessary matters.
(3) In accordance with such plan and program for the emergency services and disaster
preparedness, response, and recovery of the City of Fairbury, and out of funds appropriated for
such purposes, to procure and preposition supplies, medicine, materials, and equipment, to
institute training programs and public information programs, and to take all other preparatory
steps, including the partial or full mobilization of emergency services and disaster organizations in
advance of actual disasters to insure the response of adequately trained and equipped forces for
disaster operations.
(4) Out of funds appropriated for such purposes, to make such studies and surveys of the industries,
resources, and facilities in the City of Fairbury as may be necessary to ascertain the capabilities
of this city for disaster operations and disaster preparedness, response, and recovery, and to
plan for the most efficient emergency use thereof.
(d) The mayor is authorized to designate space in a municipal building, or elsewhere, for the emergency
services and disaster agency as its office.
.06 FINANCING.
(a) It is the intent of the City Council and declared to be the policy of the City of Fairbury that every effort
shall be made to provide funds for disaster emergencies.
(b) It is the City Council’s intent that the first recourse shall be funds regularly appropriated to the agency.
If the mayor finds the demands place upon these funds in coping with a particular disaster are
unreasonably great, the mayor may make application for funds from the county and state disaster
relief fund. If moneys available from the funds are insufficient, and if the mayor finds that other
sources of money to cope with the disaster are not available or are insufficient, the mayor shall issue
a call for an immediate session of the City Council for the purpose of enacting ordinances as the City
Council may deem necessary to transfer and expend moneys appropriated for other purposes, or
borrow moneys from the United States Government or other public or private sources. If less than a
quorum of the members of the City Council is capable of convening in session to enact such
ordinances for the transfer, expenditure, or borrowing of such moneys, the mayor is authorized to
carry out these decisions until such time as a quorum of the City Council can convene.
(c) Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to limit the mayor’s authority to apply for,
administer and expend grants, gifts, or payments in aid of disaster prevention, preparedness,
response, or recovery.
.07 LOCAL DISASTER EMERGENCIES.
(a) A local disaster emergency may be declared by the mayor or the mayor’s interim emergency
successor. If declared by the mayor, it shall not be continued for a period in excess of seven (7) days
except by or with the consent of the City Council. Any order or proclamation declaring, continuing, or
terminating a local disaster shall be given prompt and general publicity, and shall be filed promptly
with the City Clerk.
(b) The effect of a declaration of a local emergency is to activate the response and recovery aspects of
any and all applicable local or interjurisdictional disaster emergency plans and to authorize the
furnishing of aid and assistance thereunder.
(c) No interjurisdictional agency or official thereof may declare a local disaster emergency, unless
expressly authorized by the agreement pursuant to which the agency functions. However, an
interjurisdictional disaster agency shall provide aid and service in accordance with the agreement
pursuant to which it functions.
(d) During a local disaster emergency, the mayor may suspend the provisions of any municipal ordinance
prescribing procedures for the conduct of municipal business, or the orders, rules, and regulations of
any municipal agency, if strict accordance with the provisions of any ordinance, rule, or regulation
Fairbury Code Ch. 18 Page 5 Dec-11
would in any way prevent, hinder, or delay necessary action in coping with the emergency, as
authorized by “The Illinois Emergency Management Act,” provided that, if the City Council meets as
such time, the mayor shall act subject to the direction and restrictions imposed by that body.
.08 TESTING OF CIVIL DEFENSE AND DISASTER WARNING DEVICES.
The testing of outdoor warning devices shall be held only on the first Tuesday of each month at 10:00
a.m. in the morning.
.09 MUTUAL AID ARRANGEMENTS BETWEEN POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS
The coordinator for emergency services and disaster operations may, in collaboration with other public
agencies within the immediate vicinity, develop or cause to be developed mutual aid arrangements with
other political subdivisions, municipal corporations or bodies politic within this state for reciprocal disaster
assistance in case of disaster too great to be dealt with unassisted, which arrangements shall not,
however, be effective unless and until approved by each such political subdivisions, municipal corporation
or bodies politic as are parties thereto, in the manner provided by law, and unless and until filed with and
approved by the state director. Such arrangements shall be consistent with the state emergency
management operations plan and program, and in the event of such a disaster as described in Section
.03 of this chapter, it shall be the duty of each local and department for emergency services and disaster
operations to render assistance in accordance with the provisions of such mutual aid arrangements.
.10 COMMUNICATIONS.
The Fairbury Emergency Services and Disaster Agency shall ascertain what means exist for rapid and
efficient communications in times of disaster emergencies. The agency shall consider the desirability of
supplementing these communications resources or of integrating them into a comprehensive system or
network. In studying the character and feasibility of any system or its several parts, the agency shall
evaluate the possibility of multipurpose use thereof for general municipal and local governmental
purposes. The agency shall make recommendations to the mayor as appropriate.
.11 IMMUNITY.
Neither the municipality, the agency or any member thereof or any person acting at their direction,
engaged in any emergency services and disaster operations or disaster activities, while complying with or
attempting to comply with this chapter or any rule. or regulation promulgated pursuant to this chapter is
liable for the death or any injury to persons, or damage to property, as a result of such activity. This
section does not, however, affect the right of any person to receive benefits to which they would
otherwise be entitled under this chapter, under the Worker’s Compensation Act or the Worker’s
Occupational Diseases Act, or under any pension law, and this section does not affect the right or any
such person to receive any benefit or compensation under any act of Congress.
.12 PROFESSIONS, TRADES, AND OCCUPATIONS.
If such disaster as described in Section .03 occurs in the City of Fairbury and the services of persons who
are competent to practice any profession, trade, or occupation are required in the City of Fairbury to cope
with the disaster situation and it appears that the number of persons licensed or registered in the City of
Fairbury to practice such profession, trade, or occupation may be insufficient for such purpose, then any
persons who are licensed elsewhere to practice any such profession, trade, or occupation may, if a
member of another political subdivision rendering aid in the City of Fairbury pursuant to the order of the
head of that political subdivision and upon the request of City of Fairbury, or if otherwise requested so to
do by the mayor or the coordinator of the City of Fairbury, during the time the disaster condition
continues, practice such profession, trade, or occupation in the City of Fairbury without being licensed or
registered in the City of Fairbury.
.13 APPROPRIATIONS AND LEVY OF TAXES FOR EMERGENCY SERVICES AND DISASTER
OPERATIONS.
The City Council may make appropriations for emergency services and disaster operations in the manner
provided by law for making appropriations for the ordinary expenses of such political subdivision. The City
Council may also levy for emergency services and disaster operations a tax not to exceed .05 percent of
Fairbury Code Ch. 18 Page 6 Dec-11
the full, fair cash value as equalized or assessed by the Department of Revenue on all taxable property in
the municipality for the current year. However, the amount collectible under such levy shall in no event
exceed twenty-five cents ($0.25) per capita. The annual tax shall be in addition to and in excess to the
amount authorized to be levied for general corporate purposes.
.14 AUTHORITY TO ACCEPT SERVICES, GIFTS, GRANTS, OR LOANS.
Whenever the federal or state governments, or any agency or officer thereof, or whenever any person,
firm or corporation shall offer to the City of Fairbury services, equipment, supplies, materials, or funds by
way of gift or grant for purposes of emergency services and disaster operations, the City of Fairbury,
acting through the mayor or through the City Council, may accept such offer and upon acceptance, the
mayor of the City Council may authorize any officer of the City of Fairbury to receive such services,
equipment, supplies, materials, or funds on behalf of the City of Fairbury.
.15 ORDERS, RULES, AND REGULATIONS.
(a) The mayor shall file a copy of every rule, regulation, or order and any amendment thereof made by
him pursuant to the provisions of this ordinance in the office of the city clerk. No such rule, regulation,
order, or any amendment thereof, shall be effective until ten (10) days after such filing; provided,
however, that upon the declaration of such a disaster emergency by the mayor, described in Section
.07, the provision relating to the effective date of any rule, regulation, order, or amendment issued
pursuant to this ordinance and during the state of such disaster emergency, is abrogated, and said
rule, regulation, order, or amendment shall become effective immediately upon being filed with the
city clerk, accompanied by a certificate stating the reason for the emergency.
(b) The Fairbury Emergency Services and Disaster Agency established pursuant to this ordinance, and
the coordinator thereof, shall execute and enforce such order, rules, and regulations as may be made
by the Governor under the authority of the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act. The Fairbury
agency shall have available for inspection at its offices all orders, rules, and regulations made by the
Governor, or under this authority. The state emergency services and disaster agency shall furnish
such orders, rules, and regulations to the agency.
.16 UTILIZATION OF EXISTING AGENCY, FACILITIES, AND PERSONNEL.
In carrying out the provisions of this ordinance, the mayor and the coordinator of the emergency services
and disaster agency are directed to utilize the services, equipment, supplies, and facilities of existing
departments, offices, and agencies of the City of Fairbury to the maximum extent practicable, and the
officers, and personnel of all such departments, offices, and agencies are directed, upon request, to
cooperate with and extend such services and facilities to the coordinator of the emergency services and
disaster agency.
.17 SEVERABILITY.
If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstance be held invalid,
such invalidity shall not affect such other provisions or applications of the chapter which can be given
effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are hereby
declared to be severable.
.18 NO PRIVATE LIABILITY.
Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises, who voluntarily and without
compensation, grants a license or privilege, or otherwise permits the designation or use of the whole or
any part or parts of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual or
impending disaster, or a mock or practice disaster response activity together with his successors in
interest, if any, shall not be liable for negligently causing the death of, or injury to, any person on or about
such real estate or premises under such license, privilege or other permission, or for negligently causing
loss of, or damage to, the property of such person.
.19 SUCCESSION.
In the event of the death, absence from the City of Fairbury or other disability of the mayor preventing him
Fairbury Code Ch. 18 Page 7 Dec-11
from acting under this ordinance or for any other municipal purpose, and until the office is filled in a
manner prescribed by law, the interim emergency successor shall succeed to the duties and
responsibilities of the mayor.
.20 COMPENSATION.
(a) The City Council, by its annual appropriations ordinance, may provide for the payment of the salary of
the coordinator and such other staff and personnel as may be expressly provided for in this
ordinance. Nothing herein contained shall prohibit any member of the agency from receiving
compensation from the State of Illinois Emergency Management Agency under any provisions of that
agency.
(b) In the event a disaster emergency is declared under Section .07 of this chapter or by the Governor as
provided by law, all salaried municipal employees who serve in a capacity outlined in the City of
Fairbury Disaster Plan shall be compensated at an hourly rate equivalent to their normal pay for all
time worked over and above the normal 40-hour work week.
.21 EMERGENCY SERVICES AND DISASTER AGENCY PERSONNEL OATH.
Each person, whether compensated or noncompensated, who is appointed to serve in any capacity in a
department of the Fairbury Emergency Service and Disaster Agency, shall, before entering upon his
duties, take an oath, in writing, before the person authorized to administer oaths in this municipality,
which oath shall be filled with the coordinator on the Fairbury Emergency Services and Disaster Agency
and which oath shall be substantially as follows:
“I, ________________ , do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and defend and bear true faith
and allegiance to the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of Illinois, and the
territory, institutions, and facilities thereof, both public and private, against all enemies, foreign or
domestic; that I take this obligation freely, without mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will
faithfully discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter. And I do swear (or affirm) that I do not
advocate, nor am I, nor have I been a member of any political party or organization that advocates the
overthrow of the government of the United States by force or violence; and that such time I am affiliated
with the Fairbury Emergency Service and Disaster Agency and the City of Fairbury, I will not advocate nor
become a member of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government
of the United States by force or violence.”
.22 EMERGENCY TERMINATION OR REDUCTION OF ELECTRICAL SERVICE.
Declaration of emergency condition. When, in the judgment of the mayor or City Council, as provided
herein in Section .07(a), a local disaster emergency requires the termination or reduction of electrical
service, the mayor or City Council shall forthwith declare in writing the existence of the emergency
condition and order the termination or reduction.
.23 PENALTY.
Any person convicted of violating this chapter or any order thereunder shall be punished by a fine not
exceeding $500.00.
Fairbury Zoning Ordinance Page - 1 May-18
FAIRBURY ZONING ORDINANCE
2016
CONTENTS OF ORDINANCE
I Title . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
II Intent and Purpose . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
III Activities Regulated by this Ordinance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
IV Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
V Districts and Boundaries thereof . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
VI “A” Country Estate District Regulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
VII “R-1” Single-Family Residential District . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
VIII “R-2” Residential District . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
IX “R-2-A” Residential District . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
X “C” Commercial District . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
XI Industrial District . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
XII Height and Area Exceptions and Modifications . . . . . . . . . . . 18
XIII Off-Street Parking Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
XIV Non-Conforming Uses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
XV Administration and Enforcement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
XVI Zoning Administrator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
XVII Occupancy Permits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
XVIII Zoning Board of Appeals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
XIX Office of the Secretary of the Zoning Board of Appeals . . . . . . . 25
XX Interpretation and Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
XXI Violation and Penalty . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
XXII Zoning Board of Review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
XXIII Publication and Effective Date . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
Fairbury Zoning Ordinance Page - 2 May-18
CITY OF FAIRBURY :
COUNTY OF LIVINGSTON : SS.
STATE OF ILLINOIS :
ORDINANCE NO. 714
An Ordinance to regulate and limit the height and bulk of buildings hereafter to be erected; to regulate and limit
the intensity of the use of lot areas, and to regulate and determine the areas of open spaces within and
surrounding such buildings; to classify, regulate, and restrict the location of trades and industries and the location
of buildings designed for specified industrial, business, residential, and other uses; to divide the entire City and
environs into districts for the purpose of this Ordinance; to fix standards to which buildings or structures shall
conform; to prohibit uses, buildings, or structures incompatible with the character of such districts respectively;
and to prevent additions to and alterations or remodeling of existing buildings or structures in such a way as to
avoid the restrictions and limitations lawfully imposed hereunder; to classify, to regulate and restrict the use of
property on the basis of family relationship; and to provide penalties for violation hereof; and to exercise such
powers within the corporate limits of the City of Fairbury and within contiguous territory not more than one and
one-half miles beyond the corporate limits and not included within any municipality.
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF FAIRBURY, ILLINOIS, THAT:
ARTICLE I
TITLE
1.1 This Ordinance, including the zoning map made a part thereof, shall be known and may be cited and referred
to as the “Fairbury Zoning Ordinance”.
ARTICLE II
INTENT AND PURPOSE
2.1 This Ordinance is adopted for the following purposes:
To promote the public health, safety, morals, comfort and general welfare of the citizens of the City of Fairbury
and surrounding area;
To conserve the values of property throughout the City of Fairbury and to protect the character and stability of
agricultural, residential, business and industrial areas within the City and within contiguous territory;
To promote orderly and beneficial development of the City of Fairbury and surrounding areas;
To provide adequate light, pure air, privacy and convenience of access to property;
To lessen or avoid congestion in the public streets and highways in the City of Fairbury and surrounding areas;
To regulate and restrict the location and use of buildings, structures and land for trade, industry, agriculture,
residence and other uses, and to regulate and restrict the intensity of such uses;
To divide the City of Fairbury and contiguous territory into districts of such number, shape, area and of such
different classes, according to the use of land and buildings and the intensity of such use, as may be deemed
best suited to carry out the purpose of this Ordinance;
To prohibit locations and uses of buildings and structures and uses of land which are incompatible with the type of
development planned for such specified zoning districts;
To prevent additions to and alterations or remodeling of existing buildings or structures in such a way as to avoid
the restrictions and limitations lawfully imposed hereunder;
Fairbury Zoning Ordinance Page - 3 May-18
To protect against fire, explosion, noxious fumes and other dangers;
To fix reasonable standards to which buildings and structures shall conform;
To define and limit the powers and duties of administrative officers and bodies as provided herein;
To prescribe penalties for the violation of and methods for the enforcement of the provisions of this Ordinance or
any amendment thereto.
2.2 CONTIGUOUS TERRITORY. To carry out such intent and purposes this Ordinance is hereby made
specifically applicable to all territory contiguous to the City of Fairbury and not more than one and one-half miles
beyond the corporate limits of the City and not included within any municipality, and all powers granted to the City
by Division 13 of Article 11 of the Illinois Municipal Code as the same may be amended from time to time, shall be
exercised within such contiguous territory as well as within the corporate limits of the City.
ARTICLE III
ACTIVITIES REGULATED BY THIS ORDINANCE
3.1 NEW STRUCTURES. All structures erected hereafter shall comply with all the regulations of this Ordinance.
Any structure hereafter moved from one site to another site, shall be considered to be a structure erected
hereafter. Any structure rebuilt after its destruction to the extent of more than fifty per cent of the current
replacement cost of the entire structure (exclusive of its foundation) shall be considered to be a new structure
erected hereafter.
3.2 NEW USES OF OLD STRUCTURES. If a use of any structure is hereafter changed to another use, then the
new use must comply with the Use Regulations of this Ordinance, but the mere establishment of a new use does
not require the existing structure to conform to the lot size requirements or to the height and area regulations of
this Ordinance.
3.3 REMODELING. If any structure is hereafter remodeled,
(1) The entire structure as remodeled shall comply with the Use Regulations of this Ordinance.
(2) Any alterations of, enlargements of or additions to the structure shall comply with the Height and Area
Regulations of this Ordinance.
(3) The off-street parking facilities shall not be reduced below (or if already less than shall not be further
reduced below) the requirements applicable to a similar new structure or use.
3.4 USES OF OPEN LAND. If any use of open land is hereafter established or if any use of open land is hereafter
changed to another use, such new use shall comply with all of the regulations of this Zoning Ordinance.
3.5 USES PERMITTED IN ALL DISTRICTS. The following public utility and municipal uses are permitted in all
districts: poles, wires, cables, conduits, vaults, laterals, pipes, mains, valves or any other similar equipment (not
including sub-stations) for the distribution to consumers of telephone or other communications, electricity, gas or
water, or for the collection of sewerage or surface water.
ARTICLE IV
DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this Ordinance, certain terms and words are hereby defined as follows:
4.1 Words used in the present tense include the future; words in the singular number include the plural, and
words in the plural number include the singular; the word “building” includes the word “structure”, the word “shall”
is mandatory and not directory.
Fairbury Zoning Ordinance Page - 4 May-18
4.2 ACCESSORY BUILDING AND USE: An accessory building, located on the same lot as the main building, the
use of which is naturally and normally incidental to that of the dominant use of the main building or land. An
accessory use is one which is naturally and normally incidental to the main use of the premises. In R-1, R-2 & R-
2-A, the square footage footprint of accessory buildings/structures may not exceed 60% of the square footage
footprint of the principal residence nor extend upward beyond the highest point of the principal residence.
Accessory buildings may only be placed upon a lot improved with a main building. (2011-6)
4.3 ALLEY. A public right of way, other than a street or highway, which affords only a secondary means of access
to property abutting thereon.
4.4 APARTMENT. A room or suite of rooms intended, designed, or used as a residence by a single family.
4.5 APARTMENT HOUSE. See dwelling, multiple.
4.6 BASEMENT. A story partly underground having at least one-half of its height above the average level of the
adjoining ground. A basement shall be counted as a story if subdivided and used for dwelling or business
purposes, other than for the quarters of a watchman or janitor.
4.7 BOARDING HOUSE OR LODGING HOUSE. A building other than a hotel where, for compensation and by
arrangement, meals and/or lodging, are provided for three or more persons.
4.8 BUILDING. Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls for the support, enclosure, shelter, or
protection of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind, and which is permanently affixed to the land.
4.9 BUILDING, HEIGHT OF. The vertical distance from the grade (elevation of the sidewalk or the average level
of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the structure) to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof, to
the mean height level between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs.
4.10 CELLAR. That portion of a building between floor and ceiling which is wholly or partly below grade, and
having more than one-half of its height below grade.
4.11 CLINIC. An establishment where patients who are not lodged overnight are admitted for examination and
treatment by a group of physicians, dentists, or other members of the healing arts practicing together.
4.12 CLUB. A building or portion thereof or premises owned or operated by a corporation, association, person or
persons for a social, educational or recreational purpose, but not primarily for profit.
4.13 CONDOMINIUM. An individually owned unit in a multiple building or development. In which maintenance
and common areas are shared. No single family dwelling, which is part of a Multi-family complex, shall be sold
without benefit of a condominium agreement. (2000-7)
4.14 DAY CARE HOMES. A Day care Home is a family dwelling unit licensed by the State of Illinois, which
receives more than 3 (three) up to a maximum of 12 (twelve) children, for less than 24 hours a day. The number
counted includes the Family’s natural or adopted children, and all other persons under age 12. The term does not
include facilities which receive only children from a Single household. (2000-7)
4.15* DISTRICT. Any section of the City of Fairbury or environs for which the zoning regulations governing the
use of buildings and premises, the height of buildings, the size of yards, and the intensity of use are uniform.
4.16* DWELLING. Any building or portion thereof, but not a trailer, which is designed for or used for residential
purposes, including single-family, two-family, multiple dwellings and apartment houses, but not including hotels,
motels, boarding or lodging houses.
4.17* DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A building designed for or occupied exclusively by one family.
Fairbury Zoning Ordinance Page - 5 May-18
4.18* DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A building designed for or occupied exclusively by two families.
4.19* DWELLING, MULTIPLE. A building designed for or occupied exclusively by three or more families.
4.20* FAMILY. Either (a) an individual, or (b) two or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption,
occupying a dwelling and living as a single house-keeping unit, or (c) a group of not more than four persons, who
need not be related by blood, marriage or adoption, living together as a single housekeeping unit, as
distinguished from a group occupying a boarding house, lodging house, or hotel, as herein defined.
4.21* FILLING STATION. Any building, structure, or land used for the dispensing, sale or offering for sale at retail
of any automobile fuels, oils or accessories, including lubrication or washing of automobiles and replacement or
installation of minor parts and accessories but not including major repair work such as motor replacement, body
and fender repair or spray painting.
4.22* FLOOR AREA. The sum of the gross horizontal areas of all floors of a building measured from the exterior
faces of the exterior walls or from the center line of walls separating buildings, but not including garages,
unenclosed porches, and cellar or basement space, unless used for business or commerce.
4.23* FRONTAGE. All property on one side of a street between two intersecting streets (crossing or terminating),
measured along the line of the street, or if the street is dead ended, then all of the property abutting on one side
between an intersecting street and the dead end of the street.
4.24* GARAGE, PRIVATE. An accessory building designed or used for the storage of not more than four motordriven
vehicles owned and used by the occupants of the building to which it is accessory, and not storing more
than one commercial vehicle or any vehicle which exceeds a two-ton capacity.
4.25* GARAGE, PUBLIC. A building or portion thereof, other than a private garage, designed or used for
equipping, servicing, repairing, hiring, selling or storing motor-driven vehicles.
4.26* HOME BUSINESS. A business operating from a private home in a residential district shall be subject to the
following restrictions. (2005-3)
A. Registration shall be required. (2005-3)
B. All business shall be transacted by mail, telephone, fax, or on-line computer. (2005-3)
C. There shall be no signs visible from the street and no stock publicly displayed in a private home in a
residential district. (2005-3)
D. There shall be no additional foot or auto traffic created by the operation. (2005-3)
E. No product, purchased, assembled, or constructed on site, shall be sold over the counter either retail or
wholesale, in a private home in a residential district. (2005-3)
F. There shall be no additional employees other than members of the immediate household. (2005-3)
G. The homeowner and or business operator shall reside (live) in the home. (2005-3)
4.27* HOTEL. A building in which lodging or boarding and lodging are provided and offered to the public for
compensation and in which ingress and egress to and from all rooms is made through an inside lobby or office
supervised by a person in charge at all hours. As such, it is open to the public in contradiction to a boarding
house, a lodging house, or an apartment which are herein separately defined. (1996-21)
4.28* INSTITUTION. A building occupied by a non-profit corporation or a non-profit establishment for public use.
(1996-21)
4.29* LAUNDROMAT. An establishment providing washing, dry cleaning, drying or ironing machines for hire to
Fairbury Zoning Ordinance Page - 6 May-18
be used by customers on the premises. (1996-21)
4.30* LOADING SPACE. A space within the main building or on the same lot therewith, providing for the
standing, loading of trucks, and having a minimum dimension of 12 by 35 feet and a vertical clearance of at least
14 feet. (1996-21)
4.31* LOT. A parcel of land occupied or intended for occupancy by a use permitted in this Ordinance, including
one main building together with its accessory building, the open spaces and parking spaces required by this
Ordinance, and having its principal frontage upon a street or upon an officially approved place. So long as it
satisfies the above requirements, such lot may consist of a single lot of record, or a combination of lots or parts of
lots of record. (1996-21)
4.32* LOT, CORNER. A lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection. (1996-21)
4.33* LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE. A lot having a frontage on two non-intersecting streets as distinguished from a
corner lot. (1996-21)
4.34* LOT OF RECORD. A lot which is part of a subdivision, the map of which has been recorded in the office of
the Recorder of Deeds of Livingston County; or a parcel of land, the deed of which was recorded in the office of
the Recorder of Deeds of Livingston County, and which map or deed was recorded prior to the date of the
adoption of this Ordinance. (1996-21)
4.35* MODULAR HOMES: A structure of conventional construction, but built off site in a special manufacturing
facility, then transferred to the building site, (on a series of special vehicles) where final assembly is completed.
These structures shall rest on a circumferential foundation, which supports at least 60% of the weight of said
structure. (1996-21)
4.36* MOTEL. A building or group of buildings used for the temporary residence of motorists or travelers.(1996-21)
4.37* NON-CONFORMING USE. The use of land or a building, or portion thereof, which use does not conform
with the use regulations of the district in which it is situated. (1996-21)
4.38* OUTLOT an area of land that cannot be developed as a lot. No outlots shall be allowed without the Council
and the City Engineer approval. Outlots must be reviewed and substantial evidence provided for their need of
existence. Outlots may not be used to restrict extensions of planned streets or utilities to areas beyond the
subdivision. (2003-6)
4.39** PARKING AREA. An open, unoccupied space used or required for use for parking of automobiles
exclusively and in which no gasoline or automobile accessories are sold or no other business is conducted and no
fees are charged. (2003-6)
4.40** PARKING SPACE. An area, enclosed in the main building or in an accessory building, or unenclosed,
having an area of not less than 180 square feet exclusive of driveways, permanently reserved for the temporary
storage of one automobile and connected with a street or alley by a driveway which affords satisfactory ingress
and egress for automobiles. (2003-6)
4.41** PLACE. An open unoccupied space or a public or private thoroughfare other than a street or alley
permanently reserved as the principal means of access to abutting property. (2003-6)
4.42** STORY. That portion of a building, other than a cellar or basement (except one used for business or
residence), included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it or, if there be no
floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. (2003-6)
4.43** STORY, HALF. A partial story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wall plates of which on at least two
opposite exterior walls are not more than four feet above the floor of such story, except that any partial story used
for residence purposes, other than for a janitor or caretaker or his family, or by a family occupying the floor
immediately below it, shall be deemed a full story. (2003-6)
Fairbury Zoning Ordinance Page - 7 May-18
4.44** STREET. A public or private thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting property.
(2003-6)
4.45** STREET LINE. A dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and a contiguous street. (2003-6)
4.46** STREET INTERSECTION. That point where the boundary line of one street crosses the boundary line of
any other street. The boundary lines of such streets shall be determined from the official recorded plat of the
addition or subdivision containing such streets. (2003-6)
4.47** STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires more or less permanent location
on the ground or attached to something having a permanent location on the ground, including but without limiting
the generality of the foregoing, advertising signs, billboards, back stops for tennis courts, carports, lean-tos, and
pergolas. (2005-3)
4.48** STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS. Any change in the supporting members of a structure, such as bearing
walls, columns, beams, or girders, other than a change in doors or windows or a minor alteration which affects
primarily the appearance and not the life of the structure. (2003-6)
4.49** TEMPORARY STORAGE UNIT. A fully-enclosed, portable container with signage on one or more of its
outer surfaces. It is designed to permit ease of loading to and from a transport vehicle. A temporary storage unit
is NOT a storage shed, roll-off container, dumpster, cargo shipping container or the trailer portion of a tractor
trailer. (2012-5)
4.50** TRAILER. Any structure used for living, sleeping, business or storage purposes and designed for
conveyance after fabrication, on streets and highways on its own wheels or on flatbed or other trailers, and
arriving at the site where it is to be occupied as a dwelling unit complete and ready for occupancy, except for
minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations such as locating on jacks or other foundation, or
connection to utilities. This definition shall not include prefabricated structures or Modular structures fixed on a
solid, contiguous, enclosed masonry foundation. (2003-6)
4.51** TRAILER COURT. An area providing space where two or more tents or trailers can be or are intended to
be parked. (2003-6)
4.52** YARD. An open space between a building and the adjoining lot lines, unoccupied and unobstructed by any
portion of a structure from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided herein, and measured as the
minimum horizontal distance between the lot line and the main building. (2003-6)
4.53** YARD FRONT. A yard extending across the front of a lot and measured between the street and the
uncovered steps, uncovered balconies, or uncovered porch. On a corner lot the owner may elect either street line
as a front lot line. See diagram labeled YARD DESCRIPTION diagram. (2011-6)
4.54* YARD, REAR. A yard extending across the rear of a lot between the rear lot line and the rear of the main
building or any projections thereof other than the projections of uncovered steps, unenclosed balconies or
unenclosed porches. On all lots the rear yard shall be at the opposite end of the lot from the front yard.
See diagram labeled YARD DESCRIPTION diagram. (2011-6)
4.55** YARD, SIDE. A yard between the main building and the side line of the lot, extending from the front yard
line to the rear yard line. See diagram labeled YARD DESCRIPTION diagram. (2011-6)
4.56** ZONING DIAGRAMS - see following page. (2011-6)
Fairbury Zoning Ordinance Page - 8 May-18
Fairbury Zoning Ordinance Page - 9 May-18
ARTICLE V
DISTRICTS AND BOUNDARIES THEREOF
5.1 ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS. In order to classify, regulate and restrict the locations of trades,
industries and the location of buildings designated for specified purposes, to regulate and limit the height and bulk
of buildings hereafter erected or structurally altered, to regulate and limit the intensity of the use of the lot areas,
and to regulate and determine the areas of yards, courts and other open spaces within and surrounding such
buildings, the City and environs is hereby divided into districts, of which there shall be six in number, known as:
(2000-7)
“A” Country Estate District
“R-1” Single-Family Residential District
“R-2” Residential District
“R-2A” Residential District
“C” Commercial District
“I” Industrial District
5.2 RULES WHERE UNCERTAINTIES MAY ARISE. Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of
the various districts as shown in the map accompanying and made a part of this Ordinance, the following rules
apply:
5.3 BOUNDARIES.
A. The district boundaries are either streets or alleys, unless otherwise shown, and where the districts
designated on the map accompanying and made a part of this Ordinance are bounded approximately by
street or alley lines, the street or alley shall be construed to be the boundary of the district.
B. Where the district boundaries are not otherwise indicated, and where the property has been or may
hereafter be divided into blocks and lots, the district boundaries shall be construed to be the lot lines, and
where the districts designated on the map accompanying and made a part of this Ordinance are bounded
approximately by lot lines, the lot lines shall be construed to be the boundary of the districts unless the
boundaries are otherwise indicated on the map.
C. In subdivided property and in areas not annexed to the City the district boundary lines on the map
accompanying and made a part of this Ordinance shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on said
map.
5.4 DISTRICT MAP. The boundaries of the districts are shown upon the map prepared April 3, 1996, and last
revised October 11, 1996, which is made a part of this Ordinance, which map is designated as the “District Map.”
The District Map and all notations, references and other information shown thereon are a part of this Ordinance
and have the same force and effect as if the District Map and all the notations, references and other information
shown thereon were all fully set forth or described herein, the original of which District Map is properly attested
and is on file with the Clerk of the City. (1996-21)
5.5 ANNEXED LAND. All land which may hereafter be annexed to the City of Fairbury shall continue to be
classified in the District in which said land is classified by this Ordinance, or in the event such land is not classified
herein, the same shall be automatically classified in the District to which said land was contiguous at the time of
such annexation. Provided, however, that this section shall not apply to land affected by a valid annexation
agreement adopted pursuant to Division 15.1 of Article 11 of the Illinois Municipal Code, and entered into after
investigation and approval by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
5.6 VACATION. Whenever any street, alley, or other public way is vacated, the zoning district adjoining each side
of such street, alley or public way shall be automatically extended to the center of such a vacation, and all area
included in the vacation shall then and henceforth be subject to all appropriate regulations of the extended
districts.
Fairbury Zoning Ordinance Page - 10 May-18
5.7 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS IN ALL ZONING DISTRICTS. Except as hereinafter specifically provided:
A. No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered, nor shall
any building or land be used, except for a use permitted in the district in which such building or land is located.
B. No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or structurally altered to exceed the height
limit herein established for the district in which such building is located.
C. No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or structurally altered except in conformity
with the area regulations of the district in which such building is located.
D. The minimum yards, parking spaces, and open spaces, including lot area per family, required by this
Ordinance for each and every building existing at the time of passage of this Ordinance or for any building
hereafter erected, shall not be encroached upon or considered as part of the yard or parking place or open
space required for any other building, nor shall any lot area be reduced below the requirements of this
Ordinance for the district in which such lot is located.
E. Every residential building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be located on a lot as herein defined
and in no case shall there be more than one main residential building on one lot except as specifically
provided hereinafter. Residence is not allowed in the industrial zone. (2004-1)
F. The front yard requirements on both streets of a corner lot shall be observed for all buildings and
structures, including accessory buildings.
G. ENCLOSURES AROUND SWIMMING POOLS AND OTHER BODIES OF WATER (2010-6)
(1) Every person owning land on which there is situated a swimming pool or wading pool capable of
containing 24 inches of water in depth at any point, shall erect and maintain thereon an adequate fence
enclosure either surrounding the property, or pool area, sufficient to make such body of water inaccessible
to small children. Snow fences, either picket or plastic, shall not be allowed as a fence enclosure. Such
enclosure, including gates therein, shall be not less than four (4) feet above the underlying ground and
shall comply with the maximum height restrictions listed elsewhere in this section. All gates shall be selfclosing
and self-latching with latches placed four (4) feet above the underlying ground and otherwise made
inaccessible from the outside to small children. (2010-6)
(2) A protective device approved by the Zoning Administrator and or City Superintendent shall be an
acceptable enclosure so long as the degree of protection afforded by the substituted devices or structures
is not less than the protection afforded by the enclosure. (2010-6)
(3) If the swimming pool is an above ground pool at least 48" high, the pool wall may serve as a barrier. A
retractable ladder and/or fence shall be required around the access to the pool. Swimming pool filter
and/or equipment shall not be installed in a location where a child could climb on the equipment to gain
access to the swimming pool. It is the responsibility of the owners of such pools to enforce the
provisions of this section and to see that such retractable ladders are effective barriers for small children.
All decks must have a self-closing and self-latching gate preventing unauthorized access. (2011-6)
(4) A power safety cover will be allowed. It shall: (2010-6)
(A) Provide a continuous connection between the cover and the deck, so as to prohibit access to the
pool when the cover is completely drawn over the pool;
(B) Be mechanically operated by a key, keypad or other such device as to prevent the cover from being
drawn open or retracted except by authorized person(s). (2018-11)
(C) Is installed with track, rollers, rails, guides, or other accessories necessary to accomplish clauses
(A) and (B), in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions; and,
Fairbury Zoning Ordinance Page - 11 May-18
(D) Bear an identification tag indicating that the cover satisfies the requirements of ASTM F1346 for
power safety pool covers;
(E) The surface of the covers shall be kept free of standing water;
(F) These devices shall be inspected yearly. Inspection reports certifying the covers to be safe and
properly functioning shall be submitted by the homeowner yearly to the City of Fairbury prior to
operation of the pool. The inspection report is to be completed and submitted to City Hall by June 1 of
each year. When June 1 falls on a Saturday or Sunday, reports must be turned in by the close of
business on the next business day. (2018-11)
(5) When a landowner/tenant has been issued a Notice of Violation by the Zoning Administrator for
failure to comply with the requirements of section 5.7G(1) of this Ordinance, said landowner will have
10 days from the date that the citation was served upon him in which to establish an enclosure in
compliance with said section. (2010-6)
H. REGULATIONS FOR FENCES IN ALL DISTRICTS: No fence may be erected in a residential, commercial,
of industrial district which does not comply with the following. (2000-7)
(1) A permit will be required for all fences erected in the City of Fairbury. (2000-7)
(2) Any fence erected in a required front yard shall be at least 60% open. No fence erected in a required
front yard may exceed four (4) feet in height, measured from the ground level. No privacy fence may be
erected in the front yard of any residence. (2000-7)
(3) Any privacy fence erected on the street side of a corner lot shall be restricted to the required rear yard
and may be placed on the rear or side property line, subject to the provisions of subsection H4. However,
a chain link or ornamental fence which is no more than four (4) feet in height, measured from the ground
level, and which is 60% open may extend to the front property line. No fence may be built across or on a
utility easement. (2000-7)
(4) Any fence placed on an interior side or rear yard may be placed on the property line, if a signed written
agreement with the adjacent property owner, is presented with the building permit application. If such an
agreement is not available a three (3) foot setback is required. If an alley is present a five (5) foot setback is
required to provide for snow removal and fire lane usage. (2001-15)
(5) No fence may be erected which exceeds seven (7) feet in height above ground level in a residential
area. In commercial and industrial areas, no fence may be erected which exceeds eight (8) feet in
height. (2000-7)
(6) No fence may be constructed with barbed wire, metal spikes or any other sharp pointed materials. All
chain link fences shall be installed with the knuckle portion of the fence up and with the barb portion of the
fence at or near the ground. No fence may be electrified. (2000-7)
(7). The finished side of all fences shall face outward from the property owner. If the fence faces an alley, it
is optional. All areas of a lot on the exterior side of the fence including the fence itself shall be maintained
by the property owner. (2000-7)
I. WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS: A. Definitions:
WECS TOWER: The support structure to which the nacelle and rotor are attached.
WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM (WECS): All necessary devices that together convert wind
energy into electricity, including the rotor, nacelle, generator, WECS tower, electrical components, WECS
foundation, transformer, and electrical cabling from the WECS tower to substation(s).
Fairbury Zoning Ordinance Page - 12 May-18
B. Location: No WECS tower for a wind energy conversion system shall be located within the City of
Fairbury or within 1.5 miles of the corporate limits of the City of Fairbury, Illinois. (2011-6)
J. TEMPORARY STORAGE: Temporary storage unit or containers may be located in all zoning districts
provided the following criteria are met:
1. All containers must be registered. Registration must be made at City Hall.
2. Containers shall be allowed for 90 days. Extensions are granted at the discretion of the zoning
Administrator and must be made in person. (2012-5)
K. SIGNS: All advertising signs require a building permit. No sign may be installed on any City right-of-way or
utility easement. All signs must be erected on private property. Any sign which is in an unsafe condition, or which
overhangs any roadway or which overhangs any sidewalk less than seven feet above the sidewalk is considered
a nuisance and shall be removed or repaired. No sign shall obstruct the view of any traffic pattern on any city
street. Such obstruction shall be removed within 5 days of notification by the Zoning Administrator. (2013-6)
5.8 TRAILERS: Trailers shall be confined to trailer courts, and no land may be used for storage, parking, or
permanent location of trailers except land in “C” Commercial District, used and operated as a trailer court.
However, a double wide manufactured home having a floor area of no less than 750 square feet enclosed by a
masonry foundation skirt may be placed in district R-2-A. (2000-7)
ARTICLE VI
“A” COUNTRY ESTATE DISTRICT REGULATIONS
6.1 REGULATIONS. The regulations set forth in this Article, or set forth elsewhere in this Ordinance when
referred to in this Article, are the district regulations in the “A” Country Estate District.
6.2 USE REGULATIONS. A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes:
A. Farms.
B. Truck and flower gardening, nurseries, orchards, and greenhouses.
C. Single-family dwellings.
D. Public and private forests and wildlife reservations and similar conservation projects.
E. Parks and playgrounds owned by public agencies.
F. Golf courses and private clubs.
G. Riding academies.
H. Churches.
I. Schools.
J. Accessory buildings and accessory uses customarily incidental to the above uses.
6.3 HEIGHT REGULATIONS. No building shall exceed six stories, nor shall it exceed seventy-five feet in height,
except as provided in Article XII.
6.4 AREA REGULATIONS.
A. Yards: No building shall be erected within forty feet of any lot or street line.
B. Intensity of use: Every lot or tract of land upon which a building is erected shall have an area of not less
than one acre and an average width of not less than two hundred fifty feet, except that any of the uses permitted
in this district may be erected or constructed on a smaller lot of record.
ARTICLE VII
“R-1” SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
7.1 REGULATIONS. The regulations set forth in this Article or set forth elsewhere in this ordinance, when
referred to in this Article, are the district regulations in the “R-1” Single-Family Residential District.
Fairbury Zoning Ordinance Page - 13 May-18
7.2 USE REGULATIONS. A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes:
A. Single-family dwelling.
B. Publicly owned or operated park, playground or community building, museum, library or art gallery, with
specific approval of the location of such use by the City Council, after investigation and report by the Zoning
Board of Appeals, without hearing.
C. Church or other place of worship or Sunday School, with specific approval of the location of such use by
the City Council, after investigation and report by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
D. Public school, elementary and high, or a private school having a curriculum the same as ordinarily given in
a public school, with specific approval of the location of such use by the City Council, after investigation and
report by the Zoning Board of Appeals, without hearing.
E. Country club or golf course with specific approval of the location of such use by the City Council, after
investigation and report by the Zoning Board of Appeals, without hearing; but excluding miniature golf courses,
or practice driving tee operated for commercial purposes.
F. Accessory building or use, including a private garage, customarily incident to the above uses, but not
involving the conduct of a business.
G. A church bulletin board; or temporary sign appertaining to the lease, hire or sale of a building or premise,
which sign shall not exceed 10 square feet in area.
7.3 HEIGHT REGULATIONS. No building shall exceed two and one-half stories nor shall it exceed forty feet in
height, except as provided in Article XII.
7.4 AREA REGULATIONS:
A. Front Yard: there shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than twenty-five feet, except as hereinafter
provided at Article XII.
B. Side Yard:
(1) Except as hereinafter provided in Article XII, on each side of a building there shall be a side yard, having
a width of not less than five feet, and in no case will an eave be closer (including gutter) than 3 feet and 6
inches from a lot line. (1996-21)
(2) On a corner lot, the side yard on the street side of a building shall be the same as the front yard.
(1996-21)
(3) Any garage, the entrance of which faces upon a side lot line, shall be placed no less that fifteen feet
from such side lot line. (1985-8)
C. Rear Yard: There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than fifteen feet except in the following
circumstances: (2001-15)
(1) A garage, the entrance of which does not face upon an alley, may be placed no less than 5 feet from
the rear lot line and no less than 15 feet from the street lot line. When the entrance faces upon the alley,
the garage must be placed 15 feet from the alley lot line. (2012-5)
(2) Any other accessory building and any structure which is not a building, (other than a fence) may be
placed no less than five feet from the rear lot line and 15 feet from the street or alley lot line. (2012-5)
Accessory buildings shall be permitted only in side and rear yards. (2015-8)
Fairbury Zoning Ordinance Page - 14 May-18
D. Intensity of Use. Every lot or tract of land upon which a dwelling is erected shall have an area of not less
that eighty-five hundred square feet and an average width of not less than sixty feet. Each dwelling shall
have a minimum floor area of one thousand square feet. (2001-15)
7.5 PARKING REGULATIONS. Off-street parking space shall be provided in accordance with the requirements
for specific uses set forth in Article XIII.
ARTICLE VIII
“R-2” RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
8.1 REGULATIONS. The regulations set forth in this Article or set forth elsewhere in this Ordinance, when
referred to in this Article, are the District regulations in the “R-2” Residential District.
8.2 USE REGULATIONS. A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes:
A. Any use permitted in the R-1 Single-Family Residential District, but without requiring any specific approval
by the City Council of the location of such use.
B. Two family or multiple dwelling, or apartment buildings.
C. Boarding or lodging house.
D. Funeral Home.
E. Institution of a religious, educational, eleemosynary or philanthropic nature, but not penal or mental
institutions.
F. Hospital or sanitarium, except a criminal, mental or animal hospital.
G. Nursing or convalescent home.
H. Fraternity, sorority or lodge: Excepting one the chief activity of which is a service customarily carried on as
a business. (1996-21)
I. Accessory building or use customarily incidental to any of the above uses, including a storage garage on a
lot occupied by a multiple dwelling, hospital or institution.
J. Day Care Home. A Day Care Home Duly licensed by the State of Illinois, or license pending, may operate
as a home business. Registration is required. (2000-7)
8.3 HEIGHT REGULATIONS. The height requirements set forth for “R-1” Single-Family Residential District shall
be observed.
8.4 AREA REGULATIONS.
A. Front Yard: The front yard requirements set forth for “R-1” Single-Family Residential District shall be
observed.
B. Side Yard:
(1) Except as hereinafter provided in Article XII, on each side of a building there shall be a side yard,
having a width of not less than five feet, and in no case will an eave be closer (including gutter) than 3
feet and 6 inches from a lot line. (1996-21)
(2) On a corner lot, the side yard on the street side of a building shall be the same as the front yard.
(1996-21)
Fairbury Zoning Ordinance Page - 15 May-18
(3) Any garage, the entrance of which faces upon a side lot line, shall be placed no less that fifteen feet
from such side lot line. (1985-8)
C. Rear Yard: There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than fifteen feet except in the following
circumstances: (2001-15)
(1) A garage, the entrance of which does not face upon an alley, may be placed no less than 5 feet from
the rear lot line and no less than 15 feet from the street lot line. When the entrance faces upon the alley,
the garage must be placed 15 feet from the alley lot line. (2012-5)
(2) Any other accessory building and any structure which is not a building, (other than a fence) may be
placed no less than five feet from the rear lot line and 15 feet from the street or alley lot line. (2012-5).
Accessory buildings shall be permitted only in side and rear yards. (2015-8)
D. Intensity of Use. Every lot or tract of land upon which a dwelling is erected shall have an area of not less
than six thousand square feet and an average width of not less than fifty feet. Each dwelling shall have a
minimum floor area of seven hundred fifty square feet. No two-family or multiple dwelling shall be erected
or building altered for dwelling purposes to accommodate more than one family on less than six thousand
square feet of lot area, plus five hundred square feet of lot area per family dwelling unit. Each dwelling
shall have minimum floor area of seven hundred fifty square feet per single unit, and minimum floor area of
six hundred seventy-five square feet per family dwelling unit in two-family or multiple dwellings. (2001-15)
8.5 PARKING REGULATIONS. Off-street parking space shall be provided in accordance with the requirements
for specific uses set forth in Article XIII.
ARTICLE IX
“R-2-A” RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
added in Ordinance (2000-7)
9.1 REGULATIONS. The regulations set forth in this Article or set forth elsewhere in this Ordinance, when
referred to in this Article, are the District regulations in the “R-2-A Residential District.
9.2 USE REGULATIONS. A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes:
A. Any use permitted in the R-2 Single-Family Residential District, but without requiring any specific approval
by the City Council of the location of such use.
B. A Manufactured Home (Double wide Mobile Home) having a minimum of 750 (seven hundred fifty square
foot) and must have a masonry skirt.
9.3 HEIGHT REGULATIONS. The height requirements set forth for “R-2” Single-family residential district shall be
observed.
9.4 AREA REGULATIONS.
A. Front Yard: The front yard requirements set forth for “R-2” Single-Family Residential District shall be
observed.
B. Side Yard:
(1) Except as hereinafter provided in Article XII, on each side of a building there shall be a side yard, having
a width of not less than five feet, and in no case will an eve be closer (including gutter) than 3 feet and 6
inches from a lot line.
(2) On a corner lot, the side yard on the street side of a building shall be the same as the front yard.
Fairbury Zoning Ordinance Page - 16 May-18
(3) Any garage, the entrance of which faces upon a side lot line, shall be placed no less that fifteen feet
from such side lot line.
C. Rear Yard: There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than fifteen feet except in the following
circumstances: (2001-15)
(1) A garage, the entrance of which does not face upon an alley, may be placed no less than 5 feet from
the rear lot line and no less than 15 feet from the street lot line. When the entrance faces upon the alley,
the garage must be placed 15 feet from the alley lot line. (2012-5)
(2) Any other accessory building and any structure which is not a building, (other than a fence) may be
placed no less than five feet from the rear lot line and 15 feet from the street or alley lot line. (2012-5).
Accessory buildings shall be permitted only in side and rear yards. (2015-8)
D. Intensity of Use. Every lot or tract of land upon which a dwelling is erected shall have an area of not less
than six thousand square feet and an average width of not less than fifty feet. Each dwelling shall have a
minimum floor area of seven hundred fifty square feet. No two-family or multiple dwelling shall be erected
or building altered for dwelling purposes to accommodate more than one family on less than six thousand
square feet of lot area, plus five hundred square feet of lot area per family dwelling unit. Each dwelling
shall have minimum floor area of seven hundred fifty square feet per single unit, and minimum floor area of
six hundred seventy-five square feet per family dwelling unit in two-family or multiple dwellings. (2001-15)
9.5 PARKING REGULATIONS. Off-street parking space shall be provided in accordance with the requirements
for specific uses set forth in Article XIII.
ARTICLE X
“C” COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
10.1 REGULATIONS. The regulations set forth in this Article or set forth elsewhere in this Ordinance, when
referred to in this Article, are the district regulations in the “C” Commercial District.
10.2 USE REGULATIONS. A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes: (2003-6)
A. Any use permitted in Residential Districts “R-1” and “R-2”.
B. Agricultural Services and Products.
C. Apartment buildings and business buildings.
D. Bakeries.
E. Barber shops, beauty shops, shoeshine parlors.
F. Battery stations, filling stations and car washes.
G. Fairs and exhibitions.
H. Farm implement stores.
I. Financial institutions.
J. Hay, grain, seed, feed and meal stores.
K. Hotels, motels, and trailer courts.
L. Laboratories.
M. Laundries, cleaning and dyeing establishments.
N. Light commercial and manufacturing which is not objectionable by reason of the emission of odor, dust,
smoke, gas, fumes, noise or vibration, or of an explosive nature.
O. Locker plants.
P. Lumber yards.
Q. Photograph and art studios.
R. Printing and publishing establishments.
S. Private Clubs, restaurants and taverns.
T. Professional services.
U. Public garages, auto sales and services.
Fairbury Zoning Ordinance Page - 17 May-18
V. Recreation establishments.
W. Shops for electrical work, plumbing, steam fitting, tinsmiths, locksmithing, painting, decorating, and
upholstering.
X. Stores, shops, storage showrooms, salesroom and retail storage for the conducting of retail business.
Y. Tailor, millinery and dressmaking shops.
Z. Telephone exchange.
aa. Theaters.
ab. Transportation/Trucking Firms.
10.3 HEIGHT REGULATIONS. No building shall exceed six-stories, nor shall it exceed seventy-five feet in
height, except as provided at Article XII.
10.4 AREA REGULATIONS:
A. Front Yard: No front yard is required except where the frontage on one side of a street between two intersecting
streets is partly in the “C” Commercial District and partly in a Residential District, in which event
the front yard regulations of the Residential District shall apply.
B. On each side of a commercial building there shall be a side yard having a width of three (3) feet. For
dwellings the side yard of the R2 residential district shall apply. (2001-15)
C. Rear Yard. The rear yard regulations for dwellings are the same as in the “R-2”, Residential District. In all
other cases a rear yard is not required except where a lot abuts upon a Residential District, in which case
there shall be a rear yard with a depth of not less than fifteen feet; Provided if said lot abuts upon an alley
or street, the rear yard shall have a depth of not less than five feet.
D. Intensity of Use: Where a lot or tract is improved with a multiple family dwelling, or where living facilities
are erected above other uses, the intensity of use regulations are the same as those required in “R-2”
Residential Districts.
ARTICLE XI
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
11.1 REGULATIONS. The regulations set forth in this Article or set forth elsewhere in this Ordinance, when
referred to this Article, are the regulations of the “I” Industrial District.
11.2 USE REGULATIONS. A building or premises may be used only for the following purposes:
A. Any use permitted in the “C” Commercial District, but not those uses permitted under Article X, Section
10.2 paragraph A (any uses permitted in Residential District “R-1”and “R-2”), and at Section 10.2 paragraph
H (Hotels, motels and trailer courts). (2001-15)
B. Any other use not in conflict with any ordinance of the City of Fairbury regulating nuisances; and provided
further that no building or occupancy permit shall be issued for any of the following uses until and unless the
location of such use shall have been approved by the City Council after reports by the Zoning Board of
Appeals, Chief of the Fire Department, and Superintendent of Water and Wastewater: (1996-21)
(1) Acid manufacture
(2) Cement, lime, gypsum, or plaster of Paris manufacture
(3) Distillation of bones and glue manufacture
(4) Explosives manufacture or storage
(5) Fat rendering and fertilizer manufacture
(6) Garbage, offal, or dead animals, reduction or dumping
(7) Petroleum, or its products, refining of
(8) Smelting of tin, copper zinc, or iron ores
Fairbury Zoning Ordinance Page - 18 May-18
(9) Stockyards or slaughter of animals
11.3 HEIGHT REGULATIONS. The height requirements set forth for “C” Commercial District shall be observed.
11.4 AREA REGULATIONS:
A. Front Yard: There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than forty feet, except as provided
hereinafter at Article XII.
B. Side Yard: A side yard is not required except on the side of a lot adjoining a Residential District, in which
case there shall be a side yard of not less than ten feet.
C. Rear Yard: A rear yard is not required except where a lot abuts upon a Residential District, in which case
there shall be a rear yard of not less than twenty feet.
ARTICLE XII
HEIGHT AND AREA EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS
12.1 HEIGHT: The height regulations prescribed herein shall not apply to television and radio towers, church
belfries, monuments, water and fire towers, cooling towers, ornamental towers, chimneys, flues, elevator
bulkheads, smokestacks, fire escapes, conveyors, flag poles, cupolas, silos and barns.
12.2 FRONT YARDS:
A. In a Residential District, when forty per cent or more of the frontage on one side of the street between two
intersecting streets is improved with buildings that have a front yard which is greater or less than the
required front yard in the district, no building shall project beyond the average front yard so established;
provided, however, that a front yard depth shall not be required to exceed fifty per cent in excess of the front
yard otherwise required in the district in which the lot is located.
B. In a Residential District no structure or planting higher than three and one-half feet above the established
street grades shall be maintained within twenty-five feet of any street intersection. (2001-15)
C. An open uncovered porch or paved terrace may project into a required front yard for a distance of not
more than ten feet, but this shall not be interpreted to include or permit fixed canopies.
D. Filling station pumps and pump islands may be located within a required yard provided they are not less
than 15 feet from any street line and not less than 50 feet from the boundary of any Residential District.
12.3 SIDE YARD:
A. No accessory building shall project beyond a required yard line along any street.
B. A porte-cochere or canopy may project into a required yard provided every part of such porte-cochere of
canopy is unenclosed and not less than five feet from any side lot line.
C. Where a lot of record at the time of the effective date of this Ordinance is less than 50 feet in width, each of
the required side yards may be reduced by an amount equal to ten per cent of the difference between such
width and 50 feet, provided, however, that no side yard shall be less than three feet.
12.4 LOT AREA PER FAMILY: Where a lot of record at the time of the effective date of this Ordinance has less
area or width than herein required in the district in which it is located, and the owner of such lot does not own any
other parcel or tract adjacent thereto, said lot may nonetheless be used for a one family dwelling or for any nondwelling
use permitted in the district in which it is located.
12.5 DRAINAGE: The natural flow of surface water shall not be restricted by any construction or modification.
Fairbury Zoning Ordinance Page - 19 May-18
Any runoff from roofs or driveways shall not be directed towards adjacent property, but will conform to the natural
flow of water that existed prior to construction or modification. (1996-21)
12.6 Wheel Chair Ramp: A temporary wheelchair ramp, or device may project into a required front, side or rear
yard, only to the extent that the proper safe incline be maintained. Subject to the approval of the Zoning
Administrator. (2001-15)
ARTICLE XIII
OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
13.1 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS. In all districts there shall be provided at the time any building or structure is
erected or structurally altered, off-street parking spaces in accordance with the following requirements, provided,
however, that no off-street parking need be provided for any of these uses when they are located in that part of
the Commercial District, bounded by Walnut and Maple Streets.
A. Dwellings, including single and two-family and multiple: one parking space for each dwelling unit.
B. Boarding or lodging house: one parking space for each two roomers for whom accommodations are
maintained.
C. Private club or lodge: one parking space for every ten members.
D. Church or temple: one parking space for each eight seats in the main auditorium.
E. School (except high school or college): one parking space for each ten seats in the auditorium or main
assembly room, or one space for each classroom, whichever is greater.
F. College or high schools: one parking space for each eight seats in the main auditorium or three spaces for
each class room, whichever is greater.
G. Hospital: one parking space for every two beds.
H. Motel: one parking space for each sleeping room or suite.
I. Dance Hall, assembly or exhibition hall without fixed seats: one parking space for each 100 square feet of
floor area used therefore.
J. Business of professional office, studio, bank, medical or dental clinic: three parking spaces plus one
additional parking space for each 400 square feet of floor area over 1000.
K. Bowling alley: five parking spaces for each alley.
L. Mortuary or funeral home: one parking space for each 100 square feet of floor space in slumber rooms,
parlors or individual funeral service rooms.
M. Restaurant, nightclub, cafe or similar recreation or amusement establishment: one parking space for each
100 square feet of floor area.
N. Manufacturing or industrial establishment, research or testing laboratory, creamery, bottling plant,
warehouse or similar establishment: one parking space for every two employees on the maximum working
shift plus space to accommodate all trucks and other vehicles used in connection therewith.
O. Any new establishments not addressed in the above section must obtain parking requirements from the
City of Fairbury. (2014-4)
ARTICLE XIV
NON-CONFORMING USES
14.1 NON-CONFORMITIES: If within the districts established by this ordinance, or amendments thereto, there
exist lots, structures, uses of land or structures, and characteristics of use which were lawful before the ordinance
was passed or amended but which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted, it is the intent of this ordinance to
permit these non-conformities to continue until they are removed but not to encourage their survival under the
terms of this ordinance. It is further the intent of this Ordinance that non-conformities shall not be enlarged upon,
expanded, or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the
same district. Non-conforming uses are declared by this Ordinance to be incompatible with permitted uses in the
districts involved. A non-conforming use of a structure, a non-conforming use of land, or a non-conforming use of
structure and land in combination shall not be extended or enlarged after passage of this Ordinance by
attachment on a building or by the addition of other uses of a nature which would be prohibited generally in the
district involved. (1996-21)
Fairbury Zoning Ordinance Page - 20 May-18
14.2 NON-CONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD: Where a lot of record at the time of the effective date of this
Ordinance or amendments thereto has less area or width than is herein required in the district in which it is
located, and the owner of such lot does not own any other parcel adjacent or contiguous thereto, said lot may be
used for a one-family dwelling or for any non-dwelling use permitted in the district in which it is located. However,
if the owner has ownership or unified control of vacant property, conforming, or non-conforming, lots of record,
adjacent or contiguous with above said lot of record, then such contiguous lots of record or at least such portion
thereof as is necessary to meet or exceed the minimum lot area and width requirements of the district in which
they are located shall be used and developed only as a single conforming lot. Any person who conveys property
or terminates the unified control of such contiguous lots of record so as to frustrate the purpose of the foregoing
proviso shall be deemed to have violated the provisions of this ordinance. (1996-21)
14.3 NON-CONFORMING USES OF LAND: Where at the time of passage of this Ordinance or subsequent more
restrictive amendment thereto, a lawful use of land exists which would not be permitted by the regulations
imposed, the use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, provided, (1996-21)
A. No such non-conforming use shall be enlarged or increased, nor extended to occupy a greater area of
land than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance. (1996-21)
B. No such non-conforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any portion of the lot or parcel other
than that occupied by such use at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance. (1996-21)
C. If any such non-conforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of more than thirty (30)
consecutive days, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations specified by this
ordinance for the district in which such land is located. (1996-21)
D. No additional structure conforming to the requirements of this Ordinance shall be erected in connection
with such non-conforming use of land, unless the entire property in question is brought into full conformity.
(1996-21)
14.4 NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURES: Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or
amendment of this Ordinance that could not be built under the terms of this Ordinance by reasons of restrictions
on the area, lot coverage, height, yards, its location on the lot or other zoning requirements concerning the
structure, such structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following
provisions: (1996-21)
A. If no structural alterations are made, a non-conforming use of a building may be changed to another
non-conforming use of the same or more restricted classification. Whenever a non-conforming use has
been changed to a more restricted use or to a conforming use, such use shall not thereafter be changed to
a less restricted use. The non-conforming use of a building may be extended throughout those parts
thereof which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time of adoption of this Ordinance.
(1996-21)
B. Whenever the use of a building shall become non-conforming through a change in zoning ordinance or in
the district boundaries, such use may be continued, and if no structural alternations are made, may be
changed to another non-conforming use of the same or of a more restricted classification. (1996-21)
C. Whenever a non-conforming use of a building or portion thereof is discontinued for a continuous period of
six months, any future use of such building or portion thereof shall be in conformity with the regulations of
the district in which such building is located. (1996-21)
D. A non-conforming building which has been damaged by fire, explosion, act of God, or the public enemy to
the extent of more than fifty (50) percent of its market value at the time of damage shall not be restored
except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located. When damaged by less than
fifty (50) percent of its market value, a non-conforming building may be repaired or reconstructed and used
as before the time of damage, provided such repairs or reconstruction are completed within one year of the
Fairbury Zoning Ordinance Page - 21 May-18
date of such damage. (1996-21)
14.5 TERMINATION AND REMOVAL OF NON-CONFORMING USES: The period of time during which the
following non-conforming uses of buildings, structures, or land may continue or remain shall be limited to the
following periods from the effective day of the ordinance or of any amendments thereto which causes the use to
be non-conforming use, shall be completely removed from the premises at the expiration of the period signified, or
shall be made to conform to the regulations of the ordinance. (1996-21)
A. Any non-conforming building or structure having a fair market valuation not in excess of seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00) on the effective date of the ordinance or amendment thereto - TWO YEARS. (1996-21)
B. All non-conforming signs, billboards and outdoor advertising structures - TEN YEARS (1996-21)
C. Any non-conforming use of land where no enclosed building is involved or where the only buildings
employed are accessory or incidental to such use, or where such use is maintained in connection with a
conforming building - TWO YEARS (1996-21)
D. House trailers or mobile homes - when vacated for six months a non-conforming mobile home shall be
removed. When a house trailer or mobile home is removed from a premise for any reason, it shall not be
replaced with another mobile home. (1996-21)
ARTICLE XV
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
15.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS. The administration and enforcement of this Ordinance is hereby vested in the
following officers of the City:
A. The Zoning Administrator
B. The Zoning Board of Appeals
C. The Secretary of the Zoning Board of Appeals
ARTICLE XVI
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR
16.1 APPOINTMENT OF THE ZONING ADMINISTRATOR. The Zoning Administrator shall be appointed by the
Mayor and shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor.
16.2 DUTIES OF ZONING ADMINISTRATOR. The Zoning Administrator shall administer and enforce this
Ordinance. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator to:
A. Receive and process applications for occupancy certificates upon the completion of a structure or when
there is a change of use as herein provided.
B. Conduct inspections of structures or the use of land to determine whether there is a compliance with this
Ordinance, and, in the case of any violation, to notify in writing the person or persons responsible, specifying
the nature of the violation and ordering a corrective action.
C. Maintain in current status the official zoning map.
D. Maintain permanent and current records required by this Ordinance, including but not limited to
occupancy certificates, inspections, and all official action on appeals, variations and amendments.
E. Prepare and have available in book, pamphlet or map form, on or before March 31 of each year:
(1) The compiled text of the zoning ordinance, including all amendments thereto through the preceding
December 31, and
Fairbury Zoning Ordinance Page - 22 May-18
(2) A zoning map, or maps, showing the zoning districts, divisions, and classifications in effect on the
preceding December 31.
F. Maintain for distribution to the public a supply of copies of the zoning map or maps, the compiled text of
the zoning ordinance and amendments, and the rules of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
G. Zoning Administrator may require that building, demolishing or altering of any building or structure shall
be in compliance with all codes and ordinances of the City of Fairbury. (2011-6)
H. The Zoning Code Book shall be interpreted and enforced by the Zoning Administrator. (2012-5)
I. All businesses shall register with the Zoning Administrator prior to the business’s opening day. (2013-6)
J. It shall be the responsibility of each building contractor who wishes to perform work within City limits to
register with the Zoning Administrator. (2013-6)
K. It shall be the Zoning Administrator’s responsibility to ensure all variances granted are being maintained
according to the variance that was granted. (2013-6)
16.3 COMPENSATION. By resolution the City Council may provide compensation for the Zoning Administrator.
ARTICLE XVII
BUILDING AND OCCUPANCY PERMITS (2004-1)
17.1 BUILDING PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
A. BUILDING PERMIT: To enable the Zoning Administrator to determine that the use of the land in question
will comply with this ordinance, the following information may be required.
(1) A Contractor’s Certification Compliance form, signed by the main contractor and subcontractors,
certifying that all materials and workmanship used, and performed on said project, shall meet the
applicable building codes of the City of Fairbury, International Code Council (ICC), and codes of the State
of Illinois in affect at the time of completion of the project. Completed form shall be submitted with the
building permit application. (2012-5)
(2) A signed certificate of licensed Architect shall be submitted with the blueprints of all Public and Multiple
family dwellings to comply with the ILLINOIS ARCHITECTURE PRACTICE ACT OF 1989.
(3) Approved blueprints may be required of all projects.
(4) A plat plan shall be required showing the location, area and height of the proposed structure, showing
building line in relation to lot lines and setbacks as required by this ordinance. Plan shall be submitted with
the building permit application. (2016-5)
(5) Surveyors stakes shall be exposed and marked. In the case that such stakes are not available, a
survey may be required.
(6) The build site must be clearly marked, and inspected by the City Superintendent and Zoning
Administrator prior to excavation. (2016-5)
(7)*** No excavation, erection, construction, alteration or placement of any structure or fence will be allowed
until a building permit is issued. No permit will become valid until signed by the following: (2012-5)
(a) Zoning Administrator
(b) City Superintendent
(c) Superintendent of Streets and Alley
Fairbury Zoning Ordinance Page - 23 May-18
(8)*** A halt order shall be given to any excavation, construction, or alteration started before a permit
issued.
(9)*** A record of all building permits shall be kept on file in the office of the Zoning Administrator and
copies shall be furnished on request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in land or in a
building affected by such building permit.
(10)*** A building permit shall be valid for 12 or 18 months from date of issue. A permit may be extended,
upon request, for 1 year. The extension fee shall be twice the amount of the previous permit charge.
(2015-8)
(11)*** Any deviation from the issued building permit shall require an amended permit, prior to continuation
of construction.
(12)*** A building permit shall be either approved or refused by the Zoning Administrator within 14 days
after he receives an application therefore, or within such further period as may be agreed to by the
applicant. When the Zoning Administrator refuses to approve an application for a building permit, he shall
advise the applicant in writing of the reasons for the refusal.
B. OCCUPANCY PERMIT: The City of Fairbury will issue an Occupancy Permit only upon request. (2015-8)
(1) Every Certificate of Occupancy shall state that the new occupancy complies with all provision of this
Ordinance.
(2) A record of all Certificates of Occupancy shall be kept on file in the office of the Zoning Administrator,
and copies shall be furnished on request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in land or in
a building affected by such building permit.
(3) An occupancy permit shall be either approved or refused by the Zoning Administrator within 14 days
after he receives an application therefore, or within such further period as may be agreed to by the
applicant. When the Zoning Administrator refuses to approve an application for an occupancy permit he
shall advise the applicant in writing of the reasons for the refusal. No occupancy permit shall be issued
until work is completed in conformance to the application.
17.2 OCCUPANCY PERMITS FOR NON-CONFORMING USES.
A. A certificate of occupancy shall be required for all non-conforming uses of land or buildings existing after
the passage of this Ordinance, or any amendment thereto. Application for such certificate of occupancy for
non-conforming uses shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator by the owner or occupant of the land or
building occupied by such non-conforming use within one year from the effective date of this Ordinance, or
amendment thereto. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator to issue a certificate of occupancy for
non-conforming use.
B. Any non-conforming use for which an occupancy permit has not been obtained in conformity with the
requirements of this Article shall be presumed to be operating in violation of this Ordinance and such use
shall thereupon be abated.
17.3 APPROVAL OF CERTIFICATES. An occupancy permit shall be either approved or refused by the Zoning
Administrator within 14 days after he receives an application therefore, or within such further period as may be
agreed to by the applicant. When the Zoning Administrator refuses to approve an application for an occupancy
permit he shall advise the applicant in writing of the reasons for the refusal. No occupancy permit shall be issued
until work is completed, in conformance with the application required at section 17.3 hereof.
ARTICLE XVIII
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
Fairbury Zoning Ordinance Page - 24 May-18
18.1 CREATION AND MEMBERSHIP. A Zoning Board of Appeals is hereby authorized to be established. The
word “Board” when used in this section shall be construed to mean the Zoning Board of Appeals. Said Board
shall consist of seven members appointed by the Mayor, with the consent of the City Council. The term of office
of each member shall be five years; provided that the members of the first Board shall serve respectively for
terms of one, two, three, four, five, six, and seven years. Thereafter, as each term expires, the successor to each
member shall serve for a term of five years. One member of the Board shall be designated by the Mayor, with the
consent of the City Council, as chairman of the Board, and shall hold his said office as Chairman until his
successor is appointed. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of the member whose place has become
vacant, in the manner herein provided for the appointment of members. By resolution the Mayor and the City
Council may provide compensation for the members of the Board.
18.2 MEETINGS. Meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of the Chairman, or any two members, and at
such other times as the Board may determine. The Chairman, or in his absence, the acting Chairman may
administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of said Board shall be open to the public.
All testimony before the Board shall be given under oath. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings,
showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and
shall also keep records of its hearings and other official actions. Findings of fact shall be included in the minutes
in each case of a requested variance, and the reasons for granting or denying such application shall be specified.
Every rule or regulation; every amendment or appeal thereof, and every order, requirement, decision or
determination by the Board shall be filed immediately in the office of the Board and shall be a public record, along
with the minutes of all proceedings. The Board shall adopt its own rules of procedure, and may select or appoint
such officers as it deems necessary. Four members of the Board shall constitute a quorum.
18.3 POWERS AND DUTIES. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the following powers and duties:
A. To hear and decide appeals from any decision made by the Zoning Administrator in the enforcement of
this Ordinance.
B. To grant variations from the terms of this Ordinance as provided by statute, when a property owner shows
that a strict application of the terms of this Ordinance relating to the use, construction, or alteration of
buildings or structures, or to the use of land, by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape
thereof or by reason of exceptional topography or other extraordinary or exceptional situation, would result in
peculiar or exceptional practical difficulties and clearly demonstrable hardship upon him, amounting to
practical confiscation thereof and not a mere inconvenience to the owner; Provided, that any such variation
shall be authorized only to the extent that justice may be done, and the variation can be granted without
depreciation of the value of the neighboring property, and without substantial detriment to the public good and
provided further that such variations are in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this ordinance.
The Zoning Board of Appeals may grant variations with such conditions and safeguards as it may determine
in harmony with the general purpose, intent and spirit of this Ordinance so that the public health, safety and
welfare shall be secured, and substantial justice shall be done.
C. To make investigations and give reports, with recommendations to the City Council on matters concerning
or related to this Ordinance when so requested by the City Council.
18.4 APPEALS TO THE ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS:
A. An appeal may be taken to the Board by any person, or by any officer or department of the city, affected
by any decision of the Zoning Administrator relative to this Ordinance. Such appeal shall be taken within
such time as shall be prescribed by the Board of general rule, by filing with the Zoning Administrator and with
the Board a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds thereof. The Zoning Administrator shall forthwith
transmit to the Board all of the papers constituting the record from which the action appealed from was taken.
B. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the Zoning
Administrator certifies to the Board after notice of appeal shall have been filed with him that, by reason of the
Fairbury Zoning Ordinance Page - 25 May-18
facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such
case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the
Board or by a court of record, as provided, or by statute.
C. The Board shall fix a reasonable time and place for the hearing of the appeal and give due notice of the
time, place and purpose thereof, and shall decide the appeal within a reasonable time. The Board may
reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify or amend the order, requirement, decision or determination
appealed from as in its opinion ought to be made in the premises.
18.5 ZONING CHANGES. Any person seeking any variation from the terms of this ordinance shall file with the
Secretary of the Zoning Board of Appeals an Application for a Variation, in the form and manner required by
general rules adopted by the Zoning Board of Appeals. Within sixty (60) days after the filing of such Application
the Zoning Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing on such application. Within sixty (60) days after the
hearing, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall grant or deny such application.
18.6 VOTE REQUIRED. In considering all appeals and all proposed variations to this Ordinance the Board shall,
before making any variation from the Ordinance in a specific case, first determine that the proposed variation will
not impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property, or unreasonably increase the congestion in
public streets, or increase the danger of fire or endanger the public safety or unreasonably diminish or impair
established property values within the surrounding area, or in any other respect impair the public health, safety,
comfort, morals or welfare of the inhabitants of the City. The concurring vote of four members of the Board shall
be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the Zoning Administrator, or to
decide in favor of the applicant any matter upon which it is authorized by this Ordinance to render a decision.
18.7 NOTICE. The Board shall make no determination except in a specific case and after a public hearing
conducted by the Board. Notice of the time and place of such public hearing shall be published in a paper of
general circulation in the City at least fifteen days previous to the hearing. Such notice shall contain the address
or location of the property for which the variation or other ruling by the Board is sought, as well as a brief
description of the nature of the appeal, or of the variation sought.
18.8 APPEALS TO THE CITY COUNCIL:
A. An appeal may be taken to the City Council by any applicant for a variance from the terms of this
Ordinance. Such appeal shall be presented within 30 days of the decision of the Board of Appeals,
whereupon, the City Council shall schedule a hearing within 30 days of receiving such appeal. The applicant
shall file a notice of appeal with the Board of Appeals and with the Fairbury City Clerk a notice of appeal,
specifying the grounds thereof. The Secretary of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall thereupon transmit to the
City Council a written opinion regarding the action appealed from stating: (2001-15)
(1) The decision of the Board on the Application for Variance; (2001-15)
(2) All finding of fact, setting forth in detail the specific reasons why the Application for Variance was
denied. (2001-15)
When testimony has been presented at a lawful, Advertised hearing, before the Zoning Board of Appeals, and
a decision has been rendered by the board, and which decision has been appealed to the City Council. No
further testimony other than that which was presented to the Board of Appeals, shall be considered by the
City Council. (2001-15)
Any members of the Zoning Board of Appeals not concurring in such decision may prepare a written
dissenting opinion. The Secretary of the Board shall promptly deliver such opinion and dissenting opinion to
the City Council and to the person making such appeal. (2001-15)
B. Upon receipt of such Notice of Appeal the City Council should thereupon consider such matter in the
ordinary course of its business and procedure. The City Council may grant a variation by Ordinance and may
impose such conditions and restrictions upon the premises benefited by such variations as may be necessary
to reduce or minimize the injurious effect of such variation upon other property in the neighborhood.
Fairbury Zoning Ordinance Page - 26 May-18
C. Once the City Council has heard the appeal and rendered a decision, it shall be the Zoning Administrator’s
responsibility to inform the petitioner of said decision. The Zoning Administrator shall, at that time, also convey
to the petitioner the time frame allowed to correct the non-conformity. (2013-6)
18.9 FEES. The City Council shall establish a schedule of fees, charges and expenses for building permits, occupancy
permits, appeals, copies of the zoning ordinance, maps, regulations, rules or other matters pertaining to
this Ordinance. This schedule of fees shall be posted in the office of the Zoning Administrator and may be altered
or amended only by the City Council. Until all applicable fees, charges and expenses have been paid in advance,
no action shall be taken on any application or appeal. (2012-5)
ARTICLE XIX
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF THE ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
19.1 APPOINTMENT. The Secretary of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be appointed by the Mayor of the City
of Fairbury by and with the advice and consent of the City Council of the City of Fairbury and said Secretary shall
be subject to removal from office upon the sole determination of the Mayor and City Council.
19.2 DUTIES OF THE SECRETARY OF THE ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS. The secretary of the Board shall:
A. Record the minutes of the Board’s proceedings and actions, showing the vote of each member on each
question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact.
B. Act as custodian of the records of the Board. With all original records filed at Fairbury City Hall. (2001-15)
C. Furnish members of the public with such blank forms for appeals and application for variations as are
approved by the Board.
D. Review, on behalf of the Board, all such forms, when submitted by the appellant or applicant or his
attorney.
E. Perform such other duties as may be assigned from time to time by the Board.
ARTICLE XX
INTERPRETATION AND CONSTRUCTION
20.1 INTERPRETATION. In interpreting and applying the provisions of this Ordinance, they shall be held to be
the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public safety, health, convenience, comfort, prosperity, or
general welfare. It is not intended by this Ordinance to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements,
covenants, or other agreements between parties, provided, however, that where this Ordinance imposes a
greater restriction upon the use of buildings or premises or upon heights of buildings or requires larger open
spaces than are imposed or required by other ordinance, rules, regulations or by easements, covenants, or
agreements, the provisions of this Ordinance shall govern.
20.2 SEPARABILITY:
A. Should any section, clause or provision of this Ordinance be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction
to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any part thereof, other
than the part so declared to be invalid.
B. Should any court of competent jurisdiction adjudge invalid the application of any provision of this
Ordinance to a particular property or building, such judgment should not affect the application of such
provision to any other property or building.
ARTICLE XXI
VIOLATION AND PENALTY
Fairbury Zoning Ordinance Page - 27 May-18
21.1 Any person, firm, corporation, or contractor who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to comply
with, or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of the ordinance shall be fined for noncompliance
after the 14 day notification as follow: (2005-3)
1st Offense: $10.00 a day, up to 10 days.
2nd Offense: $100.00 a day, up to 10 days.
3rd Offense: $200.00 a day and court & attorney fees.
ARTICLE XXII
ZONING BOARD OF REVIEW (1996-21)
22.1 ZONING BOARD OF REVIEW: There shall be established a zoning board of review that will meet annually
during the first quarter of the year, whose responsibility will be:
A. Review all appeals acted upon by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
B. Address any problems, and trends that should be included in the Zoning Ordinance.
C. Recommend to the City Council any changes that may be necessary to insure the integrity of the Zoning
Ordinance.
D. The Board of Review will be composed of the following:
(1) Zoning Administrator
(2) City Superintendent
(3) Chairman Ordinance Committee
(4) Two members from the Board of Appeals
(5) Two members from the City Planning Commission (if a planning commission exists) and if not, two
members from the Association of Commerce
ARTICLE XXIII
PUBLICATION AND EFFECTIVE DATE
23.1 This Ordinance shall be published and printed in pamphlet form and copies thereof shall be available at the
office of the City Clerk for inspection by the parties. Additional copies may be purchased from the Clerk by
anyone paying the cost thereof, as determined by the City Council.
23.2 The provisions of this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect on and after its passage and publication
according to law.
Passed by the City Council of Fairbury, Illinois, this 18th day of December, AD 1968. Approved by the Mayor of
the City of Fairbury, Illinois this 18th day of December, AD 1968.
Amended by Ordinance No. 747 passed by the City Council of the City of Fairbury, Illinois, this 5th day of
September, AD 1973 and approved by the Mayor of the City of Fairbury this 5th day of September, AD 1973.
Amended by Ordinance No. 796 passed by the City Council of the City of Fairbury this 3rd day of May, AD 1978
and approved by the Mayor of the City of Fairbury, this 3rd day of May, AD 1978.
Amended by Ordinance No. 1985-8 passed by the City Council of the City of Fairbury this 6th day of November,
AD 1985 and approved by the Mayor of the City of Fairbury, this 6th day of November, AD 1985.
Amended by Ordinance No. 1996-21 passed by the City Council of the City of Fairbury this 4th day of December,
AD 1996 and approved by the Mayor of the City of Fairbury, this 4th day of December, AD 1996.
Amended by Ordinance No. 2000-7 passed by the City Council of the City of Fairbury this 21st day of June, AD
2000 and approved by the Mayor of the City of Fairbury, this 21st day of June, AD 2000.
Fairbury Zoning Ordinance Page - 28 May-18
Amended by Ordinance No. 2001-15 passed by the City Council of the City of Fairbury this 19th day of
September, AD 2001 and approved by the Mayor of the City of Fairbury, this 19th day of September, AD 2001.
Amended by Ordinance No. 2003-6 passed by the City Council of the City of Fairbury this 21st day of May, AD
2003 and approved by the Mayor of the City of Fairbury, this 21st day of May, AD 2003.
Amended by Ordinance No. 2004-1 passed by the City Council of the City of Fairbury this 7th day of April, AD
2004 and approved by the Mayor of the City of Fairbury, this 7th day of April, AD 2004.
Amended by Ordinance No. 2005-3 passed by the City Council of the City of Fairbury this 6th day of April, AD
2005 and approved by the Mayor of the City of Fairbury, this 6th day of April, AD 2005.
Amended by Ordinance No. 2007-3 passed by the City Council of the City of Fairbury this 7th day of February,
AD 2007 and approved by the Mayor of the City of Fairbury, this 7th day of February, AD 2007.
Amended by Ordinance No. 2010-6 passed by the City Council of the City of Fairbury this 21st day of July, AD
2010 and approved by the Mayor of the City of Fairbury, this 21st day of July, AD 2010.
Amended by Ordinance No. 2011-6 passed by the City Council of the City of Fairbury this 15th day of June, AD
2011 and approved by the Mayor of the City of Fairbury, this 15th day of June, AD 2011.
Amended by Ordinance No. 2012-5 passed by the City Council of the City of Fairbury this 5th day of July, AD
2012 and approved by the Mayor of the City of Fairbury, this 5th day of July, AD 2012.
Amended by Ordinance No. 2013-6 passed by the City Council of the City of Fairbury this 17th day of April, AD
2013 and approved by the Mayor of the City of Fairbury, this 17th day of April, AD 2013.
Amended by Ordinance No. 2015-12 passed by the City Council of the City of Fairbury this 19th day of August, AD
2015 and approved by the Mayor of the City of Fairbury, this 19th day of August, AD 2015.
Amended by Ordinance No. 2016-5 passed by the City Council of the City of Fairbury this 1st day of June, AD
2016 and approved by the Mayor of the City of Fairbury this 1st day of June, AD 2016.
Amended by Ordinance No. 2018-11 passed by the City Council of the City of Fairbury this 16th day of May, AD
2018 and approved by the Mayor of the City of Fairbury this 17th day of May, AD 2018.
*Renumbered in 2000-7 includes definitions and articles starting with X
**Renumbered in 2003-6 includes definitions
***Renumbered in 2016-5 with the addition of #6