6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 1/416
A1 18
A2 5
A3 4
ORDINANCES PENDING CODIFICATION
Ordinances listed under this folder in the table of contents to the left, have been passed, but
have not been incorporated in the actual code. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are
any questions concerning the ordinances listed.
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
ORDINANCE NO. O-03-19
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING SECTION 6, ENTITLED “LICENSE FEES AND NUMBER,” OF CHAPTER 3, ENTITLED
“LIQUOR CONTROL,” OF TITLE 3 OF THE MUNICIPAL CODE OF
THE VILLAGE OF FOREST PARK, COOK COUNTY, ILLINOIS
AFFECTING CLASS “A-1, A-2 AND A-3” LICENSES
WHEREAS, Section 6, entitled “License Fees and Number,” of Chapter 3, entitled “Liquor Control,” of Title 3 of the municipal code sets forth the
license fee for each liquor license classification and the number of licenses authorized by the Village Council; and
WHEREAS, the Village Council wishes to decrease the number of licenses by one (1) in the A-1 classification, increase the number of licenses by
one (1) in the A-2 classification, and decrease the number of licenses by two (2) in the A-3 classification.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Council of the Village of Forest Park, Cook County, Illinois as follows:
Section 1. That Section 3-3-6, entitled “License Fees and Number,” of Chapter 3, entitled “Liquor Control,” of Title 3 of the Municipal Code of
the Village of Forest Park, is hereby amended to reflect the following number of liquor licenses authorized by the Village Council in the specified
classification listed:
Classification Number
Section 2. That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect upon its passage and approval in the manner
provided by law.
PASSED by the Council of the Village of Forest Park, Cook County, Illinois, this 25th day of February, 2019.
_____________________________________
Anthony T. Calderone, Mayor
ATTEST:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 2/416
________________________________
Vanessa Moritz, Village Clerk
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
ORDINANCE NO. O-06-19
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING SUBSECTION D OF SECTION 6-2,
ENTITLED “VEHICLE INSPECTIONS,” OF CHAPTER 10, ENTITLED
“TAXICABS, TAXIMETERS AND DRIVERS,” OF TITLE 3, ENTITLED
“BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS,” OF THE MUNICIPAL CODE
OF THE VILLAGE OF FOREST PARK, COOK COUNTY, ILLINOIS
BE IT ORDAINED by the Mayor and Village Council of the Village of Forest Park, Cook County, Illinois, as follows:
Section 1. Subsection D, entitled “Age of Vehicle,” of Section 6-2, entitled “Vehicle Inspections,” of Chapter 10, entitled “Taxicabs, Taximeters and
Drivers,” of Title 3, entitled “Business and License Regulations,” of the Municipal Code of the Village of Forest Park is hereby deleted in its entirety and in
lieu thereof the following new provision is to be inserted (emphasis added for new language):
D. Age of Vehicle: No vehicle shall be licensed as a taxicab, whether upon application or renewal, unless it is less than ten (10) years old at the time of
application, commencing with fiscal year 2020, and for each subsequent year.
Section 2. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this Ordinance shall be and the same are hereby repealed.
Section 3. The corporate authorities of the Village intend that this Ordinance will be made part of the Village Code and that sections of this
Ordinance can be renumbered or relettered and the word “Ordinance” can be changed to “Section,” “Article,” Chapter” or some other appropriate word or
phrase to accomplish codification, and regardless of whether this Ordinance is ever codified, the Ordinance can be renumbered or relettered and
typographical errors can be corrected with the authorization of the Village Attorney, or his or her designee.
Section 4. All parts of the Village Code in conflict with the terms or provisions of this Ordinance shall be and the same are hereby amended or
repealed to the extent of such conflict, and said Village Code and all other existing ordinances shall otherwise remain in full force and effect.
Section 5. If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Ordinance or any part thereof is, for any reason, held to be
unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining
portions of this Ordinance, or any part thereof. The corporate authorities hereby declare that they would have passed each section, subsection,
subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs,
sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective.
Section 6. This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect on and after its passage and approval in the manner provided by law.
Passed by the Council of the Village of Forest Park, Cook County, Illinois this 11th day of March, 2019.
APPROVED:
Anthony T. Calderone, Mayor
ATTEST:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 3/416
Vanessa Moritz, Village Clerk
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
ORDINANCE NO. O-07-19
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING SUBSECTION D OF SECTION 5,
ENTITLED “INSPECTIONS,” OF CHAPTER 3, ENTITLED “FOOD
AND FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS,” OF TITLE 4, ENTITLED “HEALTH
AND SANITATION,” OF THE MUNICIPAL CODE OF THE
VILLAGEOF FOREST PARK, COOK COUNTY, ILLINOIS
BE IT ORDAINED by the Mayor and Village Council of the Village of Forest Park, Cook County, Illinois, as follows:
Section 1. Subsection D, entitled “Costs,” of Section 5, entitled “Inspections,” of Chapter 3, entitled “Food and Food Establishments,” of Title 4,
entitled “Health and Sanitation,” of the Municipal Code of the Village of Forest Park is hereby deleted in its entirety and in lieu thereof the following new
provision is to be inserted (emphasis added for new language):
D. Costs: Except as provided below, each food service and/or food establishment shall pay an inspection fee of one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00) for
each inspection. Except as provided below, the yearly fee, totaling two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), shall be billed to the establishment on May 1, the
beginning of each upcoming fiscal year, and shall be due upon receipt of the invoice. Except as provided below, in the event a reinspection is necessary, a
fee of one hundred seventy-five dollars ($175.00) shall be charged for the first reinspection and two hundred twenty-five dollars ($225.00) for each
additional reinspection, which shall be billed to the establishment on a quarterly basis and shall be due upon receipt. Notwithstanding the foregoing to the
contrary, the American Legion/VFW Hall shall be exempt from the application and imposition of the provisions and costs under this Subsection D.
Section 2. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this Ordinance shall be and the same are hereby repealed.
Section 3. The corporate authorities of the Village intend that this Ordinance will be made part of the Village Code and that sections of this
Ordinance can be renumbered or relettered and the word “Ordinance” can be changed to “Section,” “Article,” Chapter” or some other appropriate word or
phrase to accomplish codification, and regardless of whether this Ordinance is ever codified, the Ordinance can be renumbered or relettered and
typographical errors can be corrected with the authorization of the Village Attorney, or his or her designee.
Section 4. All parts of the Village Code in conflict with the terms or provisions of this Ordinance shall be and the same are hereby amended or
repealed to the extent of such conflict, and said Village Code and all other existing ordinances shall otherwise remain in full force and effect.
Section 5. If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Ordinance or any part thereof is, for any reason, held to be
unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining
portions of this Ordinance, or any part thereof. The corporate authorities hereby declare that they would have passed each section, subsection,
subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs,
sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective.
Section 6. This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect on and after its passage and approval in the manner provided by law.
Passed by the Council of the Village of Forest Park, Cook County, Illinois this 11th day of March, 2019.
APPROVED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 4/416
Anthony T. Calderone, Mayor
ATTEST:
Vanessa Moritz, Village Clerk
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
ORDINANCE NO. O-12-19
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING TITLE 9, ENTITLED
“FOREST PARK ZONING ORDINANCE,” OF THE
VILLAGE CODE OF THE VILLAGE OF FOREST PARK
(Central Business District Incubator Kitchens,
Personal Grooming Services and Massage Establishments)
WHEREAS, the Village of Forest Park maintains a zoning ordinance which is found in Title 9 of the Forest Park Village Code, Forest Park Illinois (the “Zoning
Ordinance”); and
WHEREAS, the Village Council deems it reasonable to periodically review said Zoning Ordinance and make necessary changes; and
WHEREAS, the Village filed an application (“Application”) to amend the Zoning Ordinance to (i) provide “Incubator Kitchens” as a permitted use in the
Downtown Business District (DBD) of the Village; (ii) amend the definition for “Personal Grooming Services” to remove “massages”; and (iii) provide for Massage
Establishments as a permitted use in the DBD (collectively, the "Text Amendments"); and
WHEREAS, pursuant to proper legal notice, a public hearing to consider the Application was conducted by the Village of Forest Park Zoning Board of Appeals
(the “ZBA”) on March 18, 2019, at which time the ZBA reviewed the Application and took all testimony and public comment regarding the proposed Text Amendments;
and
WHEREAS, the ZBA recommended that the Village Council approve the proposed Text Amendments to the Zoning Ordinance, as set forth herein; and
WHEREAS, the Village Council has considered the recommendation of the ZBA and all of the facts and circumstances regarding the Application and finds that it
is in the best interest of the Village to amend the Zoning Ordinance.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COUNCIL OF THE VILLAGE OF FOREST PARK, COOK COUNTY, ILLINOIS, as follows:
Section 1: The facts and statements contained in the preambles to this Ordinance are found to be true and correct and are hereby incorporated herein adopted
as part of this Ordinance.
Section 2: Section 9-1-5, entitled “Definitions,” of Chapter 1, entitled “General Zoning Provisions,” of Title 9, entitled “Zoning Regulations,” is hereby
amended to include the following definition alphabetically:
INCUBATOR KITCHEN: An establishment that rents or otherwise makes available commercial-grade kitchen space for the exclusive or
primary purpose of food preparation including temporary extra production capacity, menu planning, training, taste testing, product
development, food packaging, food storage or any other food-related purpose.
Section 3: Section 9-4-C1, entitled “Use Regulations,” of Article C, entitled “DBD Downtown Business District,” of Chapter 4, entitled “Business District,”
of Title 9, entitled “Zoning Regulations,” of the Village Code of the Village of Forest Park, Illinois, is hereby amended by adding the following permitted use in the
appropriate alphabetical location:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 5/416
Incubator Kitchen,” subject to the following conditions:
A. Single owner. The facility must be owned by a single person or entity and may not have multiple owners.
B. Owner license required. No facility may be established without all licenses as required by the Forest Park Code of Ordinances.
C. Multiple-use by rental only. If the facility will be used at any time by persons or entities other than the owner of the facility, then that use must be by a written
rental agreement.
D. User license required. No person or entity may rent or use a shared kitchen facility without all licenses as required by the Forest Park Code of Ordinances.
Section 4: The definition of “Personal Grooming Services” in Section 9-1-5, entitled “Definitions,” of Chapter 1, entitled “General Zoning Provisions,” of
Title 9, entitled “Zoning Regulations,” is hereby amended as follows:
PERSONAL GROOMING SERVICES: An establishment licensed by the state of Illinois that utilizes one or more individuals that are licensed by the state
of Illinois to provide services necessary for personal grooming, including beauticians that provide any cosmetic treatment, including, but not limited to,
services to the hair, hands, legs, feet and face; spas that administer any personal care treatment such as facials and barbershops.
Section 5: Section 9-4-C1, entitled “Use Regulations,” of Article C, entitled “DBD Downtown Business District,” of Chapter 4, entitled “Business Districts,”
of Title 9, entitled “Forest Park Zoning Ordinance,” of the Village Code of the Village of Forest Park, Illinois, is hereby amended by adding the following permitted use in
the appropriate location:
Massage establishment, as defined and subject to compliance with all regulations pertaining to massage establishments in Section 3-7-2 of the Village Code
of the Village of Forest Park.
Section 6: The corporate authorities of the Village intend that this Ordinance will be made part of the Village Code and that sections of this Ordinance can be
renumbered or relettered and the word “Ordinance” can be changed to “Section,” “Article,” Chapter” or some other appropriate word or phrase to accomplish
codification, and regardless of whether this Ordinance is ever codified, the Ordinance can be renumbered or relettered and typographical errors can be corrected with the
authorization of the Village Attorney, or his or her designee.
Section 7: All parts of the Village Code in conflict with the terms or provisions of this Ordinance shall be and the same are hereby amended or repealed to the
extent of such conflict, and said Village Code and all other existing ordinances shall otherwise remain in full force and effect.
Section 8: If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Ordinance or any part thereof is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional
or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of this Ordinance, or
any part thereof. The corporate authorities hereby declare that they would have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof
irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or
ineffective.
Section 9: That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect on and after its passage and approval in the manner provided by law.
Passed by the Council of the Village of Forest Park, Cook County, Illinois this 8th day of April, 2019.
AYES: 5
NAYS: 0
ABSENT: 0
APPROVED:
Anthony T. Calderone, Mayor
ATTEST:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 6/416
Vanessa Moritz, Village Clerk
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
ORDINANCE NO. O-13-19
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING PARKING IN LOADING ZONES
AND DESIGNATING TEMPORARY PICK-UP AND DROP-OFF
LOADING ZONES ALONG A PORTION OF MADISON STREET
WHEREAS, the corporate authorities desire to amend parking in loading zones and to designate certain portions along Madison Street as
temporary pick-up and drop-off loading zones.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Mayor and Council of the Village of Forest Park, Cook County, Illinois as follows:
Section 1. The corporate authorities of the Village of Forest Park hereby amend Section 6-4-2C, entitled “Parking in Loading Zones,” of Section
6-4-2, entitled “Parking Restrictions,” of Chapter 4, entitled “Stopping, Standing and Parking,” of Title 6, entitled “Motor Vehicles and Traffic,” of the
Municipal Code of the Village of Forest Park, as follows:
C. Parking In Loading Zones: It shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle without vehicle emergency flashers enabled to stand (i) a
passenger vehicle for a period of time longer than is necessary for loading or unloading of passengers, not to exceed three (3) minutes; (ii)
any freight carrying vehicles for a period of time longer than is necessary to load, unload and deliver materials, not to exceed thirty (30)
minutes; and (iii) a motor vehicle for a period of time longer than is necessary for pick-up and drop-off of delivery goods, not to exceed
fifteen (15) minutes, in any place designated and marked by the Village Council as a loading zone pursuant to Section 6-5-12, or in any of
the following designated places:
1. In any place within seventy five feet (75') along the curb before the entrance to any hospital;
2. At any place within seventy five feet (75') along the curb before the entrance to a public building between eight o'clock (8:00) A.M.
and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. except Sundays. (Ord. O-17-98, 5-11-1998)
Section 2. The corporate authorities of the Village of Forest Park hereby amend Section 6-5-12, entitled ALoading Zone,@ of Chapter 5,
entitled “Traffic Schedules,” of Title 6, entitled “Motor Vehicles and Traffic,” of the Municipal Code of the Village of Forest Park, to designate the following
locations as fifteen (15) minute temporary pick-up and drop-off loading zones, and further direct that such locations be marked by the appropriate sign:
South side of the 7600 block of Madison Street, designated as the first
parking space west of the bump out in front of 7638 West Madison
Street
South side of the 7600 block of Madison Street, designated as the first
parking space west of the bump out in front of 7620 West Madison
Street
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 7/416
North side of the 7400 block of Madison Street, designated as the first
parking space west of the bump out in front of 7405 West Madison
Street
Section 3. The corporate authorities of the Village intend that this Ordinance will be made part of the Village Code and that sections of this
Ordinance can be renumbered or relettered and the word “Ordinance” can be changed to “Section,” “Article,” Chapter” or some other appropriate word or
phrase to accomplish codification, and regardless of whether this Ordinance is ever codified, the Ordinance can be renumbered or relettered and
typographical errors can be corrected with the authorization of the Village Attorney, or his or her designee.
Section 4. All parts of the Village Code in conflict with the terms or provisions of this Ordinance shall be and the same are hereby amended or
repealed to the extent of such conflict, and said Village Code and all other existing ordinances shall otherwise remain in full force and effect.
Section 5. If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Ordinance or any part thereof is, for any reason, held to be
unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining
portions of this Ordinance, or any part thereof. The corporate authorities hereby declare that they would have passed each section, subsection,
subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs,
sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective.
Section 6. This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect ten (10) days after its passage, approval and publication in the manner as provided by
law.
PASSED by the Mayor and Council of the Village of Forest Park, Cook County, Illinois this 8th day of April, 2019.
AYES: 5
NAYS: 0
ABSENT: 0
APPROVED:
Anthony T. Calderone, Mayor
ATTEST:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 8/416
Vanessa Moritz, Village Clerk
PREFACE
This Village Code of the Village of Forest Park, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to and including ordinance O-22-18, passed August 13, 2018.
Ordinances of the Village adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this Village Code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent
therewith. Consult the Village office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the Code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
Sterling Codifiers
Coeur d'Alene, Idaho
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING
THE MUNICIPAL CODE OF THE
VILLAGE OF FOREST PARK, ILLINOIS
BE IT ORDAINED by the Council of the Village of Forest Park, Illinois as follows:
Section 1: Pursuant to the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/1-2-3, and from and after the date of passage of this ordinance, the Municipal Code of the Village of
Forest Park, Illinois, ("Village Code"), prepared by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., containing the compilation of all ordinances of a general nature, up to and
including ordinance O-21-04, passed May 10, 2004, together with the changes made to said ordinances, under the direction of the governing body of the
Village, shall be accepted in all courts without question as the official code and law of the Village of Forest Park as enacted by the Council.
Section 2: There is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification, the loose-leaf type of binding together with the continuous supplement
service, provided by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., whereby each newly adopted ordinance of a general and permanent nature amending, altering, adding or
deleting provisions of the official Village Code is identified by the proper catchline and is inserted in the proper place in each of the official copies, one copy
of which shall be maintained in the office of the Village Clerk, certified as to correctness and available for inspection at any and all times that said office is
regularly open.
Section 3: All ordinances of a general nature included in this official Village Code shall be considered as a continuation of said ordinance provision and
the fact that some provisions have been deliberately eliminated by the governing body shall not serve to cause any interruption in the continuous
effectiveness of ordinances included in said official Village Code. All ordinances of a special nature, such as tax levy ordinances, bond ordinances,
franchises, vacating ordinances and annexation ordinances shall continue in full force and effect unless specifically repealed or amended by a provision of
the Village Code. Such ordinances are not intended to be included in the official Village Code.
Section 4: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such Village
Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter ortamper with such Village Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the
Village to be misrepresented thereby.
Section 5: All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith, are, to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.
Section 6: This ordinance and the Village Code adopted by the same shall be recorded and shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage,
approval and publication in pamphlet form as provided by law.
PASSED this 26th day of July 2004.
AYES 5
NAYS 0
ABSENT 0
SIGNED:
Mayor
ATTEST:
Village Clerk
Title 1
ADMINISTRATION
Chapter 1
FOREST PARK VILLAGE CODE
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 9/416
1-1-1: OFFICIAL CODE:
The ordinances embraced in these titles, chapters and sections shall constitute, and be designated as, the MUNICIPAL CODE OF THE VILLAGE OF
FOREST PARK, ILLINOIS, and may be so cited. (Village Code § 2-1)
1-1-2: SAVING CLAUSE:
All of the provisions of this code shall be in full force and effect from its passage and publication in book form, as provided by statute.
All general ordinances of the village, passed by the village council prior to the effective date of this code are hereby repealed, subject to the saving clauses
herein, and except those ordinances which are referred to herein as remaining in full force and effect or are, by necessary implication, herein reserved
from repeal. The following ordinances are excluded and are not repealed: tax levy ordinances, appropriation ordinances, ordinances relating to boundaries
or annexations; franchise and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or corporations, contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the
execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places;
improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by, or from the
village; and all special ordinances, nor shall it affect any prosecution, suit or proceeding pending on said date; except that the proceeding thereof shall
conform as far as possible to the provisions of this code. (Village Code § 2-2; amd. 2004 Code)
1-1-3: ORDINANCES:
A. Passage And Publication: All ordinances passed by the mayor and village council shall be recorded by the village clerk in a proper book or books. The
original shall be filed in the office of the village clerk and due proof of publication of all ordinances requiring publication shall be procured by the village
clerk, and such proof or affidavit of publication shall be attached to and filed away with said ordinances. The villageclerk shall also note in his book of
ordinances, at the foot of the record of each ordinance, a memorandum of the date of passage and, if published or posted, the date of the publication
or posting of such ordinance. (Village Code § 2-5)
B. Effective Date: All ordinances passed by the village council requiring publication shall take effect from and after due publication thereof, unless therein
otherwise expressly provided. Ordinances not requiring publication shall take effect from their passage and upon being as signed and attested to,
unless otherwise expressly provided. (Village Code § 2-6)
C. Repealed Or Modified Ordinances: Wherever any ordinance, or part of any ordinance, shall be repealed or modified by a subsequent ordinance, a part
of an ordinance thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until the effective date of the ordinance repealing or modifying the same, but no suit
proceeding right, fine, forfeiture or penalty instituted, created, given, secured or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal shall in any way be
enjoyed and recovered as fully as if such ordinance had continued in force, unless therein otherwise expressly provided. (Village Code § 2-7)
D. Revival Of Previous Ordinance: When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision shall be itself repealed, such repeal shall not be
construed to revive such former ordinance, clause or provision unless expressly provided therein. (Village Code § 2-8)
1-1-4: CONSTITUTIONALITY:
If any part or parts, section or subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is, for any reason, declared to be unconstitutional or invalid, such
decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of the code. (Village Code § 2-11)
Chapter 2
DEFINITIONS
1-2-1: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION:
In the construction of this code, and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed unless such construction would be inconsistent with the
manifest intent of this code:
A. Computation Of Time: The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the
last. If the last day be Sunday, it shall be excluded.
B. Gender: Words used in the masculine gender shall include feminine and neuter.
C. Joint Authority: All words giving a joint authority to three (3) or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such
persons or officers.
D. Official Time: Central Standard Time shall be the official time for the transaction of all village business; except during the period that daylight saving time
shall be in effect by the city of Chicago, the official time shall then be advanced by one hour.
E. Or, And: "Or" may be read "and", and "and" may be read "or", if the sense requires it.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 10/416
F. Plural, Singular: Words importing the singular shall include the plural, and words importing the plural shall include the singular.
G. Preceding, Following: The words "preceding" and "following" shall mean next before and next after, respectively.
H. Reasonable Time: In all cases where any provision shall require any act to be done in a "reasonable time" or "reasonable notice" to be given to any
person, such reasonable time or notice shall be deemed to mean such time only as may be necessary in the prompt execution of such duty or
compliance with such notice.
I. Signatures Or Subscription: Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
J. State Law References: Whenever reference is made to statute it shall mean the Illinois Compiled Statutes. Unless otherwisestated, the intent of the
village is to refer to the current Illinois Compiled Statutes.
K. Tense: Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present.
L. Written Or In Writing: Includes any representation of words, letters or figures whether by printing or otherwise. (Village Code §§ 2-3, 2-26; amd. 2004
Code)
1-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless otherwise provided, the following words and terms shall be defined as set out in this section:
COUNCIL: The village council of the village of Forest Park, Illinois.
COUNTY: The county of Cook, state of Illinois.
FISCAL YEAR: The municipal year of the village for all fiscal, financial and official purposes, except where otherwise specially provided by ordinance, shall
commence on May 1 and end on April 30 in the calendar year following.
MONTH: A calendar month.
OATH: Includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and
"sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed."
OWNER: Applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety
of the whole, or of a part, of such building or land.
PERSON: Includes a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization, trustee or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a natural person.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Includes every species of property except real property, as herein defined.
PROPERTY: Includes real and personal property.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any street or highway, sidewalk, park, cemetery, school yard or open space adjacent thereto, and any lake or stream.
REAL PROPERTY: Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
SIDEWALK: Any portion of a street, between the curb line and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways.
STATE: The state of Illinois.
STREET: Includes streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, viaducts and all other public highways in the village.
TENANT OR OCCUPANT: Applied to a building or land, includes any person holding a written or oral lease, or who occupies the whole or a part, of such
building or land either alone or with others.
VILLAGE: The village of Forest Park, Cook County, Illinois.
YEAR: A calendar year. (Village Code §§ 2-3, 2-15; amd. 2004 Code)
1-2-3: CATCHLINES:
The headings of the several sections of this code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section; nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections,
including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. (Village Code § 2-4)
Chapter 3
GENERAL PENALTY
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 11/416
1-3-1: GENERAL PENALTY:
Wherever in this code or in any ordinance of the village, or rule or regulation promulgated by an officer or agency thereof, under authority invested by law
or ordinance, the doing of an act is prohibited, or the omission to do any act, is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense and where no specific
penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this code, ordinance, rule or regulation shall be punished by a fine not exceeding seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00)1, provided, however, that a violation of section 6-1-1/13-111 of this code, operation of second division vehicle without a
certificate of valid safety test, shall be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00). Every day that a violation of this code, or any such ordinance, rule or regulation shall continue, shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. O-54-
07, 11-13-2007)
1-3-2: OFFENSES UNDER SEPARATE PROVISIONS:
In all cases where the same offenses may be made punishable, or may be created by different clauses or sections of the ordinances of the village, the
prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed, but not more than one recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense. (Village
Code § 2-10)
1-3-3: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
A. The penalty provided in this chapter shall be applicable to every section of this code the same as though it were a part of each and every separate
section.
B. In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of this code, the prosecuting officer may elect
under which to proceed, but not more than one recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense; provided, that the revocation of a
license or permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced.
C. Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this code and there shall be no fine or
penalty specifically declared for such breach, the provisions of this chapter shall apply. (2004 Code)
ARTICLE A. ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATIONS
1-3A-1: PURPOSE:
The stated purpose of this article is to provide for fair and efficient enforcement and expeditious adjudication of municipal ordinance violations, excluding
standing, parking and condition of motor vehicle violations that are adjudicated pursuant to sections 6-9-1 through 6-9-13 of this code, as may be allowed
by law and directed by this or any other ordinance, through an administrative adjudication of violations of village ordinances and establishing a schedule of
fines and penalties and the authority and procedures for collection of unpaid fines and penalties.
The village hereby adopts, in its present form, 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2.2 et seq., and 5/11-31.1-2. (Ord. O-54-07, 11-13-2007)
1-3A-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, unless the context requires otherwise, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them:
BUILDING CODE: Any adopted code, municipal ordinance, law, housing or building codes or zoning ordinances that establish construction, plumbing,
heating, electrical, fire prevention, sanitation or other health and safety standards that are applicable to structures and property in the village, or any village
ordinance that requires, after notice, the cutting of weeds, the removal of garbage and debris, the removal of inoperable motor vehicles or the abatement
of nuisances from private property.
BUILDING OWNER: The legal, equitable or beneficial owner of a structure.
CODE: The Forest Park village code of ordinances, except for anyoffense under the Illinois motor vehicle code1 or a similar offense that regulates the
movement of motor vehicles.
CODE VIOLATION: Any infraction or violation of any village ordinance or violation of this code including any building code, law or rule adopted by
reference.
DEFENDANT OR RESPONDENT: Any person, corporation, partnership, building or property owner, whether such ownership is legal or equitable, charged
with a violation of any ordinance of the village or of this code, building code or any of its adopted codes.
HEARING OFFICER: A village employee or officer, agent or appointee of the village other than a law enforcement officer or building inspector whose duty
it is to:
A. Preside at an administrative hearing called to determine whether or not a building violation or other code violation exists;
B. Hear testimony and accept evidence from all interested parties relevant to the existence of a building code violation or other code violation;
C. Preserve and authenticate the transcript and record of the hearing and all exhibits and evidence introduced at the hearing;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 12/416
D. Issue and sign a written finding, decision and order stating whether a code violation exists and imposing fines;
E. Issue subpoenas directing witnesses to appear and give relevant testimony at the hearing; and
F. Find a respondent in default for failure to appear and proceed with the hearing.
INSPECTOR: Any state, county or village employee whose duties include the inspection or examination of structures in the village to determine if building
code violations, as herein defined, exist.
SYSTEM OF ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION: The adjudication of any code violation or any other village ordinance violation including, but not limited
to, those actions brought pursuant to this code, as well as the zoning ordinance and adopted codes such as the building code, fire code, plumbing code,
electrical code, property maintenance code and health and sanitation codes of the village, violations of section 6-1-1/13-111 of this code for operation of
second division vehicle without certificate of valid safety test, but shall not include violations regarding thestanding, parking or condition of motor vehicles
brought pursuant to authority granted the village by 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-208.3. Nor shall a system of administrative adjudication apply to
proceedings not within the statutory authority granted to the village pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-31.1-1 et seq., 5/1-2.2-1 et seq., or 625
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-208.3, nor shall it apply to offenses under the Illinois motor vehicle code2 or similar municipal offenses that are traffic
regulations governing the movement of vehicles or any reportable offense under 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-204.
VILLAGE: The village of Forest Park, Cook County, Illinois. (Ord. O-41-03, 10-14-2003; amd. Ord. O-54-07, 11-13-2007)
1-3A-3: HEARING PROCEDURES NONEXCLUSIVE:
The provisions of this article shall not preclude the village from using other methods or proceedings to enforce the ordinances of the village, including the
institution of any action in the circuit court of Cook County, Illinois, or any other authorized administrative proceeding. (Ord. O-41-03, 10-14-2003)
1-3A-4: CODE HEARING PROCEEDINGS:
A. Instituting And Conducting:
1. At such time as any inspector, police officer or other individual authorized to issue a code violation citation notice finds the existence of a code
violation, he shall note the violation on a multiple copy violation notice and report form, indicating the name and address of the structure owner,
and/or party(s) in possession of the structure or other respondent, in cases other than building code violations, the type and nature of the violation,
the date and time the violation was observed, the name of the person witnessing the violation and the address of the structure or other location
where the violation is observed.
2. The violation notice form shall be forwarded by the inspector, police officer or other authorized individual, to the code hearing department where a
citation or docket number shall be stamped on all copies of the notice and a hearing date noted in the blank spaces provided for that purpose on the
violation notice form. Except for violations related to the standing, stopping or condition of motor vehicles adjudicated pursuant to title 6, chapter 9 of
this code, the hearing date shall not be less than thirty (30) nor more than forty (40) days after the violation is reported to the code hearing
department.
3. One copy of the violation notice form shall be maintained in the files of the code hearing department and shall be part of therecord of hearing, one
copy of the notice form shall be returned to the inspector or officer so that he may prepare evidence of the code violation for presentation at the
hearing on the date indicated, and one copy of the violation notice form shall be served, personally or by first class U.S. mail, postage prepaid, to the
respondent, along with a summons or notice to appear commanding the respondent to appear at the hearing. If, in the case of a building code
violation, the name of the owner of the structure or premises cannot be ascertained or if service on the owner cannot be made by mail, service may
be made on the owner of the structure or premises by posting or mailing a copy of the violation notice form and summons on the front door of the
structure where the violation is found, not less than twenty (20) days before the hearing is scheduled.
B. Subpoenas; Defaults: At any time prior to the hearing date the hearing officer assigned to hear the case may, at the request of an inspector, other
authorized person on behalf of the village or the attorney for the village, or the respondent or his attorney, issue subpoenas directing witnesses to
appear and give testimony at the hearing. The party requesting a subpoena shall serve, via first class mail, copies of any and all subpoenas on all
parties to the action. If, on the date set for hearing, the respondent, his attorney or agent, fails to appear, the hearing officer may, after determining that
proper notice of hearing has been given, find the respondent in default and proceed with the hearing and accept evidence relevant to the existence of a
code violation.
C. Continuances; Representation:
1. No continuances shall be authorized by the hearing officer except in such cases where a continuance is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of
the respondent. Lack of preparation shall not be grounds for continuance. Any continuance authorized by a hearing officer under this section shall
not, except for good cause shown, exceed twenty five (25) days.
2. At the hearing, the case for the village may be presented by the inspector in the case of a building code violation, by another village employee or by
an attorney designated by the village; provided, however, that the case for the village may not be presented by a member of the code hearing
department. The case for the respondent may be presented by the respondent, or his attorney.
D. Hearing; Evidence: At the hearing, the hearing officer shall preside and shall hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the existence or
nonexistence of a code violation. The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings shall not apply to these hearings. (Ord. O-41-03, 10-14-
2003)
1-3A-5: FINDINGS, DECISION AND ORDER:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 13/416
A. General: At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall make a determination on the basis of the evidence presentedat the hearing as to
whether or not a code violation exists. The determination shall be in writing and shall be designated as findings, decision and order. The findings,
decision and order shall include the hearing officer's findings of fact, a decision as to whether or not a code violation exists based on the findings of
fact, and an order, ordering correction of the violation in the case of a building code violation, stating the fines or sanctions if applicable or dismissing
the case, in the event a violation is not proved. If a violation is proved, the order may impose any and all sanctions or fines that are provided by this
code for a violation proved, not to exceed the fines set out in the general penalty in section 1-3-1 of this code per violation. A copy of the findings,
decision and order shall be served on the respondent or his attorney within five (5) days after it is issued; service shall be in the same manner as the
violation notice form and summons are served pursuant to section 1-3A-4 of this article. Payment of any penalty or fine imposed shall be to the village
and shall be paid within thirty (30) days of the date the order is issued. (Ord. O-41-03, 10-14-2003; amd. 2004 Code)
B. Judgment On Findings, Decision And Order:
1. Any fine, sanction or costs imposed, or part of any fine, other sanction or costs imposed, remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of or the failure to
exhaust, judicial review procedures under the administrative review law shall be a debt due and owing the village and, as such, may be collected in
accordance with applicable law.
2. After expiration of the period in which judicial review under the administrative review law may be sought for a final determination of the village, the
village may commence a proceeding in the circuit court of Cook County for purposes of obtaining a judgment on the findings, decision and order.
Nothing in this article shall prevent the village from consolidating multiple findings, decisions and orders against a person in such a proceeding. Upon
commencement of the action, the village shall file a certified copy of the findings, decision and order, which shall be accompanied by a certification
that recites facts sufficient to show that the findings, decision and order was issued in accordance with the provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/11-31.1-1 et seq., or 5/1-2.2-1 et seq., as the case may be and the applicable village ordinances. Service of the summons and a copy of the
petition may be by any method provided in section 2-203 of the Illinois code of civil procedure or by certified mail, return receipt requested, providing
that the total fines or other sanctions and costs imposed by the findings, decision and order do not exceed the sum of two thousand five hundred
dollars ($2,500.00). If the court is satisfied that the findings, decision and order was entered in accordance with the requirements of 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-31.1-1 et seq., or 5/1-2.2-1 et seq., and the applicable village ordinances, and that the respondent had an opportunity for a
hearing and for judicial review as provided:
a. The court shall render judgment in favor of the village and against the respondent for the amount indicated in the findings, decision and order, plus
costs. Such judgment shall have the same effect and may be enforced in the same manner as other judgments for the recovery of the money; and
b. The court may also issue such other orders and injunctions as are requested by the village to enforce the order of the hearing officer to correct a
code violation. (Ord. O-41-03, 10-14-2003)
1-3A-6: REVIEW UNDER ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW ACT:
The findings, decision and order of the hearing officer shall be subject to review in the circuit court of Cook County and the provisions of the administrative
review law, and all amendments and modifications thereto, and the rules adopted pursuant thereto, are adopted and shall apply to and govern every action
for the judicial review of the final findings, decision and order of a hearing officer in hearings under this article. (Ord. O-41-03, 10-14-2003)
1-3A-7: SANCTIONS APPLICABLE TO OWNER:
Any order to correct a building code violation and any sanctions imposed as a result of a finding of the existence of a building code violation under this
article shall attach to the property as well as to the owner of the property, so that a finding of a violation against one owner cannot be avoided by conveying
or transferring the property to another owner. Any subsequent transferee or owner of the property is subject to the findings, decision and order of the
hearing officer. (Ord. O-41-03, 10-14-2003)
1-3A-8: ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING OFFICER QUALIFICATIONS:
Prior to conducting proceedings for administrative hearings, hearing officers shall successfully complete a formal training program that includes the
following:
A. Instruction on the rules of procedure of the hearings that they will conduct;
B. Orientation in each subject area of code violations that they will administer;
C. Observation of administrative hearings;
D. Participation in hypothetical cases, including rules on evidence and issuing final orders; and
E. All hearing officers must be attorneys licensed to practice in the state of Illinois for a minimum period of three (3) years. (Ord. O-41-03, 10-14-2003)
Footnote 1: 625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq.
Footnote 2: 625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq.
ARTICLE B. BOND FEE
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 14/416
1-3B-1: BAIL PROCESSING FEE:
An administrative bail processing fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) be and is hereby imposed against any person arrested and charged with a violation of any
bailable village of Forest Park ordinance, state or federal law. The bail processing fee shall be collected when such arrestee posts bail or bond.
All bail fees posted shall be paid to the general corporate fund of the village of Forest Park. (Ord. O-34-11, 11-28-2011)
Chapter 4
MAYOR AND VILLAGE COUNCIL
1-4-1: FORM OF GOVERNMENT:
The village council of Forest Park shall consist of the mayor and four (4) commissioners, as provided by the act known as the commission form of
municipal government act1. (Village code § 1-1)
1-4-2: ELECTION, TERM, OATH, BOND AND COMPENSATION:
A. Election, Term: The mayor and commissioners shall be elected, and hold office, for such term as is provided by law2. (Village code § 1-5)
B. Bond: Before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, the mayor and each commissioner shall execute a bond in a penal sum not less than
three thousand dollars ($3,000.00), with good and sufficient security, to be approved by the judge of the county court of Cook County, and conditioned
for the faithful performance of the duties of the office and the payment of all monies received by such officer, according to law and the ordinances of the
village. (Village code § 1-4)
C. Oath And Compensation: The several commissioners and the mayor shall take the oath of office prescribed by law, and shall receive such
compensation as determined by ordinance passed in accordance with the laws of this state. (Village code § 1-6)
1-4-3: EXECUTIVE AND ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS:
The executive and administrative powers, authority and duties of the village shall be distributed into and among five (5) departments as follows:
Department of public affairs
Department of accounts and finances
Department of public health and safety
Department of streets and public improvements
Department of public property
The village council shall, by ordinance, designate the commissioner to be in charge and have supervision of one of the above departments. (Village code
§ 1-7)
1-4-3-1: COMMISSIONER OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS:
A. Mayor As Commissioner Of Public Affairs: The mayor shall have and exercise all the powers and perform all the duties provided and prescribed by the
laws of this state, or by the ordinances of the village not in conflict with the provisions thereof, and shall be the commissioner of public affairs and
superintendent of that department.
B. Powers And Duties:
1. He shall have general supervision over all departments and offices and employees of the village and shall report to the village council for its action
all matters requiring attention in any department.
2. He shall preside at all meetings of the village council.
3. He shall, on behalf of the village, sign all contracts the execution of which shall have been authorized by the village council.
4. The mayor shall have charge of, and cause to be prepared, all statements and reports required by law or ordinance or by resolution of the village
council.
5. The mayor shall grant all licenses and all permits not especially assigned to some other department.
6. In the absence or inability of any of the commissioners to act, he shall, unless the village council shall otherwise direct, exercise temporary
supervision over the department assigned to such commissioner. (Village Code § 1-23)
7. He shall have jurisdiction and supervision of the police department and the community center.
8. He shall have supervision over all public service utilities and all persons or corporations rendering service in the village under any franchise, contract
or grant made or granted by the village or state, and shall report to the village council or other proper officer any failure of such persons or
corporations to render service, or to observe the requirement or conditions of the franchise, contract or grant, under which such public service utility
is being operated.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 15/416
9. He shall have general supervision over all departments and offices of the village, and shall report to the council for its action, all matters requiring
attention in any department. (Ord. O-15-76, 9-27-1976)
C. Rules: The commissioner of public affairs shall make and enforce such rules and regulations not inconsistent with the law or ordinances as may be
necessary to secure efficient conduct of the service of his department and the business thereof. (Village Code § 1-47)
1-4-3-2: COMMISSIONER OF ACCOUNTS AND FINANCES:
A. Powers And Duties: The commission of accounts and finances shall have charge of and supervision over all accounts and records of the village and all
officers, departments and employees required to keep or make accounts, records or reports. He shall inspect or cause to be inspected all records and
accounts of the offices and departments of the village and shall cause proper accounts and records to be kept and proper reports to be made. He shall
have charge of the purchase, care and distribution of all stationery and printing and all other supplies and other articles not otherwise provided by law.
He shall examine, or cause to be examined, and report thereon to the council all bills, payrolls and claims before they are acted upon or allowed,
unless otherwise provided by law. He shall procure from all persons and corporations operating public service utilities in the village such reports, if any,
as such persons or corporations are required to make to the village or any of its officers and procure copies of such reports as are made to the state or
any public office or department. He shall place all such reports on file in the village clerk's office. He shall collect, or cause to be collected, all license
fees, special occupation or business taxes, franchise taxes, rentals or other monies which may be due, or become due, to the village. He shall report to
the village council any failure to make reports or to pay monies due to the village, with such recommendations in relation thereto as he may deem
proper. In cases where the village has authority so to do, he shall cause to be examined the accounts or records of any person or corporation having
an occupation or business subject to special tax, and shall report to the village council any refusal to permit such examination. The village treasurer,
village clerk and their respective offices, and all employees therein and all accountants and bookkeepers shall be under the supervision of the
department of accounts and finances. (Village Code § 1-48)
B. Fire Department And Fire Inspection Bureau3: The commissioner of accounts and finances shall have jurisdiction over and supervision of the fire
department and the fire inspection bureau and shall have charge of the purchases of all supplies, apparatus and equipment pertaining to and in said
department and bureau. (Ord. O-4-80, 3-10-1980)
C. Village Council Vice President: The commissioner of accounts and finances shall be vice president of the village council, and in case of vacancy in the
office of the mayor or in the absence of the mayor, or his inability to act, shall preside over the village council and perform all the usual duties of the
mayor and commissioner of public affairs. (Village Code § 1-50)
D. Rules: The commissioner of accounts and finances shall make and enforce such rules and regulations, not inconsistent with the law or ordinances, as
may be necessary to secure efficient conduct of the service of his department and the business thereof. (Village code § 1-51)
E. Collective Bargaining: Pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/4-5-2, it is hereby determined that the department of accounts and finances shall have
the power and duty of overseeing collective bargaining conducted with any labor organization that has been designated by the Illinois labor relations
board as the exclusive representative of any village employees in a bargaining unit which has been recognized by the Illinois labor relations board, and
such powers and duties hereby assigned to the department of accounts and finances. (Ord. O-13-03, 4-28-2003)
1-4-3-3: COMMISSIONER OF PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY:
A. Powers And Duties: The commissioner of public health and safety shall have jurisdiction over and supervision of the building department, the code
hearing department and all other inspectors not otherwise assigned. He shall be in charge of and have supervision and direction over all officers and
employees of said departments and of all officers and employees charged with any duties concerning the matters and things assigned to his
department. He shall be consulted on all purchases for, and have charge of, motor vehicles, apparatus, officers, employees and all supplies of said
departments except such as are otherwise specially assigned. (Ord. O-19-99, 6-28-1999; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
B. Rules: The commissioner of health and safety shall make and enforce such rules and regulations not inconsistent with the law or ordinances as may be
necessary to secure efficient conduct of the service of his department and the business thereof. (Village code § 1-54; amd. Ord. O-36-04, 9-13-2004)
1-4-3-4: COMMISSIONER OF STREETS AND PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS:
A. Powers And Duties:
1. The commissioner of streets and public improvements shall have authority over and charge of all public works, streets and alleys, except as
otherwise provided by law; the entire erection, making and reconstruction of all street improvements, paving, curbing, sewers and all public
improvements and of the repair thereof; the erection and maintenance of nonelectrical traffic signs on all streets and public ways and all underground
utilities of the village. The commissioner of streets and public improvements shall keep all roadways, gutters, curbs, manholes, catch basins and
alleys of the village clean and in good repair and condition. The commissioner of streets and public improvements shall also have charge of
enforcing the provisions of any ordinances which relate to obstructions, encroachments or any other trespasses upon the streets and alleys, and any
ordinances which relate to garbage, drainage and billposting.
2. In all cases where excavations in, or obstructions of, streets, alleys and public ways are permitted as provided by ordinance and a permit therefor is
required, such permit shall be issued by said commissioner of streets and public improvements.
3. The commissioner of streets and public improvements shall keep all village maps and charts to date, and shall keep account of all matters and
doings of the department in books to be provided for that purpose.
4. The commissioner of streets and public improvements shall also provide for the collection and disposal of all garbage and rubbish.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 16/416
5. The engineer in charge and all persons employed in the department of streets and public improvements shall be under the supervision and direction
of the commissioner thereof.
6. The commissioner of streets and public improvements shall also be ex officio the commissioner of public works, with regard to all of the duties
assigned to the commissioner of streets and public improvements.
B. Rules: The commissioner of streets and public improvements shall make and enforce such rules and regulations not inconsistent with the law or
ordinances, as may be necessary to secure efficient conduct of the service of his department and the business thereof. (Ord. O-36-04, 9-13-2004)
1-4-3-5: COMMISSIONER OF PUBLIC PROPERTY:
A. Powers And Duties:
1. The commissioner of public property shall have charge of and supervision over the care, custody and recovery of all village property not otherwise
specially assigned. The commissioner of public property shall have charge of the repair and maintenance of the village hall and all village buildings
and of the grounds connected therewith, all aboveground utilities and the direction of the lighting of streets, alleys, public grounds, public places,
municipal buildings, and all other public lighting provided for by ordinance. The commissioner of public property shall also have authority over and be
in charge of the construction, repair and maintenance of all playgrounds. All persons employed by and assigned to the department of public property
shall be under the supervision and direction of the commissioner thereof.
B. Rules: Said commissioner shall make and enforce such rules and regulations, not inconsistent with the law or ordinances, as may be necessary to
secure efficient conduct in service of his department and the business thereof. (Ord. O-36-04, 9-13-2004)
1-4-4: VILLAGE COUNCIL MEETINGS:
A. Regular Meetings: The regular meetings of the village council shall be held on the second and fourth Monday of each month of the year at seven
o'clock (7:00) P.M. unless otherwise ordered at a regular meeting. (Ord. O-19-98, 6-22-1998)
B. Special Meetings: Special meetings may be called at any time, by the mayor or two (2) commissioners, upon giving not less than twenty four (24) hours'
notice to all members of the village council. Provided however, that if all members of the village council are present at a special meeting, no notice of
such meeting shall be necessary.
C. Open Meetings: All meetings of the village council, whether regular or special, shall be open to the public. (Village code § 1-9)
D. Presiding Officer: The mayor shall preside at all meetings. In the absence of the mayor, the commissioner of the department of accounts and finances
shall act as chair for the meeting.
E. Quorum: Three (3) members of the village council shall constitute a quorum, and the affirmative vote of three (3) members shall be necessary to adopt
any motion, resolution or ordinance, or pass any measure, except where otherwise provided by law. (Village code § 1-10)
F. Voting; Records: Upon every vote of the yeas and nays shall be called and recorded; and every motion, resolution or ordinance shall be reduced to
writing and read before a vote is taken thereon. All the commissioners, including the mayor, present at any meeting shall vote thereon. (Village code
§ 1-11)
G. Disorderly Conduct: In case of any disturbance or disorderly conduct, the presiding officer shall have the power to require the chambers to be cleared,
as necessary. (Village code § 1-12)
H. Electronic Attendance At Meetings:
1. Rules Statement: It is the decision of the village of Forest Park that any member of the council may attend any open or closed meeting of the council
via electronic means (such as by telephone, video or internet connection) provided that such attendance is in compliance with these rules and any
applicable laws.
2. Prerequisites: A member of the council may attend a meeting electronically if the member meets the following conditions:
a. The member shall notify the village clerk at least forty eight (48) hours before the meeting, unless impractical, so that necessary communications
equipment can be arranged. Inability to make the necessary technical arrangements will result in denial of a request for remote attendance.
b. The member must assert one of the following three (3) reasons why he or she is unable to physically attend the meeting:
(1) The member cannot attend because of personal illness or disability; or
(2) The member cannot attend because of employment purposes or the business of the village of Forest Park; or
(3) The member cannot attend because of a family or other emergency.
3. Authorization To Participate:
a. The village clerk, after receiving the electronic attendance request, shall inform the council of the request for electronic attendance.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 17/416
b. After establishing that a quorum is physically present at a meeting where a member of the village of Forest Park desires to attend electronically,
the presiding officer shall state that: 1) a notice was received by the member of the council in accordance with these rules, and 2) the member will
be deemed authorized to attend the meeting electronically unless a motion objecting to the member's electronic attendance is made, seconded,
and approved by a majority of the members of the council physically present at the meeting. If no such motion is made and seconded or if any
such motion fails to achieve the required vote by the members of the council physically present at the meeting, then the request by the member to
attend the meeting electronically shall be deemed approved by the council and the presiding officer shall declare the requesting member present.
After such declaration by the presiding officer, the question of a member's electronic attendance may not be reconsidered.
4. Adequate Equipment Required: The member participating electronically and other members of the council must be able to communicate effectively,
and members of the audience must be able to hear all communications at the meeting site. Before allowing electronic attendance at any meeting, the
council shall provide equipment adequate to accomplish this objective at the meeting site.
5. Minutes: Any member attending electronically shall be considered an off site attendee and counted as present electronically for that meeting if the
member is allowed to attend. The meeting minutes shall also reflect and state specifically whenever a member is present by electronic means.
6. Rights Of Remote Member: A member permitted to attend electronically will be able to express his or her comments during the meeting and
participate in the same capacity as those members physically present, subject to all general meeting guidelines and procedures previously adopted
and adhered to. The member attending electronically shall be heard, considered, and counted as to any vote taken. Accordingly, the name of any
member attending electronically shall be called during any vote taken, and his or her vote counted and recorded by the village clerk and placed in the
minutes for the corresponding meeting. A member attending electronically may leave a meeting and return as in the case of any member, provided
the member attending electronically shall announce his or her leaving and returning.
7. Committees, Boards And Commissions: These rules shall apply to all committees, boards and commissions established by authority of the council of
the village of Forest Park. (Ord. O-05-09, 1-26-2009)
1-4-5: ORDER OF BUSINESS:
After the meeting has been called to order and it is found that a quorum is present, the village council shall proceed to the business before it, which shall
be conducted in the following order:
Roll call.
Reading of minutes of the proceedings of the last meeting or meetings, and correction and approval of the same, unless dispensed with by the village
council.
Reading of petitions and communications.
Bills for approval.
Reports of officers.
Unfinished business.
New business.
Adjournment. (Village code § 1-19)
1-4-6: CONDUCT OF PROCEEDINGS:
A. Presentation Of Materials: When a member wishes to present a communication, petition, order, resolution or other original matter, he shall send it to the
desk of the village clerk, who shall read such matter in its proper order. (Village code § 1-13; amd. 2004 Code)
B. Oratory Or Debate; Time Limitations: No member, without leave of the village council, shall speak more than once upon the same subject until every
member desirous of speaking shall have spoken; and no member shall speak longer than five (5) minutes at any one time, except by consent of the
village council. (Village code § 1-14)
C. Members Required To Vote; Exceptions: Every member who shall be present when a question is stated from the chair, shall vote thereon, unless
excused by the village council or unless he is directly interested in the question, in which case, he shall not vote. In case that any member refuses to
vote upon any question, he shall be recorded as voting "no". (Village code § 1-16; amd. Ord. O-48-10, 10-25-2010)
D. Presiding Officer To Decide Questions: The presiding officer shall decide all questions of order; and in all cases not provided for by law or ordinance, all
meetings will be governed by "Robert's Rules Of Order". (Village code § 1-17; amd. Ord. O-48-10, 10-25-2010)
E. Signatures On Documents: Every resolution, ordinance and measure, passed by the village council, must be signed by the mayor, or by two (2)
commissioners, and be recorded in the books of the village before the same shall be in force. (Village code § 1-18; amd. Ord. O-48-10, 10-25-2010)
F. Bills: No bills or claims for labor or material furnished to the village shall be paid until the same has been approved by the commissioner of the
respective department to which such labor or material has been furnished, and it shall be the duty of the commissioner of accounts and finances to see
that no bill is paid until it has been so approved. (Village code § 1-20; amd. Ord. O-48-10, 10-25-2010)
G. Sergeant At Arms: The chief of police of the village shall act as sergeant at arms at the village council meetings, and shall be in uniform. He shall
preserve order and obey the directions of the village council, and perform all duties usually appertaining to the office of sergeant at arms of deliberative
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 18/416
assemblies; provided however, in his absence or inability to act, the fire chief shall act as such sergeant at arms. He shall have power to appoint such
number of assistants as he may deem necessary. (Village code § 1-21; amd. Ord. O-48-10, 10-25-2010)
H. Censure: Any member acting in a disgraceful manner or who uses opprobrious, obscene or insulting language to, or about, any member of the village
council, or who does not obey the order of the chair, or who wilfully and persistently violates any of the standing rules of the village council shall be, on
motion, censured by a majority vote of the members present, or expelled by a four-fifths (4/5) vote of all members elected. In case of censure, the
sergeant at arms, or any person acting under the direction of the chair, shall cause the member censured to vacate his seat and come before the bar of
the village council and receive censure from the chair. (Village code § 1-22; amd. Ord. O-48-10, 10-25-2010)
1-4-7: POWERS AND DUTIES:
A. General: The village council has and shall exercise all legislative powers, functions and duties conferred upon it by statute. It shall make all orders for
the doing of work or the making or construction of any improvements, bridges or buildings. It shall levy all taxes and appropriate all funds; and audit all
bills, accounts, payrolls and claims and order payment thereof. It shall make, or authorize the making of, all contracts, and no contract shall bind or be
obligatory upon the village unless reduced to writing and approved by the village council. All officers and superintendents are only agents of the village
council, and all of their acts shall be subject to review and to approval or rejection by the village council. Every officer, superintendent or employee
having discretionary or supervisory powers shall from time to time, as required by law and ordinance, or whenever requested by the village council or
by the commissioner in charge of the department to which such report relates, or whenever he shall deem necessary for the good of the public service,
report to the village council in writing, respecting the business of his department or office, or the matters connected therewith. The village council shall,
by ordinance, determine the powers and duties of, and to be performed by, each department and assign them to the appropriate department. Said
village council shall also prescribe the duties and powers of officers and employees, and may require an officer or employee to perform duties in two
(2) or more departments; and may make such other rules and regulations as may be necessary or proper for the efficient and economical conduct of
the business of the village. (Village code § 1-2)
B. Licenses: The village council shall grant all licenses and shall have the power to revoke the same. (Village code § 1-3)
1-4-8: RULES FOR PUBLIC PARTICIPATION:
In order to secure the rights of the citizens of the village of Forest Park to fair and just representation before their elected officials, and to guarantee order
at public meetings of the corporate authorities of the village of Forest Park, the following rules are established:
A. Any person who seeks to address the corporate authorities of the village of Forest Park, at the time allotted during the public meeting for public
comments and questions, shall be permitted to speak, only upon recognition by the presiding officer, and such person shall adhere to the following
provisions:
1. Prior to addressing the corporate authorities, each person addressing the corporate authorities of the village of Forest Park must complete the public
questions and comments sign-in sheet provided by the village clerk.
2. Each person addressing the corporate authorities of the village of Forest Park shall state his/her name and address for the record, at the beginning
of such address.
3. Each person shall be granted no more than three (3) minutes per meeting in order to address the corporate authorities of the village of Forest Park,
unless such time is extended by the presiding officer, giving consideration to the probable number of speakers and lateness of the hour.
4. Questions and/or comments shall be limited to village business. Comments supporting or opposing a nominated person's candidacy for elective
office shall not be permitted.
5. Comments shall be directed to the presiding officer, unless the presiding officer permits the individual to address the members of the village council
or other village officials, employees or consultants present.
6. The following behavior is prohibited during a public meeting of the corporate authorities of the village of Forest Park:
a. Conduct in violation of any village ordinance, state or federal law, or any rule or regulation implementing state or federal law;
b. Interruption of speakers; name calling; boisterous remarks;
c. Offensive use of abusive, obscene, profane, slanderous or threatening language or gestures;
d. Acting or behaving in such an unreasonable manner so as to alarm or disturb another and to provoke a breach of the peace; and
e. Any other act designed to intimidate, threaten or harm persons, or damage or destroy property.
B. Members of the public shall not engage in audible conversation which prohibits individuals from hearing and/or participating in a public meeting, or
disrupts the conduct of business by the corporate authorities of the village of Forest Park.
C. Members of the public may enter and leave the meeting room at any time, provided such entrance or exit is made quietly and in an orderly fashion.
D. Battery operated recording equipment is permitted at public meetings, provided the operation thereof is silent.
E. The presiding officer at each public meeting of the corporate authorities of the village of Forest Park shall be responsible for the enforcement of the
provisions of this section, and shall be empowered to reprimand and/or cause the removal of any and all persons violating the provisions of this
section. The removal of an offender from a public meeting shall proceed as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 19/416
1. The presiding officer shall twice give the offender notice that he/she is violating certain terms of this section and might be removed from the public
meeting.
2. If the offender continues to violate any of the provisions of this section after receiving the above notice, the presiding officer shall order a police
officer to remove the offender from the meeting room. If the offender continues the disturbance outside the meeting room, such that the orderly
conduct of business by the corporate authorities of the village of Forest Park is disrupted, the offender shall be removed from the village hall.
3. The offender has no right to appeal from an order of the presiding officer requiring the removal of the offender from the meeting room or village hall;
however, such an order may be appealed by a member of the village council present at the meeting. Any ruling by the presiding officer may be
overruled by a majority of the members of the village council present at such public meeting.
4. The offender removed from the meeting room or village hall shall be criminally charged for any violations of applicable law. (Ord. O-48-10, 10-25-
2010)
Chapter 5
VILLAGE OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
1-5-1: APPLICABILITY OF CHAPTER:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all officials and employees of the village, regardless of the time of the creation of the office or position, or the
time of appointment. (Village code § 2-18)
1-5-2: ELECTIONS:
Elections for village officials shall be held at the time, and in the manner, provided for by statute. Voting precincts for conducting elections in the village,
shall be as established by ordinance or resolution. (Village code § 2-27)
1-5-3: APPOINTMENTS:
A. General: All officers, other than elective officers, shall be appointed by the village council as is provided by statute. Other employees shall be employed
in the manner provided by statute or ordinance.
B. Oath: Before assuming his duties, every officer shall take the oath provided by statute1. (Village code § 2-19)
C. Term Of Office: Every appointive officer shall hold office until May 1 following his appointment, or until his appointment, or until his successor is
appointed and qualified, unless otherwise provided by ordinance. Vacancies in an office shall be filled in the same manner as appointments are made.
(Village code § 2-20)
1-5-4: RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS:
A. Elective Office: A person is not eligible for any elective municipal office unless that person is a qualified elector of the municipality and has resided in the
village for at least one year preceding election. (Ord. O-6-99, 5-24-1999)
B. Appointive Office: No person shall be eligible for any appointive office except the village administrator and all department heads, including police chief,
administrative assistant to the police chief, fire chief, captain of the fire department, director of public health and safety, community center director, and
public works director, and those offices for which the law provides other residency requirements, unless that person is a qualified elector of the
municipality or otherwise provided by law. (Ord. O-36-04, 9-13-2004; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
C. Applicable Residency Requirements:
1. All employees of the village shall be residents of the state of Illinois. (Ord. O-25-05, 6-13-2005)
2. The residency requirements provided herein shall not apply to the village engineer, attorney or any other officer who, in the opinion of the village
council, requires technical training, knowledge or experience.
3. The provisions of this section shall apply to all present officers of the village and to any persons elected or appointed by the village from and after the
effective date hereof. (Ord. O-6-99, 5-24-1999; amd. Ord. O-25-05, 6-13-2005)
1-5-5: COMPENSATION:
Officers and employees shall receive such salary as may be, from time to time, provided by ordinance or resolution. (Village code § 2-22)
1-5-6: INDEMNIFICATION OF CERTAIN OFFICIALS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 20/416
A. Officials Designated: The following officials and employees of the village shall be indemnified, defended and held harmless by the village from and
against all liabilities, expenses or investigation, judgments and amounts paid in settlement which may be imposed upon or reasonably incurred or paid
by such official or employee in connection with or resulting from any claim made against him, or any action, suit, proceeding or investigation in which
he may be involved, by reason of his being or having been such official or such employee of the village, whether or not he continues to be such official
or employee at the time of such claim, action, suit, proceeding or investigation:
Mayor
Each member of the village council (i.e., each commissioner)
Village clerk and collector and each deputy or acting village clerk or collector
Village treasurer and each deputy or acting village treasurer
Village attorney
Superintendents of village departments
Chief of police
Chief of the village fire department
Each member of any board or commission of the village established pursuant to applicable law or by ordinance of the village
B. Acts Not Indemnified: The foregoing indemnity shall not extend to any of the following:
1. Any liability or cost with respect to any matter as to which such official or employee is finally adjudged to be guilty of bad faith, actual malice or wilful
and wanton misconduct in the performance of his duties as such official or employee;
2. Any payment, expense or cost arising out of a settlement of a claim, action, suit or proceeding, unless: a) such settlement shall be approved by the
court having jurisdiction over such claim, action, suit or proceedings, with express knowledge of the existence of the indemnification provided hereby;
or b) such settlement shall have been made upon the written opinion, of independent legal counsel selected by the village council, to the effect that
there is no reasonable grounds for any finding of bad faith, actual malice or wilful and wanton misconduct on the part of such official or employee and
that the anticipated cost of such settlement will not substantially exceed the estimated cost and expense of defending such claim, action, suit or
proceeding to a final conclusion;
3. Any liability or judgment payable to the village itself;
4. The cost of independent legal representation in any such action, suit or proceeding if the village offers or otherwise indicates its willingness to
provide a legal defense with respect to such claim, action, suit, proceeding or investigation.
The foregoing rights of indemnification shall be in addition to any other rights to which such official or employee may otherwise be entitled as a
matter of law. (Ord. O-26-77, 11-14-1977)
1-5-7: TURN OVER MONIES:
All monies received by an officer in his official capacity shall be turned over to the village treasurer at least once a month, with a report showing the source
thereof. (Village Code § 2-21)
ARTICLE A. VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR
1-5A-1: POSITION CREATED:
There is hereby created the position of village administrator. (Ord. O-37-03, 10-14-2003)
1-5A-2: APPOINTIVE PROVISIONS:
A. Bond: Prior to entering upon the duties of the position, the village administrator shall furnish a surety bond in the amount of ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) to be approved by the village council and conditioned on the faithful performance of the duties of the village administrator.
B. Compensation: The village administrator shall receive such compensation as established by contract, ordinance or resolution. (Ord. O-53-00, 12-18-
2000; amd. Ord. O-37-03, 10-14-2003)
1-5A-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
A. Fiscal Matters: The village administrator shall have custody and control of all documents, including debts, mortgages, leases, contracts, judgment
orders, notes, bonds and evidences of indebtedness belonging to the village except such as are directed by law or ordinance to be deposited
elsewhere. The village administrator shall have supervision of the issuance and sale of all bonds, warrants and obligations, and shall have supervision
over the accounting work of the village.
Specifically, but not in limitation of the above, the village administrator shall have the following powers and duties:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 21/416
1. On or before May 31 of each year the village administrator or his designee shall submit to the corporate authorities a report of the amounts of money
necessary to defray the expenses of the village during the next fiscal year, and in said report classify and detail the purpose of the expenditures, the
aggregate income of the preceding fiscal year and the village liabilities and anticipated revenues.
For the purpose of preparing the aforesaid estimate, the village administrator or his designee is authorized to require all officers to submit statements
of the condition and expenses of their respective offices or departments, a description of proposed village improvements, and the probable expense
thereof, a description of all unperformed contracts and a statement of the amount of all unexpired appropriations of the preceding year.
2. The village administrator shall, after evaluating all necessary data, conferring with the finance director and consulting with the mayor and village
council, prepare and submit the annual appropriation and tax levy ordinances for passage by the village council. In conjunction with these
obligations, the village administrator shall utilize current available revenues and search out and recommend additional sources of revenue necessary
to operate the village.
3. The village administrator shall recommend to the village council the salaries to be paid officers and employees of the village when requested by the
village council.
4. The village administrator shall, each month, cause to be prepared and shall present to the village council a statement showing the exact financial
position of the village and give such additional reports and information concerning the fiscal matters of the village as may from time to time be
required by the village council. (Ord. O-53-00, 12-18-2000)
5. Pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/4-5-2, the village council hereby prescribes that the village administrator shall have the power and duty to
conduct collective bargaining on behalf of the village with village employees or their exclusive representatives; to designate the other members of the
village's collective bargaining negotiating teams; to enter into tentative agreements with the exclusive representatives of village employees regarding
the wages, hours and other terms and conditions of employment, subject to ratification by the village council; to report periodically to the village
council regarding the status of such collective bargaining; and to perform any other functions necessary to carry out such duties. (Ord. O-13-03, 4-
28-2003)
B. Village Administration: In addition to the above duties, the village administrator shall perform such other duties as are herein provided:
The village administrator shall be the chief administrative officer of the village and shall be responsible to the mayor and to the combined village council
for the administration and operation of all of the affairs and the departments of the village. As such administrative officer, and unless otherwise directed
by the village council, the village administrator shall have the administration and control of all matters and things pertaining to the operation and
maintenance of the properties of the village and of all departments of the village. He shall also have supervision of such other administrative agencies
and departments and officers as may be hereafter created by the village council, unless the administration and control of such departments and officers
is expressly delegated elsewhere. He shall perform his duties in conformity with the rules in the village. Specifically, but not in limitation of the above,
he shall have the following additional powers and duties:
1. Recommend to the mayor and village council the appointment of all officers of the village who are required by law to be appointed by the village
council and further recommend the removal or suspension of any such officer or employee when such removal or suspension shall be consistent
with the best interests of the village.
2. The village administrator shall make or cause to be made all necessary purchases of supplies and equipment for all departments of the village and,
for that purpose, the village administrator is authorized to make expenditures without approval from the village council that are consistent with the
purchasing ordinance of the village1; provided, however, that all expenditures and payments, regardless of the amount, shall be subject to the
confirmation or approval of the village council and to the limitations imposed by law, ordinance and/or budget or special appropriation, and pursuant
to chapter 8, article A of this title.
3. The village administrator shall attend all meetings of the village council unless excused therefrom by the village council, except when his removal is
under consideration by the village council. The village administrator shall have the privilege of taking part in the discussion of all matters coming
before the village council and shall be entitled to notice of all meetings, regular and special, of the village council when required.
4. The village administrator shall investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning village services and village administration.
5. The village administrator may, when requested by the commissioner in charge of a department, recommend the appointment and/or discharge of an
employee in such department with supporting information regarding the reason for such appointment and/or discharge, exclusive of employees and
officers of the police department and regular firefighters under the jurisdiction of the board of fire and police commissioners2.
6. The village administrator shall devote his entire time to the discharge of official duties.
7. The village administrator shall perform such other duties as may be required of him by the village council consistent with the statutes of the state of
Illinois and village ordinances.
8. Subject to final approval of the village council, the village administrator may consolidate, combine or reorganize any departments under his
jurisdiction. (Ord. O-53-00, 12-18-2000)
ARTICLE B. VILLAGE CLERK
1-5B-1: OFFICE CREATED:
There is hereby created the office of village clerk, who shall be appointed by the village council1. (Ord. O-55-00, 12-18-2000)
1-5B-2: BOND, OATH AND COMPENSATION:
A. Bond And Oath: The village clerk shall, before entering upon his duties, take oath and execute a bond with surety in an amount as shall be determined
by the village council. (Village Code § 1-25)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 22/416
B. Compensation: The village clerk shall receive such compensation for his service as the village council shall, from time to time, determine. (Village Code
§ 1-27)
1-5B-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The village clerk shall perform the following duties:
A. Issue notices to the members of the village council when directed to do so by that body; also to the members of the various committees and those
whose presence is required before any committee when directed or requested to do so by the chair of said committee; and have duly delivered to the
officers of the village resolutions and communications referred to such officers.
B. Keep the corporate seal of the village2 and all papers belonging to the village; and receive all petitions, remonstrances, bids, bills or other
communications addressed to the village council or to the mayor and village council and shall read them at the meeting of the village council next
succeeding their receipt by him, unless otherwise ordered by the village council. All books, records and other documents of the village, under the
control or jurisdiction of the village clerk, collector and comptroller, shall be kept by him in the municipal offices of the village.
C. Attend all meetings of the village council and keep a full record of all its proceedings in the journal.
D. Record, in a book to be kept for that purpose, all ordinances passed by the village council and, at the foot of the record of each ordinance so recorded,
shall make a memorandum of the date of its passage and of the publication and posting of such ordinance.
E. Make all required preparations for the holding of village elections; and within five (5) days after any election is declared or appointment made, notify all
persons elected or appointed to any village office of their election or appointment and shall execute with the mayor and deliver commissions to each
person elected to a village office as prescribed by law.
F. File with the county clerk of Cook County each year immediately after its passage, the annual tax levy ordinance.
G. Perform such other additional duties as now or hereafter may be prescribed by the ordinances of the village and by the statutes of the state. (Ord. O-
55-00, 12-18-2000)
1-5B-4: DEPUTY VILLAGE CLERK:
A. Office Created: There is hereby created the office of deputy village clerk, who shall discharge the functions and duties of the office of municipal clerk, as
directed by the village clerk. (Ord. O-45-05, 9-26-2005)
B. Appointment: The deputy village clerk shall be appointed by the village clerk, and before entering upon the duties of his office, shall give a surety bond
in such amount as the village council shall require. He shall hold office at the pleasure of the village clerk. (Village Code § 1-29)
C. Compensation: The deputy village clerk shall receive such compensation as the village council shall determine. (Village Code § 1-30)
ARTICLE C. VILLAGE TREASURER
1-5C-1: OFFICE CREATED:
There is hereby created the office of village treasurer who shall be appointed by the village council1. (Village Code § 1-31)
1-5C-2: BOND, OATH AND COMPENSATION:
A. Bond And Oath: The village treasurer shall, before entering upon the duties of his office, take oath and execute a bond to the village in such amount as
may be determined by the village council in accordance with state law2. (Village Code § 1-32)
B. Compensation: The village treasurer shall receive as compensation such sum as shall be determined by the village council. (Village Code § 1-40)
1-5C-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
A. Receive Monies: It shall be the duty of the village treasurer to receive all monies and to exercise all powers and duties as prescribed by state law.
(Village Code § 1-33)
B. Accounts: The village treasurer shall keep a true and accurate account of monies paid into the treasury, and from and on what account received. He
shall keep a separate account of each fund or appropriation, and shall keep a distinct account of all special assessments, and in making report to the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 23/416
mayor and village council shall make separate and specific report of the same. He shall keep a register of all warrants redeemed and paid, which shall
describe such warrants and show the date, amount, number, the fund from which paid, the name of the person to whom and when paid; and his books
and accounts shall, at all times, be subject to the inspection of any member of the village council or other officer of the village. (Village Code § 1-34)
C. Pay Warrants: The village treasurer shall pay all warrants or orders presented to him properly drawn and signed by the mayor and countersigned by the
village clerk and commissioner of accounts and finances when he shall have the necessary funds to pay the same, and he shall make no distinction,
nor give any preference to any person in paying such warrants. He shall keep all monies belonging to the village in his hands, separate and distinct
from his own monies, and he is hereby expressly prohibited from using either directly or indirectly, the village money or warrants in his custody or
keeping for his own benefit, or that of any other person or persons whomsoever; and any violation of this provision shall subject him to immediate
removal from office by the village council and such removal shall be entered upon its records, and his successor shall immediately be appointed by the
village council by a vote of a majority of all its members authorized by law to be elected, to be taken by yeas and nays, and entered upon its records,
and such successor shall hold his office for the remainder of the term unexpired of such officer so removed. (Village Code § 1-35)
D. Special Assessments: All monies received on any special assessment shall be held by the treasurer as a special fund to be applied to the payment of
the improvement for which the assessment was made, and said money shall be used for no other purpose whatever, unless to reimburse said village
for money expended for such improvement. (Village Code § 1-36)
1-5C-4: REPORTS AND RECORDS:
A. Monthly Account: The village treasurer shall, at the end of each and every month, render an account to the village council showing the state of the
treasury at that date of each account and the balance of money in the treasury. He shall also accompany such accounts with a statement of all monies
received into the treasury, and on what account, together with all warrants redeemed and paid by him, which said warrants, with any and all vouchers
held by him, shall be delivered to the village clerk and filed with his accounts in the village clerk's office upon every such day of settlement, with any
and all vouchers paid by him stamped or marked "paid". He shall also report to the village council, at such other times as he may be required, a full and
detailed account of all receipts and expenditures of the village as shown by his books at the time of said report. (Village Code § 1-37)
B. Annual Report: He shall annually, within thirty (30) days after the close of each fiscal year, make out and file with the village clerk a full and detailed
statement of all receipts and expenditures, and of all his transactions as such village treasurer during the preceding fiscal year and shall disclose in
such account the state of the treasury at the fiscal year, which account the village clerk shall immediately cause to be published in a newspaper of
general circulation in the village, if there be one, and if not, by posting in a public place in the village clerk's office. (Village Code § 1-38; amd. 2004
Code)
C. Records: He shall keep and record all files of his office at such places as may be designated by the village council, which shall at all times be open to
the inspection of the mayor, village clerk and be subject to such other rules and regulations, as the village council may from time to time direct. (Village
Code § 1-39)
ARTICLE D. LEGAL OFFICERS
1-5D-1: VILLAGE ATTORNEY:
A. Bond: The village attorney shall, before entering upon the duties of his office, execute a bond to the village in the sum of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) with sureties, to be approved by the village council, conditioned as required by law. (Village Code § 1-41)
B. Compensation: The village attorney shall receive, as compensation for his services, a salary as set by the village council from time to time. In addition to
the foregoing, the village attorney shall also receive, as additional compensation, such reasonable amounts as shall be determined and approved by
the council from time to time for the handling of other extraordinary legal matters, including court litigation. (Village Code § 1-44; amd. 2004 Code)
C. Powers And Duties: The village attorney shall superintend and conduct all the law business of the village. He shall draft such ordinances, leases,
deeds, papers, contracts and other such instruments as may be required in the business of the village. He shall furnish written opinions on subjects
submitted to him by the village council or the mayor when requested, on all legal questions arising in the conduct of the business of the village. (Village
Code § 1-42)
1-5D-2: VILLAGE PROSECUTOR:
A. Office Created: There is hereby created the office of village prosecutor for the village. The village council, by a majority vote, is hereby authorized to
appoint the village prosecutor for the village.
B. Duties: The village prosecutor shall have charge of prosecuting all violations of village ordinances, and violations of the Illinois vehicle code, unless
otherwise prohibited by law, and the village prosecutor shall cooperate with the various village departments and officers, as required, in carrying out the
functions specified in this subsection. (Ord. O-26-03, 7-14-2003)
ARTICLE E. OTHER VILLAGE OFFICIALS
1-5E-1: DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 24/416
A. Position Created: There is hereby created the position of director of public health and safety.
B. Duties: The director of public health and safety is responsible for the operations of the code hearing department. The director of public health and
safety's responsibilities shall include conducting plan reviews, performing inspections, enforcing the village's building codes, ensuring compliance with
all construction activity including, but not limited to, new construction, alterations, additions, demolition and various other improvements. Additional
responsibilities include supervising department staff, assistance with the enforcement of village zoning, property maintenance, health inspections, and
village ordinances as they relate to residential, commercial, industrial and public property. The director of public health and safety will be the conduit for
community development.
C. Accountability: The director of public health and safety shall be responsible to the commissioner of public health and safety. (Ord. O-24-05, 6-13-2005;
amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
1-5E-2: VILLAGE ENGINEER:
A. Office Created: There is hereby established the office of village engineer who shall be under the jurisdiction and control of the commissioner of streets
and public improvements and who shall be appointed by the village council.
B. Compensation: The village engineer shall receive such compensation as the village council shall from time to time determine.
C. Duties: The village engineer shall have charge of all engineering matters and prepare maps, plans and specifications for all construction work or
improvements including the laying of mains and water supply pipes and when authorized, shall have charge of the construction and repair of all
improvement projects. In addition to the foregoing he shall perform such duties as may be required of him by the village council and the ordinances of
the village. (Ord. O-5-63, 5-13-1963; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
1-5E-3: FINANCE DIRECTOR-COMPTROLLER:
A. Office Created: There is hereby created the office of finance director who shall also serve as comptroller. Any future references to finance director shall
include comptroller.
B. Compensation: The finance director shall receive such salary as shall be determined by the village council.
C. Duties:
1. The finance director shall keep in his office, in books used solely for that purpose, a correct list of all the outstanding bonds of the village, showing
the number and amount of each and for and to whom the bonds were issued. When bonds are purchased, paid or canceled, these books shall show
these additional facts. In the finance director's annual report, he shall particularly describe the bonds sold during the year and the terms of sale, with
every item of expense incurred in connection with the bonds.
2. The finance director shall exercise a general supervision over all the officers of the village, with the exception of the village administrator, charged in
any manner with the receipt, collection or disbursement of the municipal revenue, or with the collection and return of the municipal revenue, or
collection and return of the municipal revenue into the village treasury.
3. The finance director shall have custody and control of all municipal documents, books and papers designated by the corporate authorities.
4. On or before May 15 of each year, and before the annual appropriation ordinance is prepared by the corporate authorities, the finance director shall
submit to the village administrator and corporate authorities a report of the director's estimate, as nearly as may be, of the money necessary to
defray the expenses of the village during the current fiscal year. For the purpose of making this report, the director is authorized to require all officers
to submit statements of the condition and expenses of their respective offices or departments, with any proposed municipal improvements and the
probable expense of those improvements, all unperformed contracts and the amount of all unexpended appropriations of the preceding year.
In this report, the comptroller shall:
a. Classify the different objects and purposes of expenditure, giving, as nearly as may be, the amount required for each;
b. Show the aggregate income for each from the previous fiscal year;
c. Show the amount of liabilities upon which interest is to be paid;
d. Show the bonds and debts payable during the year, when due and payable; and
e. Give all other information to the corporate authorities, and the village administrator that the director deems necessary, so that the corporate
authorities and village administrator may fully understand the demands upon the village for the current fiscal year.
5. Prepare a statement of investments showing all investment activity of the previous year and interest earned.
6. When required by the village administrator or corporate authorities, assist with future investments and investment activity.
7. In addition to the foregoing, the finance director shall, when requested, exercise such duties relating to the financial affairs and conditions of the
village as may be necessary. (Ord. O-54-00, 12-18-2000; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
D. Budget Director: There is hereby created the position of budget director, who shall also serve as the director of finance, and shall receive such salary as
shall be determined by the village council.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 25/416
E. Assistant Budget Director:
1. Office Created: There is hereby created the position of assistant budget director who shall be appointed by the village council. (Ord. O-37-03, 10-14-
2003; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
2. Compensation: The assistant budget director shall receive such compensation as shall be determined from time to time by the village council.
3. Duties: The assistant budget director shall perform the duties delegated to the budget director and assist the budget director whenever necessary.
The assistant budget director shall also perform such duties as may be delegated by the village clerk and comptroller and the budget director. (Ord.
O-9-80, 6-9-1980; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
1-5E-4: DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS:
A. Position Created: There is hereby created the position of director of public works.
B. Duties:
1. The director of public works shall supervise all employees of the department of public property and in that capacity shall be responsible for the
operation and maintenance of all public property, including, but not limited to, utilities, sidewalks, playgrounds, municipal buildings, forestry and all
public property, and shall be responsible for the supervision of employees under the control of the commissioner of public property, when those
employees are performing such duties.
2. The director of public works shall also supervise all employees of the department of streets and public improvements and in that capacity shall be
responsible for the operation and maintenance of all public improvements, including, but not limited to, curbs, gutters, garbage and rubbish removal,
streets, alleys, manholes and catch basins and shall be responsible for the supervision of the employees under the control of the commissioner of
streets and public improvements, when those employees are performing such duties.
C. Accountability: The director of public works shall be responsible to the commissioner of public property, in relation to those duties described in
subsection B1 of this section. The director of public works shall be responsible to the commissioner of streets and public improvements, in relation to
those duties described in subsection B2 of this section. (Ord. O-36-04, 9-13-2004; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
1-5E-5: YOUTH AND SENIOR CITIZENS COORDINATOR:
A. Office Created: There is hereby created the position of coordinator of youth and senior citizens activities for the village, who shall be appointed by the
village council.
B. Compensation: The coordinator of youth and senior citizens activities shall receive such compensation as the village council shall designate.
C. Duties: The coordinator of youth and senior citizens activities shall be in charge of all senior citizens and youth activities in the village and be
responsible for the establishment of programs designed to enhance and improve the lives of the senior citizens and youth in the village. In this regard,
the coordinator shall be directly responsible and account to the mayor, department of public affairs. (Ord. O-8-74, 8-10-1974; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-
2010)
1-5E-6: RISK MANAGEMENT COORDINATOR:
A. Office Created: There is hereby created the position of risk management coordinator for the village, who shall be appointed by the village council who
shall prescribe the amount of time to be devoted to the duties of the coordinator and the compensation attached to the position.
B. Duties: The risk management coordinator shall have the following duties and responsibilities:
1. Responsibility for the coordination and/or administration of programs in the following areas: accident prevention, fire protection, security, emergency
control, industrial hygiene and first aid functions.
2. Implement Illinois municipal league risk management association (IMLRMA) procedures to ensure that supervisors observe for unsafe acts and
conditions and initiate corrective action before accidents happen.
3. Participate in accident investigation. This is to be done when unusual and disabling injury accidents occur or at any time any supervisor requests an
investigation in conjunction with his own investigation. Follow up is to be made on all investigations to see if corrective action eliminates the unsafe
act or condition.
4. Periodically develop internal analysis of accidents as to types, causes, severity and all other factors from experience, which can serve as a guide for
supervision in accident prevention; the risk management association (RMA) and analysis profile can be used as a basis.
5. Occasional inspection of job procedures and equipment to determine need for safeguards and the study of requirements for personal protective
equipment and make appropriate recommendations when applicable.
6. Periodic inspection of safety equipment or coordination of municipal supervisor's inspection program.
7. Participate in safety and health education and training with IMLRMA loss control personnel.
8. Keep abreast of current developments in the field and provide information and advise periodically and as requested by supervision.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 26/416
9. Participate in the inspection of plant premises and equipment for safety and health when applicable.
10. Maintain regular contact with IMLRMA loss control personnel, and act as the municipality's primary liaison within the municipal league's overall loss
control and risk management program.
11. Make job studies of new processes to develop data regarding hazards and keep the various supervisors informed.
12. Coordinate activities of the first aid personnel and services.
13. Participate in the administration of workers' compensation claims activities and act as primary liaison with claims service company personnel.
14. Attend periodic regional loss control training sessions provided by the RMA loss control specialist and apply knowledge gained.
15. Such other duties and responsibilities in the field of safety as the village council shall from time to time determine.
16. Submit periodic reports of his activities, results and recommendations in the area of the coordinator's responsibility to the village council. (Ord. O-
14-83, 12-19-1983; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
Chapter 6
VILLAGE DEPARTMENTS
ARTICLE A. FIRE DEPARTMENT
1-6A-1: DEPARTMENT CREATED; MEMBERS:
A. General: There is hereby created a fire department, an executive department of the village, which shall consist of one fire chief, one captain, three (3)
lieutenants and such other firefighters as provided by the village council, who shall receive such compensation as the village council shall determine by
ordinance or resolution.
B. Firefighter/Paramedic Positions: The position of firefighter/paramedic is hereby created in the fire department. Effective July 1, 2000, and as a condition
of employment, all new firefighters employed by the Forest Park fire department shall be licensed paramedics by the Illinois department of public health
and certified to function in the emergency medical system under which the Forest Park fire department operates. All firefighters hired after July 1, 2000,
shall maintain their paramedic license and certification as a condition of continued employment. (Ord. O-21-04, 5-10-2004)
1-6A-2: FIRE CHIEF:
A. Appointment; Bond: The fire chief shall be appointed by the village council and shall be in charge of the fire department. Before entering upon the duties
of his office, he shall execute a bond to the village in the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) with such sureties as the village council shall
approve, conditioned as the law prescribes. (Village Code § 3-2)
B. Duties:
1. General: The fire chief shall have sole control and command over all persons connected with the fire department of the village, while on duty and
shall possess full power and authority over its organization and discipline and, to that end, he may prescribe and establish, from time to time, such
lawful rules and regulations as he may deem advisable, subject to the approval of the village council. (Village Code § 3-3)
2. Custodian Of Property: The fire chief shall have the custody of all the public property of the fire department, subject to the supervision of the
commissioner of accounts and finances and whenever any of the apparatus shall require to be repaired, cause the same to be repaired. (Village
Code § 3-4)
C. Reports: The fire chief shall, on or before the fourth Monday in every month, make out in writing over his signature, and hand to the commissioner of
accounts and finances, a payroll containing the names of all the officers and members of the fire department and the amount due to each of them set
opposite his name, which report shall be verified, by oath of the fire chief, before the village clerk or any notary public. Upon being satisfied with the
correctness of such payroll, said commissioner shall audit the same. Included in each monthly report shall be stated, in detail, the number of fires
attended, the date of each, its cause, as nearly as can be ascertained, the probable amount of damage, insurance, if any, and all other information
relating thereto. (Village Code § 3-7)
1-6A-3: FIRE DEPARTMENT BOARD:
A. Board Created: Pursuant to the provisions contained in the Illinois Compiled Statutes, there shall be elected, by ballot, from the active firefighters of the
village, three (3) firefighters to constitute a board to be known as the fire department board of the village. Said board shall designate one of their
number as president another as secretary and a third as treasurer. Provided, however, that in lieu of appointing a treasurer, the village treasurer shall
be the treasurer of said board. In the event that a person, other than the village treasurer, is appointed treasurer, he shall give sufficient bond to the
village, which bond shall be approved by the village council, conditioned upon the faithful performance by the treasurer of the duties of his said office,
as required by law.
In the event of the failure, resignation or inability to act of any member of said board elected under the provisions of this section, the successor to such
member shall be elected at an election which shall be called by said board. Each member shall hold his office until his successor is duly appointed and
qualified. (Village code § 3-8)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 27/416
B. Rules And Regulations: Said fire department board of the village shall make all rules and regulations with respect to the department, and the
management of the money to be paid to the treasurer. The village treasurer shall pay to the treasurer of the fire department, or shall set aside, all sums
received by the village from foreign fire insurance companies as provided by law1; and all said monies so received from foreign fire insurance
companies shall be paid out upon the order of the fire department board, for the use, maintenance and benefit of the department specifically related to
equipment for the safety and/or protection of the members of the fire department. (Ord. O-21-89, 12-27-1989)
1-6A-4: FIRE INSPECTION BUREAU:
A. Bureau Created; Members: There is hereby created a fire inspection bureau for the village consisting of the fire chief and a deputy fire inspector who
shall not be a member of the regular fire department. The fire inspector shall be appointed by the village council at a salary to be determined by the
village council. The fire chief shall be in charge of the fire inspection bureau and its personnel.
B. Duties:
1. General: The fire inspection bureau and its personnel shall be and are hereby empowered to enter any building, structure or premises whether the
same is completed, occupied, uncompleted or unoccupied to determine whether such buildings, structures or premises are or have been
constructed, maintained or occupied in accordance with the applicable ordinances, statutes and laws of the village and the state of Illinois.
2. Other Inspections: This chapter shall not limit or prohibit the fire chief from detailing regular fire department personnel to make such additional fire
inspections as may be deemed necessary. (Ord. O-24-71, 12-27-1971)
1-6A-5: SPECIAL FIREFIGHTERS:
The village council shall have the power to appoint special firefighters to supplement the regular department, in the event of emergency, disaster or when
such necessity exists. Special firefighters shall be subject to such rules and regulations as shall be prescribed by the fire chief; and orders, ordinances and
resolutions of the village council. (Village code § 3-6)
1-6A-6: PENSION FUND:
A. Fund Established: There is established a firefighters' pension fund under, and in accordance with, the provisions of the laws of the state of Illinois2; and
there shall be set apart, to constitute such fund, the monies as specified in said act. (Village code §§ 3-10, 3-11)
B. Board Of Trustees:
1. Created: A board composed of five (5) members shall constitute a board of trustees to administer the pension fund and to designate beneficiaries
thereof. Two (2) members of the board shall be appointed by the mayor. Two (2) members of the board shall be active participants of the pension
fund who are elected from the active participants of the fund. One member of the board shall be a person who is elected by and from the
beneficiaries of the fund. Each member of the board so elected shall hold office for a term of three (3) years and until his or her successor has been
duly elected and qualified. The members appointed by the mayor shall hold office for alternate terms of two (2) years, and until his or her successor
has been duly appointed and qualified. (Ord. O-25-08, 6-9-2008)
2. Powers And Duties:
a. The said board shall have the exclusive control and management of the fund created in the manner provided by the statutes of the state of Illinois,
and shall see to the assessment and collection of monies as provided by law.
b. The board of trustees shall make all needful rules and regulations, for the discharge of its duties; and shall hear and decide all applications for
relief or pensions, under the provisions of the applicable statutes.
c. The board shall have the power to provide for the payment, from said fund, of all monies which may be necessary for the expenses of the board.
d. The board shall cause to be kept a record of all its proceedings and meetings. (Village code § 3-13)
ARTICLE B. POLICE DEPARTMENT
1-6B-1: DEPARTMENT CREATED; MEMBERS:
There is hereby established a police department for the village, which shall consist of the chief of police, one deputy chief, three (3) lieutenants, seven (7)
sergeants, and such number of police officers as the village council shall from time to time prescribe. Members of the police department shall receive such
compensation as the village council shall determine by ordinance or resolution. (Ord. O-05-16, 3-28-2016)
1-6B-2: CHIEF OF POLICE:
A. Appointment; Bond: The chief of police shall be appointed by the village council and shall be in charge of said police department. Before entering upon
the duties of his office, he shall execute a bond to the village in the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), with such sureties as the village council
shall approve, conditioned as the law prescribes. (Village code § 4-2)
B. Duties:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 28/416
1. The chief shall have general supervision of the administration of the police department, and its officers and members, and shall have custody, care
and control of the public property of the police department, subject to the directions of the village council; and of all firearms and other equipment; the
books and records of said police department. He shall devote his whole time to the affairs of said village in preserving the peace, safety, order and
cleanliness thereof. He shall be charged with the duty of protecting the rights of persons and property, and shall cause to be enforced all ordinances
of the village. (Village code § 4-3)
2. The chief of police shall be, and is hereby designated as, the custodian of lost, abandoned or stolen property. (Village code § 4-6)
1-6B-3: DEPUTY CHIEF OF POLICE:
There is hereby created the position of deputy chief, to be appointed by the chief of the police department. The deputy chief position shall be an exempt
rank immediately below that of the chief. The deputy chief may be appointed from any rank of sworn, full time officers of the village police department, but
must have at least five (5) years of full time service as a police officer in that department. The deputy chief shall serve at the discretion of the chief and, if
removed from that position by the chief, shall revert to the rank immediately held prior to appointment to the deputy chief position. The provisions of 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/10-2.1-17 regarding the discharge or suspension of a member of the department shall be applicable to the position of deputy
chief of police. (Ord. O-62-02, 12-23-2002)
1-6B-4: POLICE OFFICER REQUIREMENTS AND REGULATIONS:
A. Appointments: Police officers shall be appointed in the manner provided by statute and shall be subject to such rules and regulations as shall be
prescribed from time to time by the village council and the board of fire and police commissioners. (Ord. O-12-86, 8-11-1986)
B. Duties: It shall be the duty of the members of the police department to enforce the laws of the nation, state and ordinances of the village and to preserve
order and peace and to arrest violators of said laws and ordinances. (Ord. O-12-86, 8-11-1986; amd. Ord. O-25-05, 6-13-2005)
1-6B-5: SPECIAL POLICE:
The mayor may appoint, by and with the advice and consent of the village council, any additional number of special police to do special duty at any fixed
place within the village. Persons so appointed shall be subject to all rules and regulations governing the police force of said village, and to such special
rules and regulations as the chief of police may make concerning such special police. They shall possess all the powers and privileges, in connection with
the performances of their special duties, of regular police officers. (Village code § 4-5)
1-6B-6: AUXILIARY POLICE FORCE:
A. Authority; Appointments:
1. The commissioner of the department to which the powers and duties of the police department are assigned is hereby authorized to appoint auxiliary
police officers as employees of the village. Prior to appointment, all proposed auxiliary police shall be fingerprinted and their fingerprints shall be
checked with the federal bureau of investigation for any possible criminal record. No person shall be appointed as an auxiliary police officer if he has
been convicted of a felony or other crime involving moral turpitude. Auxiliary police officers may be terminated by the commissioner of the
department to which the powers and duties of the police department are assigned. (Ord. O-10-06, 2-13-2006)
2. Such auxiliary police shall not be members of the regular police department of the village. Auxiliary police need not be residents of the village.
Identification symbols worn by such auxiliary police shall be different and distinct from those used by the regular police department and shall be
selected and chosen by the chief of police of the village. Auxiliary police shall at all times during the performance of their duties be subject to the
direction and control of the chief of police of the village. (Ord. O-50-68, 12-21-1968)
B. Powers And Duties: Auxiliary police shall have the following powers and duties, when properly assigned and on duty:
1. To aid or direct traffic in the municipality.
2. To aid in control of natural or manmade disasters.
3. To aid in case of civil disorder.
4. To perform normal and regular police duties when assigned by the chief of police on occasions when it is impracticable for members of the regular
police department to perform normal and regular police duties.
5. If necessary, to detain arrested persons in custody overnight or on Sunday in any safe place or until they can be brought before the proper
magistrate.
6. To serve and execute all warrants for the violation of municipal ordinances, or the state criminal laws within the limits of the village, and for this
purpose to have all the common law and statutory power of sheriffs. (Ord. O-20-07, 5-30-2007)
C. Firearms: Auxiliary police shall not carry firearms except with the permission of the chief of police of the village and then only when in uniform and in the
performance of their duties.
D. Training: Auxiliary police, prior to entering upon any of their duties, shall receive a course of training in the use of weapons and other police procedures
by the chief of police of the village. Such course of training shall be not less than the required hours in duration. Upon completion of the course of
training, the chief of police shall file a certificate attesting to the auxiliary police officer's completion of said course, with the village clerk. (Ord. O-50-68,
12-21-1968)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 29/416
1-6B-7: POLICE PENSION FUND:
A. Fund Established: There is hereby established a police pension fund under, and in accordance with, the provisions of the statutes of the state of
Illinois1; and there is hereby set apart, to constitute such fund, the monies as specified by statute. (Village code §§ 4-7, 4-8)
B. Board Of Trustees:
1. A board composed of five (5) members shall constitute a board of trustees to administer the pension fund and to designate the beneficiaries thereof.
Two (2) members of the board shall be appointed by the mayor. The third and fourth members of the board shall be elected from the active
participants of the pension fund by such active participants. The fifth member shall be elected by and from the beneficiaries of the fund. The elected
members of the fund shall hold office for a term of two (2) years until his or her successor has been duly elected and qualified. The members
appointed by the mayor shall hold office for alternative terms of two (2) years and until his or her successor has been duly appointed and qualified.
(Ord. O-25-08, 6-9-2008)
2. Trustees shall be selected and fulfill their duties, and serve their tenure of office in accordance with the statutes of Illinois. (Village code §§ 4-9, 4-10)
C. Meetings: Suitable rooms for offices and meetings of such board shall be assigned by the village council. (Village code § 4-11)
1-6B-8: PART TIME POLICE OFFICERS:
A. A "part time police officer", when used herein, shall be defined to mean a member of the Forest Park police department who is employed by the village
of Forest Park for less than one thousand five hundred sixty (1,560) hours in any twelve (12) month period beginning on January 1 of any calendar year
and subject to the training requirements for a part time police officer as may be promulgated by the Illinois law enforcement training standards board.
(Ord. O-58-05, 11-14-2005)
B. Part time police officers shall be appointed by the commissioner of public affairs, pursuant to the provisions of section 4-5-6 of the Illinois municipal
code2. (Ord. O-2-06, 1-9-2006)
C. The council of the village of Forest Park is hereby vested with the authority to control and limit the number of part time police officers, to establish the
salary for part time police officers and to determine the total number of hours to be worked by all part time police officers. (Ord. O-58-05, 11-14-2005)
D. All part time police officers shall be deemed at will employees of the village, and their employment terminated or their hours of employment decreased
by the commissioner of public affairs, when in his judgment the efficient conduct of municipal affairs so demands. (Ord. O-2-06, 1-9-2006)
E. All part time police officers hired under the provisions of this section shall be at least twenty one (21) years of age and under thirty five (35) years of
age, shall possess a high school diploma or an equivalent high school education, and shall complete the training required of part time police officers
established by the Illinois law enforcement training standards board. The foregoing age limitation does not apply to any person previously employed as
a policeman in a regularly constituted police department of any municipality or to any person who has served as an auxiliary policeman pursuant to 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3.1-30-20 for at least five (5) years and is under forty (40) years of age. No person shall be hired as a part time police
officer unless he or she is a person of good character and not a habitual drunkard, gambler, or person who has been convicted of a felony or crime
involving moral turpitude.
F. The hiring standards for part time police officers, as set forth in subsection E of this section, shall be submitted by the chief of police to the Illinois law
enforcement training standards board.
G. Part time police officers shall be deployed in accordance with the provisions of any collective bargaining agreement which addresses such deployment.
H. No part time police officer employed pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be subject to any of the provisions contained in section 10-2.1-1 et
seq., of the Illinois municipal code3, and the provisions contained therein for the hiring of full time police officers, discipline of full time police officers
and termination of full time police officers shall not apply to part time police officers hired under the provisions of this section. (Ord. O-58-05, 11-14-
2005)
ARTICLE C. DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC PROPERTY
1-6C-1: DEPARTMENT CREATED; MEMBERS; DUTIES:
There is hereby established a department of public property for the village, which shall consist of such number of employees as the village council shall
from time to time prescribe, and who shall be under the supervision of the commissioner of public property. The members of the department of public
property shall perform the duties described in section 1-4-3-5 of this title or as otherwise provided by the village council. (Ord. O-36-04, 9-13-2004)
ARTICLE D. CODE HEARING DEPARTMENT
1-6D-1: PURPOSE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 30/416
The purpose of this article is to provide for fair and efficient enforcement of certain village ordinances as may be allowed by law and directed by ordinance,
through an administrative adjudication of violations and establishing a schedule of fines and penalties, and authority and procedures for collection of
unpaid fines and penalties1. (Ord. O-19-99, 6-28-1999; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
1-6D-2: DEPARTMENT CREATED:
There is hereby established a municipal department to be known as the Forest Park code hearing department, to have the power to enforce compliance
with such municipal ordinances as from time to time may be authorized by the village council and permitted by law. The establishment of the code hearing
department does not preclude the mayor and village council from using any other method to enforce ordinances of the village. (Ord. O-19-99, 6-28-1999;
amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
1-6D-3: ADMINISTRATIVE COMPOSITION:
The code hearing department shall be composed of a hearing officer, an ordinance enforcement administrator, system coordinator/computer operator and
hearing room security personnel, with the powers and authority as hereinafter set forth.
The commissioner in charge of health and safety, with the approval of the entire village council, is hereby authorized to appoint persons to hold the
positions set forth in this section. Other than the hearing officer, one person may hold and fulfill the requirements of one or more of the above stated
positions and compensation for each of the above stated positions shall be as approved by the village council.
A. Hearing Officer: The hearing officer shall preside over all adjudicatory hearings and shall have the following powers and duties:
1. Hear testimony and accept evidence that is relevant to the existence of the code violation;
2. Issue subpoenas directing witnesses to appear and give relevant testimony at the hearing, upon the request of the parties or their representatives;
3. Preserve and authenticate the record of the hearing and all exhibits and evidence introduced at the hearing;
4. Issue and sign a written finding, decision and order stating whether a code violation exists; and
5. Impose penalties, sanctions or such other relief consistent with applicable code provisions and assess costs upon finding a party liable for the
charged violation, except however, that in no event shall the hearing officer have authority to impose a penalty of incarceration.
B. Ordinance Enforcement Administrator: The ordinance enforcement administrator is authorized and directed to:
1. Operate and manage the system of administrative adjudication of any ordinance violation as may be permitted by law and directed by ordinance.
2. Adopt, distribute and process all notices as may be required under this article or as may reasonably be required to carry out the purpose of this
article.
3. Collect monies paid as fines and/or penalties assessed after a final determination of liability.
4. Certify copies of final determinations of an ordinance violation adjudicated pursuant to this article, and any factual reports verifying the final
determination of any violation liability which is issued in accordance with this article and the laws of the state of Illinois.
5. Promulgate rules and regulations reasonably required to operate and maintain the administrative adjudication system hereby created.
6. Collect unpaid fines and penalties through private collection agencies and pursuit of all postjudgment remedies available by current law.
C. System Coordinator/Computer Operator: The system coordinator/computer operator is hereby authorized and directed to operate and maintain the
computer programs for the administrative adjudication system of the code hearing department hereby created on a day to day basis, including, but not
limited to:
1. Input of violation notice information.
2. Establish hearing dates and notice dates.
3. Record fine and penalty assessments and payments.
4. Issue payment receipts.
5. Issue succeeding notice of hearing dates and/or final determination of liability; issue notice of immobilization; issue notice of impending
impoundment; issue notice of impending driver's license suspension, as directed by the ordinance enforcement administrator in accordance with the
provisions hereinafter set forth.
6. Keep accurate records of appearances and nonappearances at administrative hearings, pleas entered, judgments entered, sanctions imposed, if
any, fines and penalties assessed and paid.
D. Hearing Room Security Personnel: The hearing room security personnel shall be qualified off duty, full time, part time or auxiliary police officers who are
hereby authorized and directed to:
1. Maintain hearing room decorum.
2. Have and execute authority as is granted to courtroom deputies of the circuit court.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 31/416
3. Perform such other duties or acts as may reasonably be required and directed by the hearing officer or ordinance enforcement administrator. (Ord.
O-19-99, 6-28-1999; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
ARTICLE E. DEPARTMENT OF STREETS AND PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
1-6E-1: DEPARTMENT CREATED; MEMBERS; DUTIES:
There is hereby established a department of streets and public improvements for the village, which shall consist of such number of employees as the
village council shall from time to time prescribe, and who shall be under the supervision of the commissioner of streets and public improvements. The
members of the department of streets and public improvements shall perform the duties described in section 1-4-3-4 of this title or as otherwise provided
by the village council. (Ord. O-36-04, 9-13-2004; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
Chapter 7
ETHICS
1-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall be given these definitions:
CAMPAIGN FOR ELECTIVE OFFICE: Any activity in furtherance of an effort to influence the selection, nomination, election or appointment of any
individual to any federal, state or local public office or office in a political organization, or the selection, nomination or election of presidential or vice
presidential electors, but does not include activities: a) relating to the support or opposition of any executive, legislative or administrative action; b) relating
to collective bargaining; or c) that are otherwise in furtherance of the person's official duties.
CANDIDATE: A person who has filed nominating papers or petitions for nomination or election to an elected office, or who has been appointed to fill a
vacancy in nomination, and who remains eligible for placement on the ballot at a regular election, as defined in the election code1.
COLLECTIVE BARGAINING: Has the same meaning as that term is defined in the Illinois public labor relations act2.
COMPENSATED TIME: With respect to an employee, any time worked by or credited to the employee that counts toward any minimum work time
requirement imposed as a condition of his employment, but for purposes of this chapter, does not include any designated holidays, vacation periods,
personal time, compensatory time off or any period when the employee is on a leave of absence. With respect to officers or employees whose hours are
not fixed, "compensated time" includes any period of time when the officer is on premises under the control of the employer and any other time when the
officer or employee is executing his official duties, regardless of location.
COMPENSATORY TIME OFF: Authorized time off earned by or awardedto an employee to compensate in whole or in part for time worked in excess of
the minimum work time required of that employee as a condition of his employment.
CONTRIBUTION: Has the same meaning as that term is defined in the election code3.
EMPLOYEE: A person employed by the village, whether on a full time or part time basis or pursuant to a contract, whose duties are subject to the direction
and control of an employer with regard to the material details of how the work is to be performed, but does not include an independent contractor.
EMPLOYER: The village of Forest Park.
GIFT: Any gratuity, discount, entertainment, hospitality, loan, forbearance or other tangible or intangible item having monetary value including, but not
limited to, cash, food and drink and honoraria for speaking engagements related to or attributable to government employment or the official position of an
officer or employee.
LEAVE OF ABSENCE: Any period during which an employee does not receive: a) compensation for employment; b) service credit towards pension
benefits; and c) health insurance benefits paid for by the employer.
OFFICER: A person who holds, by election or appointment, an office created by statute or ordinance, regardless of whether the officer is compensated for
service in his official capacity.
POLITICAL ACTIVITY: Any activity in support of or in connection with any campaign for elective office or any political organization, but does not include
activities: a) relating to the support or opposition of any executive, legislative or administrative action; b) relating to collective bargaining; or c) that are
otherwise in furtherance of the person's official duties.
POLITICAL ORGANIZATION: A party, committee, association, fund or other organization, whether or not incorporated, that is required to file a statement
of organization with the state board of elections or a county clerk under the election code4, but only with regard to those activities that require filing with the
state board of elections or a county clerk.
PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITY: A. Preparing for, organizing or participating in any political meeting, political rally, political demonstration or other
political event.
B. Soliciting contributions including, but not limited to, the purchase of, selling, distributingor receiving payment for tickets for any political fundraiser,
political meeting or other political event.
C. Soliciting, planning the solicitation of or preparing any document or report regarding anything of value or intended as a campaign contribution.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 32/416
D. Planning, conducting or participating in a public opinion poll in connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political organization
for political purposes or for or against any referendum question.
E. Surveying or gathering information from potential or actual voters in an election to determine probable vote outcome in connection with a campaign
for elective office or on behalf of a political organization for political purposes or for or against any referendum question.
F. Assisting at the polls on election day on behalf of any political organization or candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question.
G. Soliciting votes on behalf of a candidate for elective office or a political organization or for or against any referendum question or helping in an effort
to get voters to the polls.
H. Initiating for circulation, preparing, circulating, reviewing or filing any petition on behalf of a candidate for elective office or for or against any
referendum question.
I. Making contributions on behalf of any candidate for elective office in that capacity or in connection with a campaign for elective office.
J. Preparing or reviewing responses to candidate questionnaires.
K. Distributing, preparing for distribution or mailing campaign literature, campaign signs or other campaign material on behalf of any candidate for
elective office or for or against any referendum question.
L. Campaigning for any elective office or for or against any referendum question.
M. Managing or working on a campaign for elective office or for or against any referendum question.
N. Serving as a delegate, alternate or proxy to a political party convention.
O. Participating in any recount or challenge to the outcome of any election.
PROHIBITED SOURCE: Any person or entity who:
A. Is seeking official action: 1) by an officer; or 2) by an employee, or by the officer or another employee directing that employee;
B. Does business or seeks to do business: 1) with the officer; or 2) with an employee, or with the officer or another employee directing that employee;
C. Conducts activities regulated: 1) by the officer; or 2) by an employee, or by the officer or another employee directing that employee; or
D. Has interests that may be substantially affected by the performance or nonperformance of the official duties of the officer or employee. (Ord. O-20-
04, 5-10-2004)
1-7-2: PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITIES:
A. No officer or employee shall intentionally perform any prohibited political activity during any "compensated time", as defined herein. No officer or
employee shall intentionally use any property or resources of the village in connection with any prohibited political activity.
B. At no time shall any officer or employee intentionally require another officer or employee to perform any prohibited political activity: 1) as part of that
officer's or employee's duties; 2) as a condition of employment; or 3) during any compensated time off (such as holidays, vacation or personal time off).
C. No officer or employee shall be required at any time to participate in any prohibited political activity in consideration for that officer or employee being
awarded additional compensation or any benefit, whether in the form of a salary adjustment, bonus, compensatory time off, continued employment or
otherwise, nor shall any officer or employee be awarded additional compensation or any benefit in consideration for his participation in any prohibited
political activity.
D. Nothing in this section prohibits activities that are permissible for an officer or employee to engage in as part of his official duties, or activities that are
undertaken by an officer or employee on a voluntary basis which are not prohibited by this chapter.
E. No person either: 1) in a position that is subject to recognized merit principles of public employment; or 2) in a position the salary for which is paid in
whole or in part by federal funds and that is subject to the federal standards for a merit system of personnel administration applicable to grant in aid
programs, shall be denied or deprived of employment or tenure solely because he is a member or an officer of a political committee, of a political party
or of a political organization or club. (Ord. O-20-04, 5-10-2004)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 33/416
1-7-3: GIFT BAN:
A. Prohibitions: Except as otherwise permitted by this section, no officer or employee, and no spouse of or immediately family member living with any
officer or employee (collectively referred to herein as "recipients"), shall intentionally solicit or accept any gift from any "prohibited source", as defined
herein, or which is otherwise prohibited by law or ordinance. No prohibited source shall intentionally offer or make a gift that violates this section.
B. Exceptions: Subsection A of this section is not applicable to the following, and each of the exceptions listed in this subsection is mutually exclusive and
independent of every other exception:
1. Opportunities, benefits and services that are available on the same conditions as for the general public.
2. Anything for which the officer or employee, or his spouse or immediately family member, pays the fair market value.
3. Any: a) contribution that is lawfully made under the election code; or b) activities associated with a fundraising event in support of a political
organization or candidate.
4. Educational materials and missions.
5. Travel expenses for a meeting to discuss business.
6. A gift from a relative, meaning those people related to the individual as father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, uncle, aunt, great aunt, great
uncle, first cousin, nephew, niece, husband, wife, grandfather, grandmother, grandson, granddaughter, father-in-law, mother-in-law, son-in-law,
daughter-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, stepfather, stepmother, stepson, stepdaughter, stepbrother, stepsister, half brother, half sister, and
including the father, mother, grandfather or grandmother of the individual's spouse and the individual's fiance or fiancee.
7. Anything provided by an individual on the basis of a personal friendship unless the recipient has reason to believe that, under the circumstances, the
gift was provided because of the official position or employment of the recipient or his spouse orimmediately family member and not because of the
personal friendship. In determining whether a gift is provided on the basis of personal friendship, the recipient shall consider the circumstances under
which the gift was offered, such as:
a. The history of the relationship between the individual giving the gift and the recipient of the gift, including any previous exchange of gifts between
those individuals;
b. Whether to the actual knowledge of the recipient, the individual who gave the gift sought a tax deduction or business reimbursement for the gift;
and
c. Whether to the actual knowledge of the recipient, the individual who gave the gift also at the same time gave the same or similar gifts to other
officers or employees, or their spouses or immediate family members.
8. Food or refreshments not exceeding seventy five dollars ($75.00) per person in value on a single calendar day, provided that the food or
refreshments are: a) consumed on the premises from which they were purchased or prepared; or b) catered. For the purposes of this paragraph,
"catered" means food or refreshments that are purchased ready to consume which are delivered by any means.
9. Food, refreshments, lodging, transportation and other benefits resulting from outside business or employment activities (or outside activities that are
not connected to the official duties of an officer or employee), if the benefits have not been offered or enhanced because of the official position or
employment of the officer or employee, and are customarily provided to others in similar circumstances.
10. Intragovernmental and intergovernmental gifts. For the purpose of this section, "intragovernmental gift" means any gift given to an officer or
employee from another officer or employee, and "intergovernmental gift" means any gift given to an officer or employee by an officer or employee of
another governmental entity.
11. Bequests, inheritances and other transfers at death.
12. Any item or items from any one prohibited source during any calendar year having a cumulative total value of less than one hundred dollars
($100.00).
C. Disposition Of Gifts: An officer or employee, his spouse or an immediate family member living with the officer or employee, does not violate this chapter
if the recipient promptly takes reasonable action to return a gift from a prohibited source to its source or gives the gift or an amount equal to its value to
an appropriate charity that is exempt from income taxation under the internal revenue code of 1986, section 501(c)(3), as now or hereafter amended,
renumbered or succeeded. (Ord. O-20-04, 5-10-2004)
1-7-4: ETHICS ADVISOR:
A. The mayor, with the advice and consent of the village council, shall designate an ethics advisor for the village. The duties of the ethics advisor may be
delegated to an officer or employee of the village, unless the position has been created as an office by the village.
B. The ethics advisor shall provide guidance to the officers and employees of the village concerning the interpretation of and compliance with the
provisions of this chapter and state ethics laws. The ethics advisor shall perform such other duties as may be delegated by the village council. (Ord. O-
20-04, 5-10-2004)
1-7-5: ETHICS COMMISSION:
A. Commission Created; Members: There is hereby created a commission to be known as the ethics commission of the village. The commission shall be
comprised of three (3) members appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the village council. No person shall be appointed as a member
of the commission who is related, either by blood or by marriage up to the degree of first cousin, to any elected officer of the village.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 34/416
B. Terms: At the first meeting of the commission, the initial appointees shall draw lots to determine their initial terms. Two (2) commissioners shall serve
two (2) year terms and the third commissioner shall serve a one year term. Thereafter, all commissioners shall be appointed to two (2) year terms.
Commissioners may be reappointed to serve subsequent terms.
C. Organization; Quorum And Voting: At the first meeting of the commission, the commissioners shall choose a chair from their number. Meetings shall be
held at the call of the chair or any two (2) commissioners. A quorum shall consist of two (2) commissioners, and official action by the commission shall
require the affirmative vote of two (2) members.
D. Removal Of Commissioners: The mayor, with the advice and consent of the village council, may remove a commissioner in case of incompetence,
neglect of duty or malfeasance in office after service on the commissioner by certified mail, return receipt requested, of a copy of the written charges
against the commissioner and after providing the commissioner an opportunity to be heard in person or by counsel upon not less than ten (10) days'
notice. Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as original appointments.
E. Powers And Duties: The commission shall have the following powers and duties:
1. To promulgate procedures and rules governing the performance of its duties and the exercise of its powers.
2. Upon receipt of a signed, notarized, written complaint, to investigate, conduct hearings and deliberations, issue recommendations for disciplinary
actions, impose fines in accordance with subsection 1-7-5F8 of this chapter, and refer violations of section 1-7-2 or 1-7-3 of this chapter to the
appropriate attorney for prosecution. The commission shall, however, act only upon the receipt of a written complaint alleging a violation of this
chapter and not upon its own prerogative.
3. To receive information from the public pertaining to its investigations and to require additional information and documents from persons who may
have violated the provisions of this chapter.
4. To compel the attendance of witnesses and to compel the production of books and papers pertinent to an investigation. It is the obligation of all
officers and employees of the village to cooperate with the commission during the course of its investigations. Failure or refusal to cooperate with
requests by the commission shall constitute grounds for discipline or discharge.
5. The powers and duties of the commission are limited to matters clearly within the purview of this chapter.
F. Complaints:
1. Complaints alleging the violation of this chapter shall be filed with the ethics commission.
2. Within three (3) business days after the receipt of a complaint, the commission shall send by certified mail, return receipt requested, a notice to the
respondent that a complaint has been filed against him and a copy of the complaint. The commission shall send by certified mail, return receipt
requested, a confirmation of the receipt of the complaint to the complainant within three (3) business days after receipt by the commission. The
notices to the respondent and the complainant shall also advise them of the date, time and place of the meeting to determine the sufficiency of the
complaint and to establish whether probable cause exists to proceed.
3. Upon not less than forty eight (48) hours' public notice, the commission shall meet to review the sufficiency of the complaint and, if the complaint is
deemed sufficient to allege a violation of this chapter, to determine whether there is probable cause, based on the evidence presented by the
complaint, to proceed. The meeting may be closed to the public to the extent authorized by the open meetings act. The commission shall issue
notice to the complainant and the respondent of the commission's ruling on the sufficiency of the complaint and, if necessary, on probable cause to
proceed within seven (7) business days after receiving the complaint.
If the complaint is deemed sufficient to allege a violationof section 1-7-3 of this chapter and there is a determination of probable cause, then the
commission's notice to the parties shall include a hearing date scheduled within four (4) weeks after the complaint's receipt. Alternatively, the
commission may elect to notify in writing the attorney designated by the corporate authorities to prosecute such actions and request that the
complaint be adjudicated judicially. If the complaint is deemed not sufficient to allege a violation, or if there is no determination of probable cause,
then the commission shall send by certified mail, return receipt requested, a notice to the parties of the decision to dismiss the complaint, and that
notice shall be made public.
If the complaint is deemed sufficient to allege a violation of section 1-7-2 of this chapter, then the commission shall notify in writing the attorney
designated by the corporate authorities to prosecute such actions, and shall transmit to the attorney the complaint and all additional documents in the
custody of the commission concerning the alleged violation.
4. On the scheduled date and upon at least forty eight (48) hours' public notice of the meeting, the commission shall conduct a hearing on the
complaint and shall allow both parties the opportunity to present testimony and evidence. The hearing may be closed to the public only if authorized
by the open meetings act.
5. Within thirty (30) days after the date the hearing or any recessed hearing is concluded, the commission shall either: a) dismiss the complaint; or b)
issue a recommendation for discipline to the alleged violator and to the village administrator (or to the mayor, if the alleged violator is the village
administrator), or impose a fine upon the violator, or both. The particular findings in the case, any recommendation for discipline and any fine
imposed shall be a matter of public information.
6. If the hearing was closed to the public, the respondent may file a written demand for a public hearing on the complaint within seven (7) business
days after the issuance of the recommendation for discipline or imposition of a fine, or both. The filing of the demand shall stay the enforcement of
the recommendation or fine. Within fourteen (14) days after receiving the demand, the commission shall conduct a public hearing on the complaint
upon at least forty eight (48) hours' public notice of the hearing and allow both parties the opportunity to present testimony and evidence. Within
seven (7) days thereafter, the commission shall publicly issue a final recommendation for discipline to the alleged violator and to the village
administrator (or to the mayor, if the alleged violator is the village administrator) or impose a fine upon the violator, or both.
7. If a complaint is filed during the sixty (60) days preceding the date of any election at which the respondent is a candidate,the commission shall
render its decision as required under subsection F5 of this section within seven (7) days after the complaint is filed, and if a complaint is filed during
the seven (7) days preceding that election, the commission shall render such decision before the date of that election, if possible.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 35/416
8. The commission may fine any person who intentionally violates any provision of section 1-7-3 of this chapter in an amount not less than one
thousand one dollars ($1,001.00) and not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). The commission may fine any person who knowingly files a
frivolous complaint alleging a violation of this chapter in an amount not less than one thousand one dollars ($1,001.00) and not more than five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00). The commission may recommend any appropriate discipline up to and including discharge.
9. A complaint alleging the violation of this chapter must be filed within one year after the alleged violation. (Ord. O-20-04, 5-10-2004)
1-7-6: PENALTIES:
A. A person who intentionally violates any provision of section 1-7-2 of this chapter may be punished by a term of incarceration in a penal institution other
than a penitentiary for a period of not more than three hundred sixty four (364) days, and may be fined in an amount not to exceed two thousand five
hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
B. A person who intentionally violates any provision of section 1-7-3 of this chapter is subject to a fine in an amount of not less than one thousand one
dollars ($1,001.00) and not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00).
C. Any person who intentionally makes a false report alleging a violation of any provision of this chapter to the local enforcement authorities, the state's
attorney or any other law enforcement official may be punished by a term of incarceration in a penal institution other than a penitentiary for a period of
not more than three hundred sixty four (364) days, and may be fined in an amount not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
D. A violation of section 1-7-2 of this chapter shall be prosecuted as a criminal offense by an attorney for the village by filing in the circuit court a sworn
complaint charging such offense. The prosecution shall be under and conform to the rules of criminal procedure. Conviction shall require the
establishment of the guilt of the defendant beyond a reasonable doubt.
A violation of section 1-7-3 of this chapter may be prosecuted as a quasi-criminal offense by an attorney for the village or, if an ethics commission has
been created, by the commission through the designated administrative procedure.
E. In addition to any other penalty that may be applicable, whether criminal or civil, an officer or employee who intentionally violates any provision of
section 1-7-2 or 1-7-3 of this chapter is subject to discipline or discharge. (Ord. O-20-04, 5-10-2004)
Chapter 8
MUNICIPAL FINANCES
1-8-1: NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS:
The village clerk and comptroller are authorized and directed to assess a charge of thirty dollars ($30.00) against any person who pays any account due
the village by check, draft, money order or any other negotiable instrument which is not honored by the drawee or person, firm or corporation directed to
pay the check, draft, money order or other negotiable instrument. (Ord. O-49-09, 7-27-2009)
ARTICLE A. PURCHASING
1-8A-1: PURCHASING POLICY AND PURPOSE:
This policy shall create guidelines for the acquisition of goods and services by the village, and the purpose of this policy is to provide clear guidelines for
the procurement of goods and services by the village, in accordance with Illinois law. In addition:
A. The policy will allow the village to obtain the highest quality products, materials and services in the most cost efficient manner, while maintaining
accountability to the taxpayers; and
B. The policy will ensure that the public contracting process is conducted with the highest ethical standards and that all prohibitions on personal interests in
contracts are strictly enforced. (Ord. O-22-01, 6-25-2001)
1-8A-2: ETHICS IN PUBLIC CONTRACTING:
No person holding any municipal office within the village, either by election or appointment, may in any manner be financially interested, directly or
indirectly, in any contract or the performance of any work in the making or letting of which such officer may be called upon to act or vote. No such officer
may represent, either as agent or otherwise, any person, association, trust or corporation with respect to any application or bid for any contract or work, if
that officer may be called upon to act or vote on the subject.
A. Any contract for the procurement of goods and services made in violation hereof is void and unenforceable.
B. Municipal officers are subject to all the prohibitions in public contracting as provided in the public officer prohibitedactivities act1, and this section is
subject to all the limitations, conditions and exclusions contained therein. (Ord. O-22-01, 6-25-2001)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 36/416
1-8A-3: GENERAL PURCHASES:
A. Definition: A "general purchase" is defined as any acquisition of goods or services, whether by contract or otherwise, but excluding contracts covered by
sections 1-8A-4 and 1-8A-5 of this article, and excluding the acquisition of real property.
B. General Purchases Of Five Hundred Dollars Or Less: All general purchases of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or less must have prior written approval
from the department head of the applicable department. "Department head" is defined as a person appointed by the village council to supervise the
daily activities of a department, who serves under a particular village commissioner.
C. General Purchases From Five Hundred Dollars One Cent To Twenty Thousand Dollars: All general purchases exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00)
but not exceeding twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) require department head written approval. In addition, each such purchase must receive prior
written approval from the village administrator. For general purchases greater than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) but not exceeding twenty
thousand dollars ($20,000.00), the department head, or his designee, shall obtain three (3) written cost estimates. The estimates shall be presented to
the village administrator for review prior to his written approval of the purchase.
D. General Purchases Exceeding Twenty Thousand Dollars: All general purchases exceeding twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) shall be approved by
the department head in writing, shall have prior written approval from the village administrator, and shall require village council approval. Before the
village may make a general purchase exceeding twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00), the following shall occur:
1. The department head, or his designee, shall obtain three (3) written proposals;
2. The written proposals shall be reviewed by the village administrator who shall, in consultation with the mayor, appropriate commissioner or staff as
required, select a proposal and present the selection to the village council. The selection shall be made utilizing criteria including the total cost, the
quality of the proposal, the specific needs of the village with regard to the subject procurement, prior work history with the village and other relevant
factors as appropriate; and
3. Prior approval of the village council shall be required for any purchase exceeding twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00).
E. Requirements Waived: The village administrator may, at his discretion, waive the requirements of this section for the procurement of professional or
consulting services, where the ability or fitness of the individual or company to be utilized is an integral part of the services to be obtained. (Ord. O-29-
06, 4-24-2006)
1-8A-4: CONTRACTS FOR PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS OF TEN THOUSAND DOLLARS OR MORE:
All contracts of whatever character, pertaining to public improvement, or to the maintenance of the public property of the municipality, involving an outlay of
ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or more shall be based on specifications to be approved by the village council.
A. The specifications for each such contract, as prepared by the village administrator or appropriate department head, shall be presented to and shall
require the approval by the village council. The specifications shall be a written description of the proposed project.
B. The village administrator shall obtain estimates or proposals which comply with the specifications, and may enter into such contract without further
village council approval. (Ord. O-29-06, 4-24-2006)
1-8A-5: CONTRACTS FOR PUBLIC WORKS AND IMPROVEMENTS EXCEEDING TWENTY THOUSAND DOLLARS:
Any work or other public improvement which is not to be paid for in whole or in part by special assessment or special taxation, when the expense thereof
exceeds twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) shall be constructed as follows:
A. By a contract let to the lowest responsible bidder after advertising for bids, in the manner prescribed below, except that any such contract may be
entered into by the village council without advertising for bids, if authorized by a vote of four (4) of the five (5) council members elected.
1. Competitive Bidding: A request for bids shall be published at least ten (10) days in advance of the date announced for the receipt of bids, in an
English language newspaper of general circulation throughout the village, and shall simultaneously be posted on readily accessible bulletin boards in
the office of the village clerk. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prohibit any additional publication of such request for bids, if
deemed appropriate by the village clerk.
a. Contents Of Request For Bids: A request for bids shall describe the character of the proposed contract or agreement in sufficient detail to enable
the bidders thereof to know what their obligations will be either in the request itself or byreference to detailed plans and specifications on file at the
time of the publication of the request for bids. Such request for bids shall also state the deadline for the receipt of bids, and no bids shall be
received at any time subsequent to the time indicated in the advertisement. However, an extension of time may be granted for the receipt of such
bids upon publication in an English language newspaper of general circulation throughout the village of the date to which the bid receipt has been
extended and the notification of all prospective bidders, per village records. The date for the opening of bids may also be included in the
advertisement.
b. Submission Of Bids: Bids may be submitted to the village clerk, or his designee, at any time during normal business hours prior to the deadline for
receipt of bids. No bids may be submitted after the deadline.
c. Bid Bond: Cash, a cashier's check or a certified check as a deposit of good faith, in an amount not to exceed ten percent (10%) of the contract
amount, may be required of each bidder by the village administrator on all bids involving amounts in excess of twenty thousand dollars
($20,000.00) when it is determined that the public interests will be served thereby. If a bid bond is required, the request for bids shall so specify.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 37/416
d. Procedures For Awarding Contracts:
(1) Opening Of Bids: All bids submitted in response to the request for bids shall be publicly opened by the village clerk or his designee.
(2) Award Of Contracts: Unless all bids are rejected as provided in subsection A1d(4) of this section, a contract under this section shall be
awarded to the lowest responsible bidder, as determined by the village administrator in consultation with the mayor, village council, village
engineer or other village officers or employees as appropriate. The award of the contract shall be approved by the village council. Each contract
shall be signed by the mayor. Following the award of a contract under this section, a copy of the awarded bid, along with copies of all
unsuccessful bids, shall remain open to public inspection in the office of the village clerk.
(3) Responsibility Of Bidder: In determining which bidder is the lowest responsible bidder, the following factors may be taken into account in
addition to contract price: financial responsibility, past transactions of the bidder with the village, experience, adequacy of equipment, ability to
complete performance and any other pertinent considerations.
(4) Rejection Of All Bids: The village administrator may reject all bids should he determine it to be in the best interest of the village.
e. Rules And Regulations Established: The village administrator shall establish rules and regulations concerning the correction,amendment or
withdrawal of previously submitted bids and the time frame for the same.
f. Assigning Contract Prohibited: No contract awarded to the lowest responsible bidder may be assigned to another party without the written consent
of the village administrator.
g. Fiscal Responsibility: The award of contracts under this section shall be made so as to promote fiscal responsibility and governmental efficiency.
h. Local Vendors: Local vendors and service providers are encouraged to participate in the bidding process.
B. In the alternative, in the following manner, if authorized by a vote of four (4) of the five (5) council members elected: The commissioner of public works
shall superintend and cause to be carried out the construction of the work or other public improvement and shall employ exclusively for the
performance of all manual labor thereon, laborers and artisans whom the city or village shall pay by the day or hour, but all material of value of twenty
thousand dollars ($20,000.00) and upward used in the construction of the work or other public improvement, shall be purchased by contract let to the
lowest responsible bidder in the manner prescribed by this section.
C. Nothing contained in this section shall apply to any contract by a municipality with the United States of America or any agency thereof. (Ord. O-29-06,
4-24-2006)
1-8A-6: ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS:
A. Waiver: Any provision in this article may be waived by a vote of four (4) out of five (5) village council members elected.
B. Single Source: The written proposal requirements and/or competitive bidding procedures outlined in this article do not apply if the product or service to
be acquired is available only from a single source, or if the product or service is so specialized as to render price quotation or competitive bidding
procedures ineffectual.
C. Emergency: The price quotations and/or competitive bidding procedures outlined in this article do not apply if the product or service is required to be
acquired in an emergency situation, where the health, welfare or safety of village residents or employees is at risk. In such case, an emergency
purchase may be made with the approval of the mayor and/or the village administrator.
D. Bids Where Not Required: Nothing in this article shall preclude the village from utilizing a competitive bidding process where it is otherwise not required,
should the mayor determine that utilizing such a procedure is in the best interests of the village.
E. Procedures Established: The village administrator, or his designee, is charged with establishing procedural rules and regulations necessary to
effectuate the purposes of this article.
F. Further Actions: The officials, officers and employees of the village are hereby authorized to take such further actions as are necessary to carry out the
intent and purpose of this article. (Ord. O-22-01, 6-25-2001)
ARTICLE B. INVESTMENT POLICY
1-8B-1: INVESTMENT POLICY ESTABLISHED:
It is the policy of the village to invest public funds in a manner which will provide the highest investment return with the maximum security while meeting
the daily cash flow demands of the village and conforming to all state and local statutes. The investment policy shall be adopted by the village council, and
shall be reviewed on an annual basis by the village administrator. Any modifications made thereto must be approved by the village council. (Ord. 0-28-99,
12-30-1999, eff. 1-1-2000)
1-8B-2: SCOPE OF ARTICLE:
The policy set out in this article includes all funds governed by the village and applies to all officers, employees or their designees. (Ord. 0-28-99, 12-30-
1999, eff. 1-1-2000)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 38/416
1-8B-3: INVESTMENT REGULATIONS:
A. Prudence: Investments shall be made with judgment and care, under circumstances then prevailing, which persons of prudence, discretion and
intelligence exercise in the management of their own affairs, not for speculation but for investment, considering the probable safety of their capital, as
well as the probable income to be derived. The standard of prudence to be used by investment officials shall be the "prudent person" standard and
shall be applied in the context of managing an overall portfolio.
B. Objectives: The primary objectives, in order of priority, shall be:
1. Legality: Conformance with federal, state and other legal requirements.
2. Safety: Preservation of capital and protection of investmentprincipal.
3. Liquidity: Maintenance of sufficient liquidity to meet operating requirements and cash flow needs.
4. Diversification: Minimization of risk by allocating portfolio among different investments.
5. Yield: Attainment of market rates of return.
The portfolio should be reviewed periodically as to its effectiveness in meeting the village's needs for safety, liquidity, yield, diversification and its
overall performance.
C. Authorized And Suitable Investments: Investments may be made in any type of security allowed for in Illinois statutes regarding the investment of public
funds1. The village is not authorized to invest in any form of derivative security. Investments shall be made that reflect the cash flow needs of the fund
type being invested and reflecting all other provisions of this policy.
D. Collateralization: Funds on deposit (checking accounts, certificates of deposit, etc.) in excess of FDIC limits may be secured with appropriate collateral,
witnessed by a written agreement and held at an independent third party institution or held in house in the name of the municipality. Collateral shall be
limited to securities of the United States of America or its agencies such as the Federal National Mortgage Association.
E. Diversification: The entity shall diversify its investments based on the type of funds invested and the cash flow needs of those funds. Diversification can
be by type of investment, number of institutions invested in, and length of maturity.
F. Maximum Maturities: To the extent possible, the village shall attempt to match its investments with anticipated cash flow requirements. Unless matched
to a specific cash flow, the village will not directly invest in securities maturing more than one year from the date of purchase. Reserve funds may be
invested in securities exceeding two (2) years if the maturity of such investments are made to coincide as nearly as practicable with the expected use
of the funds.
G. Limitations:
1. The village may not invest more than three million dollars ($3,000,000.00) or thirty percent (30%) of its portfolio, whichever amount is less, in any
one security or in any one financial institution.
2. The village administrator is authorized to invest up to twomillion dollars ($2,000,000.00) at any time, or in any one investment, subject to all other
provisions of this policy. Any investment in excess of two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) must receive approval by the village council before the
transaction can be executed by the village administrator or his designee.
H. Performance Standards: The investment portfolio will be managed in accordance with all parameters specified within this policy. The portfolio should
obtain a comparable rate of return during a market/economic environment of stable interest rates. Portfolio performance should be compared to
benchmarks with similar maturity, liquidity and credit quality as the portfolio. One such benchmark is the ninety (90) day T-bill note. (Ord. 0-28-99, 12-
30-1999, eff. 1-1-2000)
1-8B-4: DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY:
Management and administrative responsibility for the investment program is hereby delegated to the village administrator who, under the direction of the
village council, shall establish written procedures for the operation of the investment program. The procedures should be available to council members for
their review and comment. (Ord. 0-28-99, 12-30-1999, eff. 1-1-2000)
1-8B-5: ETHICS AND CONFLICTS OF INTEREST:
Officers and employees involved in the investment process shall refrain from personal business activity that could conflict with the proper execution and
management of the investment program, or that could impair their ability to make impartial decisions. Failure to comply with this provision will result in
immediate termination of the officer or employee. (Ord. 0-28-99, 12-30-1999, eff. 1-1-2000)
1-8B-6: AUTHORIZED FINANCIAL DEALERS AND INSTITUTIONS:
The village administrator will maintain a list of financial institutions authorized to provide investment services. In addition, a list will also be maintained of
approved security brokers/dealers selected by credit worthiness. All such lists will be developed as a result of a formal selection process requiring financial
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 39/416
institutions and broker/agents to submit written responses to a request for information (RFI) or request for proposal (RFP) prepared by the village. (Ord. 0-
28-99, 12-30-1999, eff. 1-1-2000)
1-8B-7: SAFEKEEPING AND CUSTODY:
All security transactions, including collateral for repurchase agreements, entered into by the village, shall be conducted on a delivery versus payment
(DVP) basis. Securities may be held by a custodian designated by the village administrator and evidencedby safekeeping receipts and a written custodial
agreement. (Ord. 0-28-99, 12-30-1999, eff. 1-1-2000)
1-8B-8: INTERNAL CONTROL:
The village administrator is responsible for establishing and maintaining an internal control structure designed to ensure that the assets of the village are
protected from loss, theft or misuse. The internal control structure shall be designed to provide reasonable assurance that these objectives are met. The
internal controls shall address the following points:
A. Control of collusion.
B. Separation of transaction authority from accounting.
C. Custodial safekeeping.
D. Written confirmation of telephone transactions for investments and wire transfers. (Ord. 0-28-99, 12-30-1999, eff. 1-1-2000)
1-8B-9: REPORTS:
A. Monthly: The village administrator shall prepare a monthly investment report. The report shall be provided to the village council and available to the
general public on request. The report should be in a format suitable for review by the general public. An annual report should also be provided to the
village council.
B. Marking To Market: A statement of the market value of the portfolio shall be issued to the village council quarterly. That statement should also identify
the cost of each individual security held in the portfolio. (Ord. 0-28-99, 12-30-1999, eff. 1-1-2000)
ARTICLE C. TIF INTERESTED PARTIES REGISTRY
1-8C-1: STATE LAW PROVISIONS:
A. Adoption Of Act: The village has adopted the tax increment allocation redevelopment act1 for certain designated redevelopment project areas, as such
term is defined in the act.
B. Registry Required: The village clerk is hereby authorized and directed to create an "interested parties" registry in accordance with 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-74.4-4.2 for each redevelopment project area created under the act, whether now existing or created after the adoption date hereof. (Ord.
O-2-00, 1-24-2000)
1-8C-2: TIF INTERESTED PARTIES REGISTRY REGISTRATION RULES:
In accordance with 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-74.4-4.2, the village hereby adopts the registration rules set out in exhibit A attached to ordinance O-
2-00 and made a part of this section as registration rules for each such interested parties registry. The village clerk, with the consent of the village's special
counsel as to form and legality, shall have the authority to amend such registration rules from time to time as may be necessary or desirable to comply with
and carry out the purposes intended by the act. (Ord. O-2-00, 1-24-2000)
ARTICLE D. TRAVEL, MEAL AND LODGING EXPENSE REIMBURSEMENT
1-8D-0: PURPOSE:
Consistent with the local government travel expense control act1 (PA 99-0604) the village allows and will reimburse village officers and employees for
reasonable authorized travel expenses, including meal and lodging expenses, incurred by them in the performance of their duties. This section regulates
the reimbursement of all travel, meal, and lodging expenses of officers and employees of the village. (Ord. O-27-16, 11-14-2016)
1-8D-1: APPLICABILITY:
This section applies to every officer and employee of the village including, but not limited to, all full time, part time and temporary employees of the village
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 40/416
and all elected officials of the village and appointed board, commission or committee members of the village. (Ord. O-27-16, 11-14-2016)
1-8D-2: DEFINITIONS:
CORPORATE AUTHORITIES: The mayor and council members of the village.
ENTERTAINMENT: Includes, but is not limited to, shows, amusements, theaters, circuses, sporting events, or any other place of public or private
entertainment or amusement, unless ancillary to the purpose of the program or event.
TRAVEL: Any expenditure directly incident to official travel by employees and officers of the village involving reimbursement to travelers or direct payment
to private agencies providing transportation or related services.
VILLAGE: The village of Forest Park, Illinois. (Ord. O-27-16, 11-14-2016)
1-8D-3: OFFICIAL BUSINESS FOR WHICH EXPENSE REIMBURSEMENT IS PERMITTED:
A. Village officers and employees are permitted to be reimbursed for the travel, meal and lodging expenses in the following instances:
1. Official Business Travel: Travel that takes the village officer or employee outside of the village relating to official business of the village that is
designed to further development, legislation, governance and administration of the village.
2. Training And Professional/Educational Travel: Travel that takes the village officer or employee outside of the village related to the attendance at
seminars, conferences, workshops, conventions and the like designed to further training, education and professional development of village officers
or employees, directly related to their duties.
3. Official Business Meals: Meals eaten within or outside of the village during which the village officer or employee discusses official business of the
village that is designed to further development, legislation, governance and administration of the village.
B. Commuting to a location within the village and to and from an officer's or employee's normal place of business does not constitute a reimbursable travel
expense. (Ord. O-27-16, 11-14-2016)
1-8D-4: TRAVEL, MEAL AND LODGING EXPENSE AUTHORIZATION:
Prior to incurring a travel, meal or lodging expense for which reimbursement is sought, village officers and employees are required to complete the travel
authorization form set forth in subsection 1-8D-8A of this article. Travel, meal or lodging expenses by employees (except for department heads) must be
authorized in advance by the department head and the village administrator. Travel, meal or lodging expenses by department heads must be authorized in
advance by the village administrator. Travel, meal or lodging expenses by village officers (except for the corporate authorities) must be authorized in
advance by the village administrator. Travel, meal or lodging expenses by the corporate authorities must be authorized in advance by the corporate
authorities by a roll call vote at an open meeting of the corporate authorities. (Ord. O-27-16, 11-14-2016)
1-8D-5: TRAVEL, MEAL AND LODGING EXPENSE REIMBURSEMENT APPROVAL:
Within ten (10) days after the return from travel, or in the absence of travel within ten (10) days after incurring the expense, the village officer or employee
must complete a travel expense reimbursement form set forth in subsection 1-8D-9A of this article supported by the required documentation and submit
the form to the village administrator. Any travel reimbursement submitted after ten (10) days must include an explanation of the delay. Only delays caused
by reasonable circumstances will be approved for reimbursement. Travel, meal and lodging expenses of village officers (except for the corporate
authorities) and employees that do not exceed the maximum allowable reimbursement amounts established in this article may be approved by the village
administrator. In the case of emergency or other extraordinary circumstances, travel, meal and lodging expenses that exceed the maximum allowable
reimbursement amounts established by this article may be approved. All travel, meal and lodging expenses of the corporate authorities and travel, meal
and lodging expenses of village officers or employees that exceed the maximum allowable reimbursement amounts established in this article shall be
approved by the corporate authorities by a roll call vote at an open meeting of the corporate authorities. (Ord. O-27-16, 11-14-2016)
1-8D-6: GENERAL TRAVEL EXPENSE REQUIREMENTS AND PERMITTED RATES OF REIMBURSEMENT:
A. General Requirements:
1. Village officers and employees are required to utilize all reasonable forms of technology, including, but not limited to, internet, teleconferencing and
webinars, to lessen travel expenses incurred.
2. The village shall reimburse allowable, authorized travel expenses for official business identified under section 1-8D-3 of this article and incurred in
the performance of village duties, conditioned on the financial ability of the village and within the budgetary constraints established by the corporate
authorities.
3. Village officials and employees shall exercise good judgment and proper regard for public funds when incurring travel expenses and when
representing the village, by only authorizing the minimum number of staff necessary when travel is required. Personal items and other
nonbusiness/nonprofessional related expenses are not reimbursable. Personnel policies apply when conducting village business, regardless of
location.
4. In order to minimize the village's total cost per trip, village officers and employees are encouraged to maximize the use of reduced fare promotions.
While travelers are not normally permitted to leave early or stay longer than designated business requires at village expense, they are encouraged to
take advantage of reduced fares whenever possible. This may mean leaving in advance, or possibly staying longer. The total cost savings should
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 41/416
take into account lost productivity if normal working time is missed. This lengthened stay may be permissible when it can be documented that the net
effect is a lower total cost for a trip. This cost saving statement shall be entered on the travel authorization form.
5. Persons receiving reimbursement for all incurred expenses shall not receive reimbursement for the same expense from any other public or private
source. Officers or employees who sign claims for reimbursement of expenses or who request payment of charges that have been incurred on a
credit card or by any other means shall certify that they are the individuals that incurred the expense and that the village is the only entity that will
receive a claim for reimbursement of the specific expense.
B. Transportation Expenses:
1. Mode Of Transportation: Usual local and long distance modes of transportation to destinations authorized for travel in the course of village business
include automobiles, airlines, railroads, buses, taxicabs, rideshare services and limousines. In all cases, travel should be by the most economical
mode of transportation available, considering travel time and work requirements.
2. Routing Of Travel: Travel shall be by the most direct route. Travel by other routes is allowed when required by the individual's official duties, safety
considerations and unusual circumstances. Expenses due to deviations for convenience shall be borne by the officer or employee. Explanations of
unusual circumstances shall be reflected in the comment section of the travel expense reimbursement form. Higher cost travel interruptions for
individual convenience are not reimbursable.
3. Commercial Transportation: Individuals will be reimbursed for actual and necessary costs of transportation by airline, railroad or other common
carrier following these guidelines:
a. Commercial Common Carriers: Use of common carriers such as airlines, trains and buses will be reimbursed at actual cost, not to exceed coach
fare. Upgrades to higher fares and first class travel will only be considered in emergencies and must be preapproved by the village board and
supported by a written statement detailing the circumstances that created the extraordinary expenditure. In all cases, a traveler shall attempt to
secure the lowest fare available given scheduling requirements.
b. Taxicab And Ridesharing Service Fares: Taxicab and ridesharing service (such as Uber, Lyft, etc.) fares are reimbursable at the actual cost of the
fare. Receipts for fares are required for reimbursement. If free van, bus or shuttle service is available and convenient, they are recommended for
use in lieu of taxicabs or ridesharing services.
c. Limousine: Use of a limousine service is reimbursable when there is an economic cost benefit compared to the use of alternative transportation,
including parking costs, and must be approved by the village administrator in advance. Limousine services will not be reimbursed where it can be
demonstrated that use of other transportation can be more cost effective.
d. Vehicle Rentals: A rental vehicle is not to be used as a personal convenience. The rental of an automobile while on travel status is allowed, if
circumstances require. Rental vehicle reimbursement is limited to:
(1) A situation that occurs where the traveler's final geographic destination is remote to the transportation terminal and there is no other cost
effective conveyance from the common carrier terminal.
(2) A situation where there are three (3) or more village travelers and it is cost effective to rent a vehicle in lieu of the total actual round trip cost of
the taxi, limousine, etc., for each traveler.
(3) A situation where timely flight connections can only be made by utilizing a short term car rental.
The most economical vehicle available that is suitable for the village's business shall be obtained. The collision damage waiver and personal
accident insurance on rented vehicles are not reimbursable. Vehicle rentals must be identified on the travel authorization form and preapproved
by the village administrator. Failure to receive preapproval may result in nonreimbursement.
4. Private Conveyance: The use of a privately owned means of transportation for village business is permitted when such use is necessary or desirable
due to a lack of other convenient means of transportation, or is otherwise advantageous to the village.
5. Personal Automobiles: Use of personal automobiles for travel will be reimbursed for miles driven at the rate established by the internal revenue
service ("IRS") standard mileage rate for business in effect at the time of travel. The IRS mileage rate is intended to cover the following expenses:
gasoline, normal wear and tear on the vehicle, insurance, and any vehicle damage. In the case of a vehicle accident, the employee's insurance
policy will be considered to be the primary insurance coverage.
a. Mileage reimbursement for personal automobile use is limited to travel outside of the village. The official or employee is required to document the
mileage by providing a printout from a reliable map source (i.e., MapQuest, Google Earth, Yahoo Maps, etc.) and must attach the printout to the
travel expense reimbursement form.
b. When two (2) or more employees travel in one vehicle, reimbursement will be made to only one employee. The names of all travelers shall be
indicated on the travel expense reimbursement form.
c. Where a personal automobile is used, the mileage allowance is not to exceed the related cost of coach airfare. Reimbursement shall be limited to
the lower of coach airfare or actual miles driven times the prevailing IRS standard mileage rate.
d. Employees using personal automobiles for travel on village business must have insurance coverage in an amount not less than that required by
section 10-101(b) of the Illinois vehicle code2. The village administrator shall require employees to file a statement certifying that they are duly
licensed and carry at least the minimum insurance coverage.
6. Village Vehicles: Village vehicles may be used for local travel. Village vehicles should not be used for out of state trips where the final destination is
more than one hundred (100) miles outside of the village, unless it is shown to be the cheaper transportation alternative. Gasoline required for the
continued use of a village vehicle where the village's gas pump cannot be used is reimbursable at the actual cost of the expense with receipts
required.
7. Incidental Auto Expenses: Certain costs associated with the use of personal or village vehicles are reimbursable, as follows:
a. The cost of automobile parking fees, bridge, road and tunnel tolls shall be allowed at the actual cost. The fee for parking a vehicle at a common
carrier terminal, or other parking area, while the traveler is away shall be allowed only to the extent that the fees, plus the allowable mileage
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 42/416
reimbursement to and from the terminal area, does not exceed the estimated cost for use of a limousine or taxicab to and from the terminal.
Receipts or a printout of an I-PASS account showing time and date are acceptable for reimbursement of tolls paid.
8. Excessive Reimbursement: Reimbursement for transportation in excess of the rates established in this section must be authorized in advance and
approved for reimbursement by the corporate authorities by a roll call vote at an open meeting of the corporate authorities.
C. Lodging Expenses:
1. It is the responsibility of each village officer and employee to request the lowest available lodging rate at the time of making reservations. However, a
person who due to a handicap may require special lodging consideration may be reimbursed for the actual cost of the least costly lodging that is
substantially accessible. Special seminar, conference or government rates shall be sought.
2. Lodging reimbursement shall be at actual cost consistent with facilities available and proximity to the location of a conference, seminar or business
meeting. Where multiple occupancy involving a spouse and/or other family members has occurred, the village officer or employee may only claim the
actual and necessary cost of his or her single occupancy at a single rate. If no single rate exists, the lowest double rate shall be reimbursed.
3. Lodging provided by a friend, relative or noninvoicing organization is not reimbursable.
4. The number of nights for which an employee may obtain reimbursement will be limited to the number necessary to conduct village business, unless
the officer or employee is utilizing a reduced fare promotion in accordance with this section. For those conferences or meetings that begin in the
morning, arrival the night before is reimbursable. For conferences or meetings that end after five o'clock (5:00) P.M., lodging expenses for that night
will also be reimbursed. Employees are encouraged to return home on the final day of the conference whenever possible.
5. Longer stays where lodging is reimbursable are permitted if they result in a significant savings in travel costs, and must be preapproved by the
village administrator (see section 1-8D-4 of this article). The employee requesting the reimbursement must document the net savings if longer stays
are requested, including the lodging expense and meals. Lost work time should also be taken into account when calculating the cost savings.
6. It is not considered prudent to use public funds for overnight lodging within a seventy five (75) mile radius of the village; therefore, it is not normally
reimbursed. Exceptions to this policy would be:
a. If documented business meetings extend past eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. and then resume again at eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. the next morning.
Business meetings, in this instance, do not include dinners, receptions or social functions sponsored for attendees during the evening hours.
Employees may attend these functions, at their own expense, and if they choose to remain away from home overnight, lodging expenses will not
be reimbursed. Prior approval of the corporate authorities must be obtained for any planned overnight stay within the seventy five (75) mile radius.
Failure to gain prior approval may result in nonreimbursement.
b. If weather conditions make a return trip unsafe, then an overnight stay may be reimbursable.
7. For each day of an overnight stay, one personal telephone call of reasonable duration will be reimbursed on a lodging bill, telephone credit card or
separate cell phone bill. Necessary business calls will be reimbursable.
8. Personal items such as movie rentals, clothes cleaning, etc., are not reimbursable.
9. Reimbursement for lodging in excess of the per diem rates published by the U.S. general services administration (GSA) domestic per diem rates
(effective October 1 of each year) (see www.gsa.gov/perdiem) must be authorized in advance and approved for reimbursement by the corporate
authorities by a roll call vote at an open meeting of the corporate authorities.
D. Meal Expenses: Expenses for breakfast, lunch and dinner amounts will be reimbursed in accordance with the meals and incidental expenses (M&IE)
breakdown established by the GSA (see www.gsa.gov). Reimbursement for expenses for meals shall not exceed the per diem amounts set forth in the
published U.S. general services administration (GSA) domestic per diem rates (effective October 1 of each year) (see www.gsa.gov/perdiem). The
meals and incidental expense (M&IE) rate will be paid based on the destination location of authorized travel.
1. Breakfast is reimbursable when an officer or employee is traveling and leaves the village or his or her personal residence (if reporting directly to the
destination) at or before six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
2. Lunch is reimbursable when an officer or employee is traveling and leaves the village or his or her personal residence (if reporting directly to the
destination) at or before twelve o'clock (12:00) noon.
3. Dinner is reimbursable when an officer or employee is traveling and arrives back at the village offices or his or her personal residence (if reporting
directly from destination) at or after seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. For employees commencing travel after close of business, but before six thirty o'clock
(6:30) P.M., dinner reimbursement is allowed if the traveler would not be eligible for per diem.
4. Reimbursement for meals in excess of the per diem rates published by the U.S. general services administration (GSA) domestic per diem rates
(effective October 1 of each year) (see www.gsa.gov/perdiem) must be authorized in advance and approved for reimbursement by the corporate
authorities by a roll call vote at an open meeting of the corporate authorities.
E. Special Expenses:
1. Registration Fees And Materials Related To Professional/Educational Activities:
a. Actual registration fee expenditure and reimbursement is allowed for authorized attendance of professional/educational activities, with prior
approval by the village administrator. Advance registration should be used where the amount of the registration fee increases as the date of the
event approaches.
b. Books and related materials such as conference tapes are reimbursable costs. The items purchased shall become the property of the village.
2. Service Tips: Tips for services provided during travel not associated with meals (or requested elsewhere) shall be included for reimbursement on the
travel expense reimbursement form. An officer or employee may request reimbursement up to twenty percent (20%) for documented tips and up to
five dollars ($5.00) for undocumented tips.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 43/416
3. Village Business Meetings: The cost of village business related to special expenses incurred while hosting a meeting shall be reimbursable, when
authorized by the village administrator in advance and if reasonable, well documented and budgeted.
a. All special expenses shall be itemized and fully documented to include the actual village business transacted and the individuals and their
affiliation. The actual cost of meals for other persons incurred in connection with official village business shall be allowed.
b. To be eligible for meal reimbursement of a guest, village business must have been discussed during the meal or immediately preceding or
following the meal.
c. Two (2) or more village employees dining together and discussing business will not constitute a reimbursable business meal.
d. Actual receipts are required to document reimbursements. (Ord. O-27-16, 11-14-2016)
1-8D-7: NONREIMBURSABLE EXPENSES:
The following expenses are nonreimbursable:
A. Alcoholic beverages;
B. Coat check;
C. Entertainment;
D. Late checkout and room guarantee charges;
E. Meals for other individuals, including other village employees or officers;
F. Parking tickets or other traffic tickets;
G. Tips incurred beyond those specifically authorized in this article; and
H. Travel, meals, lodging or other expenses not authorized and approved for reimbursement according to this article. (Ord. O-27-16, 11-14-2016)
1-8D-8: TRAVEL AUTHORIZATION FORM:
A. Village officers and employees shall use the following travel authorization form to request that travel, meal or lodging be authorized for reimbursement:
Village of Forest Park
Travel Authorization Form
NOTE: A Travel Expense Reimbursement Form must be filed no later than ten (10) days after return.
Traveler's Name:
Department/Job Title:
Destination:
(City) (State)
Purpose
Period of Absence: Depart Date Return Date
Estimated Cost
REGISTRATION FEES (Attach copy of Registration Form)
Village VISA Card Direct Pay* Reimbursement $
TRANSPORTATION METHOD
Village VISA Card Direct Pay* Reimbursement $
Airline: $
Ground: Village Vehicle (Fuel Reimbursement Only) $
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 44/416
Personal Vehicle miles @ current IRS rate/mile (Calendar Year 20 ) $
Other - Describe $
LODGING
Hotel
Single Room Rate $ x # of nights $
Village VISA Card Direct Pay* Reimbursement $
MEALS (Do not include if part of registration fee or if otherwise provided)
Breakfast(s) = GSA Rate $
Lunch(es) = GSA Rate $
Dinner(s) = GSA Rate $
OTHER EXPENSES (Travelers will be reimbursed for actual costs of receipts)
Fares (Taxi, Ferry, etc.) $
Tolls $
Parking $
Other $
TOTAL ESTIMATED COSTS: $
CALCULATION OF REDUCED FARE PROMOTION SAVINGS
Reduced Fare Savings (Subtract cost of Normal Fare from Reduced Fare) $
Cost of missed work (Multiply rate of pay times work time missed) $
(Attach Separate Illustrating Calculations)
TOTAL REDUCED FARE COST SAVINGS: $
Employee Name (Print)
Signature
Department
Approved: Date
(Department Head)
Approved: Date
(Village Administrator)
ATTACH A COPY OF THIS FORM
WITH YOUR TRAVEL EXPENSE REIMBURSEMENT FORM
B. The travel authorization form shall at a minimum contain the following information:
1. An estimate of the cost of travel, meals, or lodging;
2. The name of the individual who is requesting the travel, meal, or lodging expense;
3. The job title or office of the individual who is requesting the travel, meal, or lodging expense; and
4. The date or dates and nature of the official business in which the travel, meal, or lodging expense will be expended. (Ord. O-27-16, 11-14-2016)
1-8D-9: TRAVEL EXPENSE REIMBURSEMENT FORM:
A. Village officers and employees shall use the following travel expense reimbursement form to request approval for reimbursement of travel, meal or
lodging expenses:
Village of Forest Park
Travel Expense Reimbursement Form
The following is a true and correct statement of travel expenses while on official business for the Village of Forest Park.
Traveler's Name:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 45/416
Department/Job Title:
Destination:
(City) (State)
Purpose
Period of Absence: Depart Date Return Date
Other Individuals Traveling with Traveler
Village
VISA Card
Reimbursement Total
REGISTRATION FEES (Attach copy of receipt)
$ $ $
TRANSPORTATION METHOD (Attach paid receipts when applicable)
Airline:
$ $ $
Ground: Village Vehicle (Fuel Reimbursement Only)
$ $ $
Personal Vehicle miles @ IRS Rate (attach map printout)
$ $ $
Other - Describe
$ $ $
LODGING (Do not include if prepaid)
Hotel
Single Room Rate $ x # of nights $ $ $
MEALS (Travelers will be reimbursed for actual costs not to exceed:)
Breakfast(s) = GSA Rate $ $ $
Lunch(es) = GSA Rate $ $ $
Dinner(s) = GSA Rate $ $ $
OTHER EXPENSES (Travelers will be reimbursed for actual costs of attached receipts)
Fares (Taxi, Ferry, etc.) $ $ $
Tolls $ $ $
Parking $ $ $
Other $ $ $
TOTAL COSTS: $ $ $
Certified Correct
I hereby certify that the expenses for which I seek reimbursement, as set forth above, were actually incurred by me and that no other person or
agency has reimbursed me for said expenses.
Employee Name (Print)
Signature
Department
Charge To:
Check Payable To:
Approved: Date
(Department Head)
Approved: Date
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 46/416
(Finance Director)
ATTACH A COPY OF YOUR TRAVEL AUTHORIZATION FORM TO THIS FORM
B. The travel expense reimbursement form shall at a minimum contain the following information:
1. A receipt of the cost of travel, meals, or lodging;
2. The name of the individual who incurred the travel, meal, or lodging expense;
3. The job title or office of the individual who incurred the travel, meal, or lodging expense; and
4. The date or dates and nature of the official business in which the travel, meal, or lodging expense was expended.
C. Copies (or originals, if available) of receipts must be submitted as documentation in order for expenses to be reimbursable. In all cases, the detailed
lodging bill and actual transportation ticket are required. Cash tips are to be included on the specific reimbursement line on the travel expense report
and must be in compliance with section 1-8D-6 of this article.
D. All receipts must show method of payment and that the services were paid for in full. For noncash payments, receipt must show the name of the payee.
(Ord. O-27-16, 11-14-2016)
1-8D-10: DISCLOSURE UNDER THE FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT:
All documents and information submitted under this article are public records subject to disclosure under the freedom of information act. (Ord. O-27-16, 11-
14-2016)
1-8D-11: VIOLATIONS:
Any village officer or employee who violates a provision of this article, fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who submits a false travel
authorization form, travel expense reimbursement form or any false or altered document in support of a travel authorization form or a travel expense
reimbursement form shall be subject to one or more of the following:
A. Denial of reimbursement for the expense incurred;
B. For village employees, disciplinary action, up to and including termination of employment; and/or
C. A fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. (Ord. O-27-16, 11-14-2016)
1-8D-12: SUPERSEDES PRIOR POLICIES:
This travel expense reimbursement policy of the village supersedes any prior policy or past practice of the village with respect to reimbursement of travel
expenses. (Ord. O-27-16, 11-14-2016)
Chapter 9
VILLAGE AFFAIRS AND OTHER PROVISIONS
1-9-1: CORPORATE SEAL:
The corporate seal of the village shall be circular in form and be so constructed as to impress upon paper the words Village of Forest Park, Cook County,
IL, within a circle formed by a circle, and the words Corporate Seal, and a reproduction of the village logo as approved by the village council. (Ord. O-34-
01, 8-13-2001)
1-9-2: MAPS AND PLATS:
A. Requirements: No map, plat or subdivision of any block, lot, sublot or part thereof, or any piece or parcel of land to be admitted within the corporate
limits of said village, shall be approved by the village council until all the following requirements have been complied with: All streets, alleys, avenues or
other public ways designated on such map, plat or subdivision shall be located as near as practicable to correspond and connect with the other
established streets, alleys, avenues or other public ways in the vicinity, and also to admit to proper grades, sewerage and surface drainage
conformable to any system of grades. All such streets, avenues, or other public ways shall be properly graded and drained in conformity therewith.
(Village Code § 2-12)
B. Form: Such map, plat or subdivision shall be acknowledged by the owner or owners of the land sought to be platted, as provided by the general laws of
the state of Illinois; said owners shall make oath that they believe that they are the owners in fee of the property described in said map or plat and shall
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 47/416
deposit with the village clerk, collector and comptroller a sufficient sum of money to pay the fees of the recorder of Cook County, Illinois, for recording
the same. (Village Code § 2-13)
1-9-3: VILLAGE DATUM:
The datum mentioned herein, from which all levels in the village shall be taken, shall be the village datum. Said village datum, for the purpose of
establishing grades and elevations, is fixed and hereby established, as a level plane, forty five and one-half feet (45.5') below the bench mark on top of
plane monument at thenortheast corner of Circle Avenue and Randolph Street, in the village of Forest Park, Cook County, Illinois. No person shall alter the
grade of any street, sidewalk or public way. (Village Code § 2-17)
1-9-4: VILLAGE JAIL:
It shall be the duty of the keeper of the jail to care for all prisoners committed to the jail and to put such persons committed for a violation of a state law or
local ordinance as are able to labor to the work which they are most suited; not to exceed eight (8) hours in any working day. Such person shall be allowed
for each day's work exclusive of his board, the sum of five dollars ($5.00) which shall be applied to the payment of the fine and costs imposed upon such
person. (Ord. O-14-63, 9-23-1963)
1-9-5: WHISTLEBLOWER REWARD AND PROTECTION ACT ADOPTED:
The provisions of the whistleblower reward and protection act, 740 Illinois Compiled Statutes 175/1 et seq., are adopted by the village of Forest Park. (Ord.
O-44-05, 9-12-2005)
Chapter 10
ADMINISTRATION OF THE PUBLIC SAFETY EMPLOYEE BENEFITS ACT
1-10-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a fair and efficient method of determining the eligibility of an employee for the benefits enumerated under the
Public Safety Employee Benefits Act, 820 Illinois Compiled Statutes 320/1 et seq., ("PSEBA"), through an administrative process including, if necessary,
an administrative hearing. All benefits provided under this chapter will be consistent with PSEBA. (Ord. O-19-18, 7-9-2018)
1-10-2: POLICY AND PROCEDURE FOR ADMINISTERING APPLICATIONS FOR PSEBA BENEFITS:
A. Application For PSEBA Benefits: The Village shall maintain a PSEBA benefit application form which shall be the standard form required for a PSEBA
benefit applicant (hereinafter the "applicant") to request benefits under PSEBA. The form shall be completed pursuant to the instructions on the
application and delivered to the Village Administrator for review and consideration. The applicant shall provide, along with the application and the
required information therein, any medical records regarding the injury, any decisions by a governing Public Safety Pension Board and supporting
documentation related to such Pension Board decisions, and any additional pertinent documentation that the applicant wants to have considered or
that is requested by the Village.
The PSEBA benefit application form must be signed, sworn and notarized to certify the truthfulness of the content of the information contained in the
completed application. The application shall also include a PSEBA medical authorization release and a PSEBA general information release, executed
and notarized by the applicant. Both the PSEBA medical release and the PSEBA general information release authorize the collection of information
related to the incident that qualifies the applicant for benefits under PSEBA, including, but not limited to, the disability pension proceedings, workers'
compensation records and medical records. The Village Administrator's review of the PSEBA benefit application will not occur until the application is
complete including the completion of the PSEBA medical authorization release and a PSEBA general information release.
Applicant must file a complete and executed PSEBA benefit application no later than thirty (30) days from the date of the governing Safety Pension
Board's granting of a line-of-duty disability pension or within thirty (30) days of the date of the adoption of this chapter, whichever is later. Failure to
timely file a full and complete application will result in the forfeiture of benefits under PSEBA.
B. Application Review Process:
1. When the Village Administrator receives a complete and executed application, the Village Administrator shall review the application and engage in
such additional fact-finding and/or investigation as may be deemed necessary or appropriate to evaluate the application, including, but not limited to
the review of Public Safety Pension Board hearing transcripts and decisions, workers' compensation documentation, and independent medical
examinations. If additional fact-finding and/or investigation is determined to be necessary, applicant shall fully cooperate. If applicant refuses or
otherwise fails to fully cooperate, then the application for PSEBA benefits shall be deemed withdrawn.
2. If additional fact-finding and/or investigation set forth above is determined to be necessary by the Village Administrator, the applicant shall fully
cooperate. If the applicant refuses or otherwise fails to fully cooperate, then a written notice shall be sent to the applicant reiterating the duty of full
cooperation in the fact-finding and/or investigation process. If the applicant fails to cooperate as requested within twenty one (21) calendar days after
service of such notice, then the application for PSEBA benefits shall be deemed withdrawn.
3. a. The Village Administrator shall make an initial determination, with a copy to applicant, within forty five (45) calendar days after the later of the
following:
(1) The submission of all documentation relevant to the application; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 48/416
(2) The completion of such additional fact-finding or investigation as deemed necessary or appropriate by the Village Administrator (as stated in
subsection B2 of this section).
b. The Village Administrator's written determination may include:
(1) Applicant is ineligible for benefits under PSEBA and application is denied;
(2) Applicant is eligible for benefits under PSEBA; or
(3) A hearing as set forth in subsection 1-10-3C of this chapter should be convened in order to determine whether or not applicant is eligible for
benefits under PSEBA.
4. If the Village Administrator denies benefits under PSEBA based on the preliminary record, the applicant shall have the right to request a hearing, as
set forth in section 1-10-3 of this chapter, by submitting a written request for such hearing to the Village Administrator within thirty (30) calendar days
from the date of the Village Administrator initial determination. (Ord. O-19-18, 7-9-2018)
1-10-3: POLICY AND PROCEDURE FOR HEARINGS FOR PSEBA BENEFITS:
If the Village Administrator makes the determination that a hearing should be convened or the applicant requests a hearing, the Village Administrator shall
convene a hearing which shall be overseen by a Hearing Officer, appointed by the Village Administrator, as set forth in subsection B of this section, whose
power and authority and limitations are as follows:
A. Power Of The Hearing Officer: The Hearing Officer shall have all of the powers granted to him or her under common law relative to the conduct of an
administrative hearing including the power to:
1. Preside over the administrative hearing;
2. Administer oaths;
3. Hear testimony and accept evidence that is relevant to the issue of eligibility under PSEBA;
4. Issue subpoenas to secure attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant papers or documents upon the request of the parties or their
representatives;
5. Rule upon objections presented at the administrative hearing;
6. Preserve and authenticate the record of the hearing and all exhibits in evidence introduced at the hearing;
7. Issue a determination based on the evidence presented at the hearing, the determination of which shall be in writing and shall include a written
finding of facts, decision and order.
B. Hearing Officer: The Village Administrator is authorized to appoint a Hearing Officer for each administrative hearing held under this chapter. A Hearing
Officer must be an attorney who is licensed to practice law in Illinois. In making the appointment, the Village Administrator must consider the
candidate's ability to perform the requirements of a Hearing Officer and his or her knowledge and experience in administrative practice, the rules of
evidence, civil procedure, and laws concerning PSEBA and other benefits for public-safety employees.
C. Administrative Hearing: An administrative hearing shall be held, under the guidelines set forth below, to adjudicate and determine whether applicant is
eligible for benefits under PSEBA. If applicant is found eligible, the benefits shall be consistent with PSEBA.
1. Time And Date: The Village shall notify applicant of the administrative hearing pursuant to a written notice served upon applicant via U.S. mail, at
least ten (10) calendar days prior to the scheduled hearing. Such notice will indicate the date, time and place that the hearing will be held, as
established by the Village, along with the name and contact information of the Hearing Officer who will preside at the hearing. If applicant cannot
attend said hearing on the date or time as indicated in the notice, applicant must contact the Hearing Officer within seven (7) business days of
service of the notice to coordinate an alternative hearing date. Failure to coordinate an alternative date or appear at the scheduled hearing may
result in the denial of PSEBA benefits.
2. Record: All hearings shall be attended by a certified court reporter who shall make a transcript of all proceedings.
3. Procedures: The Village, by the Mayor or his or her designee, and applicant shall be parties to the administrative proceedings and each shall be
entitled to representation by counsel at the administrative hearing. Each party may present witnesses, may present testimony and documents, may
cross-examine opposing witnesses, and may request the issuance of subpoenas to compel the appearance of relevant witnesses or the production
of relevant documents.
4. Evidence: The rules of evidence as set forth in the Illinois Code of Evidence shall apply unless, by such application, the Hearing Officer determines
that application of the rule would be an injustice or preclude the introduction of evidence of the type commonly relied upon by a reasonably prudent
person in the conduct of her or his affairs. Such determination shall be in the sole discretion of the Hearing Officer.
5. Determination: Within ninety (90) days from the conclusion of the administrative hearing, the Hearing Officer shall issue a determination of whether
the petitioning applicant is eligible for benefits under PSEBA. This determination shall be in writing and shall include a written finding of facts,
decision and order. The determination by the Hearing Officer shall constitute a final administrative determination for the purpose of judicial review
under the common law writ of certiorari.
6. Acknowledgment Of Determination: The Hearing Officer's determination shall be presented to the Mayor and Village Council at the next regularly
scheduled Village Council meeting (subject to the notice provisions of the Open Meetings Act). At that meeting, the Mayor and Village Council shall:
a. Accept the Hearing Officer's determination, by resolution; or
b. Decide, by motion, to timely appeal the Hearing Officer's determination to the appropriate Circuit Court for judicial review regarding whether or not
applicant is eligible and qualified for benefits under PSEBA. Once the court (either the Circuit Court or any subsequent appellate court if the matter
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 49/416
is appealed further by either party) makes a final decision regarding whether or not applicant is eligible for benefits under PSEBA, the Mayor and
Village Council shall, by resolution, acknowledge and accept the court's final decision.
7. Burden Of Proof: Applicant shall have the obligation and burden of proof to establish that applicant is eligible and qualified to receive PSEBA
benefits. The standard of proof in all hearings conducted under this chapter shall be by the preponderance of the evidence.
8. Administrative Records: All records pertaining to the administrative process will be held within the Office of the Village Clerk, in a file in the Public
Safety Officer's name, separate from the employee's personnel file. (Ord. O-19-18, 7-9-2018)
Title 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Chapter 1
PLAN COMMISSION
2-1-1: COMMISSION CREATED; MEMBERS:
By virtue of the authority of the statutes of the state of Illinois, there is hereby created for the village a plan commission, which shall consist of five (5)
members who shall be residents of the village and serve for a period of five (5) years, and who shall be appointed by the mayor, by and with the consent of
the village council, to serve without compensation. One member shall be designated as chair, and a vice chair and secretary shall be elected by the
commission. (Ord. O-11-02, 3-25-2002)
2-1-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The general duties of the plan commission shall be as follows:
A. To prepare and recommend to the village council a comprehensive plan of public improvements, looking to the present and future development and
growth of the village. Such plan shall include reasonable requirements in reference to streets, alleys and public grounds within the corporate limits, and
in contiguous territory outside of, but not more than, one and one-half (11/2) miles from such limits and not included within any municipality1; such
requirements to be effective whenever such lands shall be subdivided. This plan, after its adoption by the village council, will be known as the official
plan of Forest Park.
B. To prepare and recommend to the council such changes in the official plan as may be deemed necessary.
C. To prepare and recommend to the village council plans for specific improvements in pursuance of such plans.
D. To give aid to the officials of the village, charged with the direction of projects for improvements embraced within the official plan; to further the making
of these projects and generally to promote the realization of the official plan.
E. To exercise such other powers as may be conferred by the corporate authorities. (Village Code § 1-78)
Chapter 2
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
2-2-1: CREATION AND MEMBERSHIP:
Pursuant to the authority contained in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-13-3, there is hereby created a zoning board of appeals for the village. The zoning
board of appeals shall consist of seven (7) members. All terms shall be for a period of five (5) years. The members shall be residents of the village and
shall be appointed by the mayor, by and with the consent of the village council, to serve without compensation. The mayor shall designate one of the
members to act as chair, and the members shall designate other officers of the board. The mayor and village council shall have the power to remove any
member of the board for cause and after public hearing. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of the member whose place has become vacant.
(Ord. O-15-02, 3-25-2002)
2-2-2: MEETINGS AND PROCEEDINGS:
All meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chair and at such other times as the board may determine. There shall be at least fifteen (15) days'
but not more than thirty (30) days' notice of the time and place of such meeting published in a paper published in the village, or if no newspaper is
published in Forest Park, then in a newspaper with a general circulation in Forest Park, said notice to contain a statement of the particular purpose of such
meeting and a brief description of the location of the property under consideration at such meeting. All meetings of the board shall be open to the public.
The chair or, in his absence, the acting chair, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. The board shall keep minutes of its
proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon every question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall also keep records of its
examinations and other official actions. Findings of fact shall be included in the minutes of each case of a requested variation, and the reasons for granting
or denying such variation shall be specified. Every rule, regulation, every amendment or repeal thereof, and every order, requirement, decision or
determination of the board shall immediately be filed in the office of the board and shall be a public record. The board shall adopt its own rules for
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 50/416
procedure not in conflict with the statute in such case made and provided, and may select or appoint such officers as it deems necessary. (Ord. O-17-97,
12-8-1997)
Chapter 3
BOARD OF FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSIONERS
2-3-1: BOARD CREATED:
A. State Law To Govern: There shall be, and is hereby created, a board of fire and police commissioners whose personnel, duties, tenure of office, powers
and qualifications shall be such as are, from time to time, fixed by the statutes of the state of Illinois1.
B. Officers: Said board of fire and police commissioners may appoint a secretary who shall hold office until a successor is appointed by said board, and
whose compensation shall be fixed by the annual appropriation ordinance of the village.
C. Indemnification: The village will defend the members of the board of fire and police commissioners in any actions instituted against such members and
save harmless and indemnify them from judgments entered in any such action arising out of and while engaged in their official capacity and acting in
connection with their duties as members of said board. (Ord. O-1-77, 1-10-1977)
Chapter 4
RECREATION BOARD
2-4-1: BOARD CREATED:
There is hereby established a recreation board for the village composed of seven (7) members, to be appointed by the mayor with the consent of the
village council. All members shall be residents of the village and shall serve for a period of five (5) years. Appointments shall be made so that in each five
(5) year period, the terms of three (3) members shall expire in one year, and the term of one member shall expire in each of the remaining four (4) years.
The members shall serve without compensation. If a vacancy occurs in the office of any board member, the mayor shall appoint a successor to serve for
the unexpired term. The commissioner of public property and director of public works shall be ex officio members of said board. (Ord. O-24-06, 3-27-2006)
2-4-2: DUTIES:
The mission of the recreation board is to influence the maintenance, safety and improvement of village parks and playgrounds. The board shall design,
create and implement a park and playground safety program consisting of regular and structured inspections of village parks and playgrounds. Inspections
shall be made by voting board members and findings logged and reported to the full board for discussion and resolution. Where immediate action is
required, the board members shall make such report directly to the director of public works. The board shall act as a conduit through which residents may
communicate with the department of public property as to concerns, requests and comments regarding the village parks and playgrounds and shall be
accountable to the commissioner of public property who shall be the village council liaison. (Ord. O-36-04, 9-13-2004)
2-4-3: TAX IMPOSED:
The village council shall annually levy a tax as provided by law for playgrounds and recreation purposes1. (Village Code § 1-73)
2-4-4: REPORTS:
Within fifteen (15) days after the expiration of the fiscal year of the village, the recreation board shall make a report as of the last day of the fiscal year, to
the village council. This report shall be in writing and shall be verified under oath, by the secretary or some other responsible officer of the board. It shall
contain:
A. An itemized statement of the various sums of money received from the playground and recreation tax and from other sources;
B. An itemized statement of the objects and purposes for which such sums of money have been expended;
C. A statement of the real and personal property acquired by devise, bequest, purchase or otherwise;
D. A statement of the character of any extensions of playground and recreation service that have been undertaken;
E. A statement of the financial requirements of the recreation board for the ensuing fiscal year; rate of tax which, in the judgment of the recreation board, it
will be necessary to levy for recreation and playground purposes; and
F. Any other information and recommendations that may be of interest. (Village Code § 1-74)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 51/416
Chapter 5
FINANCE COMMISSION
2-5-1: COMMISSION CREATED; MEMBERS:
There is hereby created for the village a finance commission which shall consist of eleven (11) members who shall serve for a period of five (5) years. The
members shall be appointed by the mayor upon the recommendation of the commissioner of accounts and finance and with the consent of the village
council, to serve without compensation. One member shall be designated as chair, and the other officers shall be chosen by the commission.
The residency requirement for the finance commission shall not apply to any commission member who, in the discretion of the mayor and commissioner of
accounts and finance, possesses technical training, knowledge or experience which will enhance the composition of the commission. (Ord. O-14-02, 3-25-
2002)
2-5-2: TERMS; MEETINGS:
A. The members of the finance commission shall serve at the pleasure of the village council without compensation but the members may be reimbursed
for personal expenses incurred in the performance of their duties.
B. Meetings of the commission shall be held monthly at such times and places as the commission shall from time to time direct. (Ord. O-4-71, 6-12-1971)
2-5-3: DUTIES:
The commission shall perform and exercise the following functions:
A. Upon request, cooperate with the village council and appropriate officials of departments of the village in connection with the financial matters and
activities of the village.
B. Recommend to the appropriate bodies politic such legislation as it may deem appropriate to carry out the functions of the commission.
C. Suggest consultation and cooperation with appropriate governmental and private agencies, groups or individuals in order to obtain professional advice
and recommendations affecting thefiscal matters of the village.
D. Upon request, to conduct public hearings, carry on research, and otherwise obtain pertinent data and make appropriate recommendations on the
financial conduct and policies of the village.
E. Make periodic reports of its activities as it deems necessary to the village council.
F. Carry out such other functions as may be delegated to it by the village council.
G. The services of all official departments and agencies of the village shall be made available to the commission upon request. (Ord. O-4-71, 6-12-1971)
Chapter 6
SAFETY AND TRAFFIC CONTROL COMMISSION
2-6-1: COMMISSION CREATED; MEMBERS:
There is hereby created for the village a safety and traffic control commission, which shall consist of seven (7) members who shall be residents of the
village and serve for a period of four (4) years, and who shall be appointed by the mayor, by and with the consent of the village council, to serve without
compensation. (Ord. O-9-02, 3-25-2002)
2-6-2: DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the safety and traffic control commission, when requested by the village council, to recommend rules and regulations concerning,
affecting or relating to the operations of motor and other vehicles on the public highways and elsewhere in the village, and licensing thereof; the rights and
duties of drivers thereof, and of pedestrians; and the permissible size and lead of vehicles; location and operation of traffic and other signs and signals on
streets and highways; safety zones in certain streets and all other matters pertaining to such objects. (Village Code § 1-65; amd. 2004 Code)
Chapter 7
BOARD OF HEALTH
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 52/416
2-7-1: BOARD CREATED; MEMBERS:
There is hereby created for the village a board of health, which shall consist of five (5) members, one of whom shall serve as president of the board and
one as secretary of the board. All members shall be residents of the village and shall serve for a period of five (5) years. The members shall be appointed
by the mayor upon the recommendation of the commissioner of health and safety, by and with the consent of the village council, to serve without
compensation. (Ord. O-10-02, 3-25-2002)
2-7-2: DUTIES:
The board shall adopt such rules and regulations as it may deem proper for the conduct of its work, and shall have the management and control of all
matters and things relating to the public health of the village, and shall also exercise those duties and powers conferred upon it by the statutes of the state
of Illinois1 and the ordinances of the village. (Village Code §§ 1-75, 1-76)
Chapter 8
ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROL COMMISSION
2-8-1: COMMISSION CREATED; MEMBERS:
There is hereby created a commission to be known as the environmental control commission consisting of as many members as the village council may
deem necessary. (Ord. O-4-71, 6-12-1971)
2-8-2: TERMS; MEETINGS:
A. The members of the commission shall serve at the pleasure of the village council without compensation.
B. Meetings of the commission shall be held monthly at such times and places as the commission shall from time to time direct. (Ord. O-4-71, 6-12-1971)
2-8-3: DUTIES:
The commission shall serve to promote and ensure the cleanliness of water and air; study and make recommendations to the village council on all other
matters related to the environment of the community. (Ord. O-4-71, 6-12-1971)
Chapter 9
LIBRARY BOARD
2-9-1: LIBRARY AND BOARD ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established a free public library for the village which shall be under the supervision of a library board, whose number, selection, tenure of
office, powers and duties shall conform to the statutes of the state of Illinois1. (Village Code § 1-67)
2-9-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
A. Tax Imposed: The village council shall annually levy a tax, as provided by law2, to operate the library. (Village Code § 1-68)
B. Prohibited Acts And Conditions:
1. Damaging Property: Any person who wilfully or maliciously damages any furniture, fixtures, books, or any other property belonging to the library
shall, upon conviction, be fined as provided in the general penalty in section 1-3-1 of this code. (Village Code § 1-69; amd. 2004 Code)
2. Failure To Return Property: It shall be unlawful for any person not to return any book, periodical, film or other returnable item within the time provided
by the library, or person having charge thereof, and upon conviction such person shall be fined as provided in the general penalty in section 1-3-1 of
this code. (Village Code § 1-70; amd. 2004 Code)
Chapter 10
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY
2-10-1: AGENCY ESTABLISHED:
The Forest Park emergency management agency is hereby created in accordance with the Illinois emergency management act1. It is further declared to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 53/416
be the purpose of this chapter and the policy of the village that all emergency management programs of this village be coordinated to the maximum extent
with the comparable programs of the state and federal governments, including various departments and agencies of other municipalities and private
agencies of every type, to the end that the most effective preparation and use may be made of the nation's resources and facilities for dealing with any
disaster that may occur. (Ord. O-7-96, 3-11-1996)
2-10-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following words and terms have the meaning ascribed to them in this section:
AGENCY: The department established in section 2-10-3 of this chapter within the village responsible for coordination of the overall emergency
management program of the village with private organizations, municipalities and the state and federal governments.
DIRECTOR: The person appointed by the village with the duty of coordinating the emergency management programs of the village.
DISASTER: An occurrence or threat of widespread or severe damage,injury or loss of life or property resulting from any natural or technological cause,
including, but not limited to, fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm, hazardous materials spill or other water contamination requiring emergency action to avert
danger or damage, epidemic, air contamination, blight, extended periods of severe and inclement weather, drought, infestation, critical shortages of
essential fuels and emergency, explosion, riot or hostile military or paramilitary action.
DISASTER TRAINING EXERCISE: A planned event designed specifically to stimulate an actual disaster that will provide emergency operations training
for emergency response personnel.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT: The efforts of the village to develop, plan, analyze, conduct, implement and maintain programs for disaster mitigation,
preparedness, response and recovery.
EMERGENCY OPERATIONS PLAN: The written plan of the village describing the organization, mission and functions of the government and supporting
services for responding to and recovering from disasters.
MOBILE SUPPORT TEAM: The utilization of personnel to be dispatched by the mayor or, if so authorized by the director, to supplement the state or
municipality for emergency management programs in response to a disaster.
VILLAGE: The village of Forest Park, Cook County, Illinois. (Ord. O-7-96, 3-11-1996)
2-10-3: DEPARTMENT OF EMERGENCY SERVICES:
A. Department Created: There is hereby created an agency and a director of the agency, herein called the director, who shall be the administrator thereof.
The agency is created to prevent, minimize, repair and alleviate injury or damage resulting from disaster inflicted upon this village, either by natural or
by technological causes in accordance with the Illinois emergency management act.
B. Director:
1. The department of emergency services shall consist of a director and additional members to be selected by the director.
2. The director of the agency shall be appointed by the village council, and shall serve until removed by same, subject to the direction and control of the
mayor. The director shall be the chief executive of the agency and shall be responsible, under the direction of the mayor, for carrying out the program
for emergency management of the village. The director shall have responsibility for the organization, administration, training and operation of the
agency.
3. In the event of the absence, resignation, death or inabilityto serve of the director, the mayor, or any person designated by the mayor, shall act as the
director until a new appointment is made, as provided in this chapter.
C. Agency Functions: The agency shall perform such functions within the village as prescribed in and by the act. In addition, the agency shall:
1. Coordinate the overall emergency management program of the village.
2. Cooperate with other local, state and federal governments and any public or private agency or entity in achieving any purpose of this chapter and in
implementing emergency management programs for mitigation, preparedness, response and recovery.
3. Prepare, for issuance by the mayor or village council, executive orders, proclamations and regulations as necessary or appropriate in coping with
disasters.
4. Review and update the emergency operations plan of the village and ensure that the contents of said plan are in compliance with state and federal
regulations.
5. Determine requirements of the village for food, clothing and other necessities in event of a disaster.
6. Expand the disaster awareness program and its efforts to distribute disaster preparedness materials to school, community groups, civic
organizations and the media.
7. Identify areas particularly vulnerable to disasters. (Ord. O-7-96, 3-11-1996)
2-10-4: PURCHASES AND EXPENDITURES:
A. The village council may, on recommendation of the director, authorize any purchase or contracts necessary to place the village in a position to
effectively combat any natural or manmade disaster, protect property and provide emergency assistance to victims in the case of such disaster.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 54/416
B. In the event of such disaster, the director is authorized, on behalf of the village, to procure such services, supplies, equipment or material as may be
necessary for such purposes in view of the emergency, without regard to statutory procedures or formalities normally prescribed by law pertaining to
municipal contracts or obligations; provided, that if the village council meets at such time, the director shall act subject to the directions and restrictions
imposed by the village council. (Ord. O-7-96, 3-11-1996)
2-10-5: COMPENSATION:
A. Members of the agency who are paid employees or officers of the village, if called for training by the director of the agency, shall receive for the time
spent in such training the same rate of pay as is attached to the position held.
B. Members who are not village employees or officers shall receive, for such training time, such compensation as may be established by the village
council. (Ord. O-7-96, 3-11-1996)
2-10-6: EMERGENCY POWERS OF MAYOR:
A. Emergency Management Powers: The mayor shall have general direction and control of the agency and shall be responsible for carrying out the
provisions of this chapter. In performing duties under this chapter, the mayor is further authorized to:
1. Make, amend and rescind all lawful necessary orders, rules and regulations to carry out the limits of the authority conferred upon the mayor.
2. Cause to be prepared a comprehensive plan and program for the emergency management of the village, which plan and program shall be integrated
into and coordinated with emergency management plans and programs of the county, state and federal governments whenever possible, and which
plan and program may include:
a. Mitigation of injury and damage caused by disaster;
b. Prompt and effective response to disaster;
c. Emergency relief;
d. Recommendations for zoning, building and other land use controls, safety measures for securing permanent structures and other mitigation
measures designed to eliminate or reduce disaster or its impact;
e. Authorization and procedures for the erection or other construction of temporary works designed to mitigate danger, damage or loss from flood or
other disaster; and
f. Other necessary matters.
B. Emergency Powers: In the event of a "disaster", as defined in section 2-10-2 of this chapter, the mayor may, by proclamation, declare that a disaster
exists. Upon such proclamation, the mayor shall have and may exercise for a period not to exceed seven (7) days, the following emergency powers:
1. To utilize all available resources of the village government as reasonably necessary to cope with the disaster.
2. To transfer the direction, personnel or functions of village departments and agencies or units thereof for the purpose of performing or facilitating
disaster response and recoveryprograms.
3. To order the evacuation of all or part of the population from any stricken or threatened area within the village if the mayor so deems this action
necessary.
4. To prescribe the route, modes of transportation and destinations in connection with evacuation.
5. To control ingress and egress to and from a disaster area, the movement of persons within the area and the occupancy of premises therein.
6. After proclamation of a disaster or civil emergency, the mayor may order a general curfew applicable to such geographical areas of the village or to
the village as a whole, as deemed advisable and applicable during such hours of the day or night as deemed for the public safety and welfare.
7. Order the closing of all retail liquor stores, including taverns and private clubs or portions thereof, wherein the consumption of intoxicating liquor and
beer is permitted.
8. Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing or giving away gasoline or other liquid flammable or combustible products in any container other than
a gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor vehicle.
9. Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing, dispensing or giving away of any firearms or ammunition of any character whatsoever.
10. Order the discontinuance of the sale of alcoholic liquor by any wholesaler or retailer.
11. Make provision for the availability and use of temporary emergency housing.
12. Issue a proclamation of disaster or civil emergency which shall activate the village emergency operations plan and be the authority for the
deployment and use of any forces that the plan or plans apply and for use or distribution of any supplies, equipment and materials and facilities
assembled, stockpiled or arranged to be made available under this chapter or act as any other provision of law relating to disasters or civil
emergencies.
13. Prohibit increases in the prices of goods and services during a disaster.
14. Issue such other orders as are imminently necessary for the protection of life and property. (Ord. O-7-96, 3-11-1996)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 55/416
2-10-7: MOBILE SUPPORT TEAMS:
A. The mayor or director may cause to be created mobile support teams to aid and to reinforce the agency, and emergency services and disaster agencies
in areas stricken by disaster. Each mobile support team shall have a leader, selected by the director, who will be responsible, under the direction and
control of the mayor or director.
B. Any member of the mobile support team who is a village officer or employee, while on call to duty by the mayor, governor or the state director of
emergency management, shall receive the compensation and have the powers, duties, rights and immunities incident to such office or employment.
C. Any such member who is not a paid officer or employee of the village while so serving, shall receive from the village reasonable compensation as
provided by law.
D. All personnel of mobile support teams shall, while on duty under such call, be reimbursed by the state for all actual and necessary travel and
subsistence expenses.
E. No personnel of mobile support teams of the village may be ordered by the mayor to operate in any other state unless a request for the same has been
made by the governor of the state of Illinois. (Ord. O-7-96, 3-11-1996)
2-10-8: TESTING OF DISASTER WARNING DEVICE:
The testing of disaster warning devices, including outdoor warning sirens, shall be held during disaster training exercises that are specifically and
expressly approved by the Illinois emergency management agency. (Ord. O-7-96, 3-11-1996)
2-10-9: MUTUAL AID ARRANGEMENTS:
The director may, in collaboration with other public agencies within the immediate vicinity, develop or cause to be developed mutual aid arrangements with
other municipalities within this state for reciprocal disaster response and recovery assistance in case a disaster is too great to be dealt with unassisted.
The mutual aid shall not, however, be effective until approved by each of the political subdivisions. The arrangements shall be consistent with the state
emergency operations plan and state emergency management program, and in the event of a "disaster", as described in section 2-10-2 of this chapter, it
shall be the duty of the director to render assistance in accordance with the provisions of the mutual aid arrangements. (Ord. O-7-96, 3-11-1996)
2-10-10: COMMUNICATIONS:
The agency shall ascertain what means exist for rapid andefficient communications in times of disaster. The agency shall consider the desirability of
supplementing those communications resources or of integrating them into a comprehensive village or village/state telecommunications or other
communications system or network. In studying the character and feasibility of any system or its several parts, the agency shall evaluate the possibility of
multipurpose use thereof for general village purposes. The agency may promulgate rules to establish policies and procedures relating to
telecommunications and the continuation of rapid and efficient communications in times of disaster to the extent authorized by any provision of this chapter
or other laws and regulations. The agency shall make recommendations to the mayor as appropriate. (Ord. O-7-96, 3-11-1996)
2-10-11: IMMUNITY:
Neither the village nor the state nor, except in cases of negligence or wilful misconduct, the mayor, the director or the agents, employees or
representatives of any of them, engaged in any emergency management response or recovery activities, while complying with or attempting to comply with
this chapter, shall be liable for the death of or any injury to persons or damage to property as a result of such activity. This section does not, however,
affect the right of any person to receive benefits to which he would otherwise ben entitled under this chapter, under the workers' compensation act or the
workers' occupational diseases act, or under any pension law, and this section does not affect the right of any such person to receive any benefits or
compensation under any act of congress. (Ord. O-7-96, 3-11-1996)
2-10-12: AUTHORITY TO ACCEPT SERVICES, GIFTS, GRANTS OR LOANS:
Whenever the state or federal government or any agency or officer thereof, or whenever any person shall offer to the village services, equipment, supplies,
materials or funds by way of gift or grant, for purposes of emergency management, the village, acting through the mayor, may accept such offer and upon
such acceptance the mayor may authorize an officer of the village, as the case may be, to receive such services, equipment, supplies, materials or funds
on behalf of the village. (Ord. O-7-96, 3-11-1996)
2-10-13: OATH:
Each person, whether compensated or noncompensated, who is appointed to serve in any capacity in the agency shall, before entering upon his duties,
take an oath, in writing, before the director or before the mayor, which shall be filed with the director with whom he shall serve, and which oath shall be
substantially as follows:
I , do solemnly swear (oraffirm) that I will support and defend and bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of the United States and the
Constitution of the State of Illinois, and the territory, institutions and facilities thereof, both public and private, against all enemies, foreign and domestic;
that I take this obligation freely, without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and faithfully discharge the duties upon which I
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 56/416
am about to enter. And I do further swear (or affirm) that I do not advocate, nor am I nor have I ever been a member of any political party or organization
that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this state by force or violence; and that during such time as I are affiliated with
the village of Forest Park, I will not advocate nor become a member of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government
of the United States or of this state by force or violence.
(Ord. O-7-96, 3-11-1996)
2-10-14: OFFICE AND PROPERTY CUSTODY:
A. Office Space: The village council is authorized to designate space in the village hall, or elsewhere, for the agency.
B. Custodian: The director shall have the responsibility for the care and custody of all the public property of the agency, subject to the supervision of the
mayor, and whenever any of the equipment requires repair, shall cause the same to be repaired. (Ord. O-7-96, 3-11-1996)
Chapter 11
YOUTH COMMISSION
2-11-1: COMMISSION CREATED; MEMBERS:
There is hereby created for the village a youth commission, which shall consist of fourteen (14) members together with such advisory members as shall be
deemed necessary and designated by the commission. The members shall be residents of the village and shall be appointed by the mayor, by and with
the consent of the village council, to serve without compensation. The mayor shall designate one of the members to act as chair, and the members shall
designate other officers of the commission. (Ord. O-13-02, 3-25-2002)
2-11-2: DUTIES:
The commission shall perform and exercise the following functions and powers:
A. Cooperate with the mayor, village council and other village departments, agencies and officials in carrying out a comprehensive program of youth
welfare and activities, and may join with other public and voluntary agencies engaged in providing services and facilities to the youth of the village;
B. Recommend such legislation as it may deem appropriate to effectively carry out the policy of the commission;
C. Invite, enlist and encourage the cooperation of all voluntary agencies, racial, religious and ethnic groups, community organizations, labor and business
organizations, fraternal and benevolent societies, veterans' organizations, professional and technical organizations and other groups in the village in
carrying out its work;
D. Cooperate with state and federal agencies when it deems such action appropriate in effectuating the policy of the commission;
E. Conduct public hearings, carry on research, or otherwise obtain factual data, issue such publications and make such recommendations as in its
judgement will effectuate the policy of the commission;
F. The commission shall render an annual report of its activities to the mayor and council.
G. The services of all village departments and agencies shall bemade available to the commission on request. (Ord. O-10-63, 7-22-1963)
Chapter 12
SENIOR CITIZENS COMMISSION
2-12-1: COMMISSION CREATED; MEMBERS:
There is hereby created a commission to be known as the senior citizens commission consisting of members who shall be appointed by the village council.
The chair and the secretary of the commission be chosen by the members of the commission. The members of the commission shall serve for such terms
as the village council shall determine without compensation but may be reimbursed for personal expenses incurred in the performance of duty. (Ord. O-16-
74, 9-28-1974)
2-12-2: DUTIES:
The commission shall perform the following duties and functions:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 57/416
A. Upon request, cooperate with the village in establishing activities for senior citizens.
B. Recommend such legislation as may be appropriate to further senior citizens programs in the village.
C. Arrange for assistance to senior citizens by obtaining governmental and private agencies and individuals to render instruction and guidance in specific
areas of need.
D. Make such reports of activities as is deemed necessary to the village council.
E. Carry out other functions as may be delegated by the village council. (Ord. O-16-74, 9-28-1974)
Chapter 13
DIVERSITY COMMISSION
2-13-0: COMMISSION CREATED:
There is hereby created the diversity commission of the village of Forest Park. (Ord. O-09-16, 5-23-2016)
2-13-1: MISSION:
The mission is to promote social harmony and deter prejudice, discrimination and intolerance through educational and action programs. (Ord. O-09-16, 5-
23-2016)
2-13-2: MEMBERSHIP AND TERM:
The diversity commission shall consist of nine (9) members appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the village council. They shall serve a
term of three (3) years except that initial appointees shall be staggered in such a manner so that two (2) members shall serve one year, three (3) members
shall serve two (2) years and four (4) members shall serve three (3) years. All members shall serve without compensation. (Ord. O-03-17, 2-27-2017)
2-13-3: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
The diversity commission will be a resource for experience and information on diversity issues and serve in an advisory capacity to the mayor and village
council. They shall help to enrich the social and intellectual life of all residents through educational and social programs. They shall facilitate awareness
and promote the understanding and acceptance of all people, especially those who have different racial, religious, and ethnic backgrounds, sexual
preferences, physical limitations, gender, educational, and economic levels. They may invite and enlist the cooperation of racial, religious and ethnic
groups, community organizations, fraternal and benevolent societies, veterans' organizations, professional and technical organizations and other groups to
assist in their mission. (Ord. O-09-16, 5-23-2016)
Title 3
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
BUSINESS LICENSES AND PERMITS
3-1-1: LICENSES REQUIRED; APPLICATIONS:
Applications for all licenses and permits required by ordinance, shall be made, in writing, to the village clerk in the absence of any provision to the contrary.
Each application shall state the name of the applicant, the permit or license desired, the location to be used, if any, the time covered and the fee to be
paid. Applications shall contain such additional information as may be needed for the proper disposition of the application. Forms for all licenses and
permits and the applications therefor, shall be prepared and kept on file by the village clerk. (Village code §§ 5-1, 5-2)
3-1-2: INVESTIGATION:
Upon the receipt of an application for a license or permit, where an ordinance of the village necessitates an inspection, or investigation before the issuance
of such license or permit, the village clerk shall refer such application to the proper investigating officer, who shall thereupon investigate and make a report
thereon as soon as practicable. The health officer of the village shall make, or cause to be made, an investigation in regard to those licenses, or permits
relating to the care and handling of food and the prevention of nuisances, and the spread of disease for the protection of health. The director of public
health and safety shall make, or cause to be made, any such inspections relating to the construction of buildings or other structures. All other
investigations except where otherwise provided, shall be made by the chief of police, the fire chief or some other officer designated by the village council.
(Village code § 5-3; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 58/416
3-1-3: LICENSE FEES, TERM, AND RENEWAL:
A. Fees: In the absence of any provision to the contrary, all fees and charges for licenses or permits shall be paid before such license or permit is issued
by the village. Except as otherwise provided, all such fees shall become a part of the corporate fund.
B. Term Of License: All licenses shall terminate on April 30 following the date of issuance unless otherwise provided. The village clerk shall mail to all
licensees a statement at the time of the expiration of the license held by the licensee.
C. Renewal Required: All licenses shall be renewed before May 1 of each year upon payment of the required fee. A failure of the village to send a
statement of expiration in accordance with subsection B of this section, or a failure of licensee to receive the statement of expiration in accordance with
subsection B of this section, shall not excuse the licensee from a duty to secure a new license or a renewal thereof; nor shall it be a defense in an
action for operating without a license. No renewal, however, shall be issued to a person, who, at the time of application for renewal of any license
issued hereunder, would not be eligible for such license upon a first application. (Ord. O-17-07, 4-23-2007)
3-1-4: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
A. Change Of Location: The location of any licensed business or occupation, or of any permitted act, may be changed provided ten (10) days' notice is
given to the village clerk. (Village code § 5-6)
B. Nuisance Businesses: No business, licensed or unlicensed, shall be so conducted, or operated, so as to amount to a nuisance in fact. (Village code § 5-
7)
C. Posting License: It shall be the duty of any person conducting a licensed business in the village to post his license in a proper, permanent place on the
premises and to keep the same on display at all times. (Village code § 5-10)
D. Removal Of Waste Material And Litter: It shall be the duty of any person conducting a licensed business in the village to maintain the exterior of the
licensed premises in a safe, clean and sanitary manner at all times, including the duty to remove all waste material and all litter, including, but not
limited to, cigarette and cigar butts and paper from the public sidewalk, parkway and right of way adjacent to the licensed premises. All such waste
material and litter shall be placed in a refuse container for removal by the licensed premises' waste hauler. Any violation of such duty may result in the
revocation of the business license in the manner provided by law. (Ord. O-41-08, 10-14-2008)
3-1-5: INSPECTIONS:
A. Whenever an inspection of the premises used for or in connection with the operation of a licensed business or occupation is provided for, required by
ordinance or is reasonably necessary to secure compliance with any ordinance, or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the licensee or the
person in charge of the premises to admit thereto, for the purpose of making an inspection, any authorized officer or employee of the village.
B. Whenever an analysis of any commodity or material is reasonably necessary to secure conformance with any ordinance provision, or to detect
violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the licensee to give any authorized officer or employee of the village requesting the same sufficient samples of
such material or commodity for an analysis upon request.
C. In addition to any other penalty which may be provided for herein, the village council may revoke the license of any licensed proprietor of any licensed
business in the village, who refuses to permit an authorized officer or employee of the village to make an inspection, take samples or who interferes
with such officer or employee while in the performance of his duty in making an inspection. Provided that, no such license shall be revoked unless the
licensee, or person in charge of the premises, is advised that such inspection or sample is desired. (Village code § 5-8)
3-1-6: REVOCATION:
All licenses issued under the provisions of this code may be revoked or suspended by the village council, with the exception of liquor licenses which may
be revoked or suspended by the mayor as local liquor control commissioner, for any violation by any licensee of the provisions of this code, other
ordinances or state laws relating to the business licensed hereunder or to the premises occupied. Any act or omission by any officer, director, agent or
employee of the licensee which constitutes such a violation, if done with knowledge, authority or approval of the licensee, shall be deemed an act of the
licensee for which the licensee shall be responsible. (Village code § 5-9; amd. 2004 Code)
A. The health officer, director of public health and safety or chief of police shall have the authority to suspend any license, other than liquor licenses, when
there is good cause to believe that either the public health or public safety will be endangered by continuance of any licensed business operation.
Notice of such suspension will be given to the licensee and village council and shall cite the violation giving rise to the suspension. The licensee shall
be given an immediate emergency hearing by the village council who shall determine the length of suspension and/or revocation of the license.
B. In the case of revocations, other than liquor licenses, the health officer, director of public health and safety, chief of police or village clerk shall give
notice of intent to revoke any license to the licensee and village council three (3) days prior to a hearing on the intended revocation. All notices of intent
to revoke shall cite the violation. The village council may then revoke or suspend any such license for any period as deemed necessary to correct the
violations cited. Revocation of any license may be determined as indefinite or permanent. (Village code § 5-9; amd. 2004 Code; Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
3-1-7: DENIAL OF A LICENSE OR RENEWAL:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 59/416
Any license or renewal issued by the village, other than liquor licenses for which restrictions are outlined in section 3-3-4 of this title, may be denied for any
of the following reasons:
A. The applicant fails to provide all the necessary information required;
B. The applicant provides false information;
C. The applicant or the business is not in compliance with any provision of this code, state or federal laws, rules or regulations;
D. The applicant has a background or history of violating local ordinances, state or federal laws, rules or regulations;
E. The public health, welfare or safety would be adversely affected by granting the application; or
F. The licensee, applicant for license, or licensed premises owes any debt, fine or penalty to the village. (Ord. O-17-07, 4-23-2007)
3-1-8: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be fined as provided in the general penalty provisions of section 1-3-1 of this code for each
offense, and a separate violation shall be deemed committed on each day during, or on which, a violation occurs or continues. In addition to the general
penalties contained in section 1-3-1 of this code, any relevant specific penalty provisions as outlined in each chapter of this title may apply. (Ord. O-17-07,
4-23-2007)
Chapter 2
MUNICIPAL OCCUPATION TAXES
3-2-1: RETAIL OCCUPATION TAX:
A. Tax Imposed: A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property at retail in this village at the rate of
one percent (1%) of the gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such business while this section is in effect, in accordance with the
provisions of section 8-11-1 of the Illinois municipal code1. (Ord. O-28-69, 8-11-1969)
B. Exclusions: The exclusion contained in section 2 (d) of the retailers occupation tax act, approved June 28, 1933, as amended2, shall not apply to
property within the village. (Ord. O-6-79, 6-11-1979)
C. Reports And Payments: Every person subject to the tax herein imposed shall file proper reports to the state of Illinois department of revenue as
required by law, and at the time such report is filed shall pay to the state department of revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed. (Village Code § 22-
3)
3-2-2: SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX:
A. Tax Imposed: A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in this village in the business of making sales of service at the rate of one percent
(1%) of the cost price of all tangible personal property transferred by said servicemen either in the form of tangible personal property or in the form of
real estate as an incident to a sale of service, in accordance with the provisions of section 8-11-5 of the Illinois municipal code3. (Ord. O-29-69, 8-11-
1969)
B. Exclusions: The exclusion contained in section 2 (e) of the service occupation tax act approved July 10, 1961, as amended4, shall not apply to property
within the village. (Ord. O-6-79, 6-11-1979)
C. Reports And Payments: Every person subject to the tax herein imposed shall file proper reports to the state of Illinois department of revenue as
required by law, and at the time such report is filed shall pay to the state department of revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed. (Village Code § 22-
3)
3-2-3: AUTOMOBILE RENTING USE TAX:
A. Tax Imposed: A tax is hereby imposed upon the privilege of using in this village an automobile which is rented from a renter outside Illinois and which is
titled or registered with an agency of this state's government in this village at the rate of one percent (1%) of the rental price of such automobile while
this section is in effect, in accordance with the provisions of section 8-11-8 of the Illinois municipal code5.
B. Collections: The tax provided for in this section shall be collected from the persons whose Illinois address for titling or registration purposes is given as
being in the village.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 60/416
C. Payment: The tax imposed by this section shall be paid to the Illinois department of revenue. (Ord. O-2-82, 1-11-1982)
3-2-4: AUTOMOBILE RENTING OCCUPATION TAX:
A. Tax Imposed: A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of renting automobiles in this village at the rate of one percent (1%) of
the gross receipts from such rentals made in the course of such business while this section is in effect, accordance with the provisions of section 8-11-7
of the Illinois municipal code6.
B. Collections: Every such person engaged in such business in the village shall file on or before the last day of each calendar month, the report to the state
department of revenue required by sections two and three of an act in relation to a tax upon persons engaged in the business of selling tangible
personal property to purchasers for use or consumption, approved June 29, 1933, as amended7.
C. Payments: At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the state department of revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of the
renting of automobiles during the preceding month. (Ord. O-1-82, 1-11-1982)
ARTICLE A. MUNICIPAL UTILITY TAX
3-2A-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply:
GROSS RECEIPTS: The consideration received for the distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas and electricity for use or consumption and not for
resale, as the case may be; and for all services rendered in connection therewith valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including
cash, credit, services and property of every kind and material and for all services rendered therewith; and shall be determined without any deduction on
account of the cost of the service, product or commodity supplied, the cost of materials used, labor or service cost or any other expenses whatsoever.
Gross receipts shall not include any charges added to customers' bills pursuant to the provisions of sections 9-221 or 9-222 of the Illinois public utilities
act1 or any other separately stated charge added to customers' bills in respect of any tax or other governmental imposition.
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation, municipal corporation or
political subdivision of this state, or a receiver, trustee, conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court. (Ord. O-9-94, 4-25-1994)
3-2A-2: TAX IMPOSED:
A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the following occupations or privileges:
A. Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas for use or consumption within the corporate limits of the village, and
not for resale, at the rate of five percent (5%) of the gross receipts therefrom. (Ord.O-9-94, 4-25-1994)
B. Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling electricity for use or consumption within the corporate limits of the
village and not for resale, at the rate of five percent (5%) of the gross receipts therefrom. The tax imposed under this subsection shall not apply with
respect to gross receipts pertaining to bills for the distribution, supply, furnishing or sale of electricity where the use or consumption of the electricity is
subject to the tax imposed under section 3-2-7 of this chapter. (Ord. O-4-99, 4-26-1999)
3-2A-3: APPLICATION OF TAX:
A. No tax is imposed by this article with respect to any transaction in interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent to which such business may not,
under the constitution and statutes of the United States, be made subject to taxation by this state or any political subdivision thereof; nor shall any
persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas, water or electricity be subject to taxation under the provisions of
this article for such transactions as are or may become subject to taxation under the provisions of the municipal retailers' occupation tax act2.
B. Such tax shall be in addition to the payment of money, or value of products or services, furnished to the village by the taxpayer as compensation for the
use of its streets, alleys or other public places, or installation and maintenance therein, thereon or thereunder of poles, wires, pipes or other equipment
used in the operation of the taxpayer's business. (Ord. O-9-94, 4-25-1994)
3-2A-4: PAYMENT OF TAX:
A. On or before the last day of each month, each taxpayer shall make a return to the village clerk for the preceding month stating:
1. His name;
2. His principal place of business;
3. His gross receipts for that month upon the basis of which the tax is imposed;
4. Amount of tax; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 61/416
5. Such other reasonable and related information as the corporate authorities may require.
The taxpayer making the return herein provided for shall, at the time of making such return, pay to the village clerk the amount of tax herein imposed;
provided, that in connection with any return, the taxpayer may, if he so elects, report and pay an amount based upon his total billings of business
subject to the tax during the period for which the return is made, exclusive of any amounts previously billed, with prompt adjustments of later
payments based upon any difference between such billings and the taxable gross receipts. (Ord. O-9-94, 4-25-1994)
B. If it appears that an amount of tax has been paid which was not due under the provisions of this article, whether as a result of a mistake of fact or an
error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any tax due or to become due under this article from the taxpayer who made the erroneous
payment; provided, that no amounts erroneously paid more than three (3) years prior to the filing of a claim thereof shall be so credited. If a taxpayer
under this article is unable to use a credit authorized by this article solely because the tax imposed by this article has been replaced by the tax imposed
under article B of this chapter, then the taxpayer may apply such credit against any tax due under article B of this chapter. (Ord. O-4-99, 4-26-1999)
C. No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this article shall be commenced more than three (3) years after the due date of such
amount. (Ord. O-9-94, 4-25-1994)
3-2A-5: FAILURE TO MAKE RETURN:
Any taxpayer who fails to make a return, or who makes a fraudulent return, or who wilfully violates any other provision of this article is guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be fined as provided in the general penalty in section 1-3-1 of this code and, in addition, shall be liable in
a civil action for the amount of the tax due. (Ord. O-9-94, 4-25-1994; amd. 2004 Code)
ARTICLE B. MUNICIPAL ELECTRICITY UTILITY TAX
3-2B-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context otherwise requires:
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation, limited liability company,
municipal corporation, the state or any of its political subdivisions, any state university created by statute, or a receiver, trustee, conservator or other
representative appointed by order of any court.
PERSONS MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE: Any person having or maintaining within this state, directly or by a subsidiary or
other affiliate, an office, generation facility, distribution facility, transmission facility, sales office or other place of business, or any employee, agent or other
representative operating within this state under the authority of the person or its subsidiary or other affiliate, irrespective of whether such place of business
or agent or other representative is located in this state permanently or temporarily or whether such person, subsidiary or other affiliate is licensed or
qualified to do business in this state.
PURCHASE AT RETAIL: Any acquisition of electricity by a purchaser for purposes of use or consumption, and not for resale, but shall not include the use
of electricity by a public utility, as defined in section 8-11-2 of the Illinois municipal code1, directly in the generation, production, transmission, delivery or
sale of electricity.
PURCHASER: Any person who uses or consumes, within the corporate limits of the village, electricity acquired in a purchase at retail.
TAX COLLECTOR: The person delivering electricity to the purchaser.
VILLAGE: The village of Forest Park, Illinois. (Ord. O-4-99, 4-26-1999)
3-2B-2: TAX IMPOSED:
A. Pursuant to section 8-11-2 of the Illinois municipal code2 and any and all other applicable authority, a tax is imposed upon the privilege of using or
consuming electricity acquired in a purchase at retail and used or consumed within the corporate limits of the village at the following rates, calculated
on a monthly basis for each purchaser:
Kilowatt Hours Used Or
Consumed In A Month
Per Kilowatt Hour
For the first 2,000 $0.543 cents
For the next 48,000 0.349 cents
For the next 50,000 0.348 cents
For the next 400,000 0.310 cents
For the next 500,000 0.307 cents
For the next 2,000,000 0.255 cents
For the next 2,000,000 0.220 cents
For the next 5,000,000 0.185 cents
For the next 10,000,000 0.150 cents
For all in excess of 20,000,000 0.115 cents
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 62/416
(Ord. O-7-99, 6-14-1999)
B. The tax is in addition to all taxes, fees and other revenue measures imposed by the village, the state of Illinois or any other political subdivision of the
state.
C. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the tax shall not be imposed if and to the extent that imposition or collection of the tax would violate
the constitution or statutes of the United States or the constitution or statutes of the state of Illinois.
D. The tax shall be imposed with respect to the use or consumption of electricity by residential customers beginning with the first bill issued on or after May
1, 1999; and with respect to the use or consumption of electricity by nonresidential customers for delivery services in accordance with section 16-104 of
the public utilities act3, or the first bill issued to such customers on or after January 1, 2001, whichever issuance occurs sooner. (Ord. O-4-99, 4-26-
1999)
3-2B-3: COLLECTION OF TAX:
A. Subject to the provisions of section 3-2B-5 of this article regarding the delivery of electricity to resellers, the tax imposed under this article shall be
collected from purchasers by the person maintaining a place of business in this state who delivers electricity to such purchasers. This tax shall
constitute a debt of the purchaser to the person who delivers the electricity to the purchaser and is recoverable at the same time and in the same
manner as the original charge for delivering the electricity.
B. Any tax required to be collected by this article, and any tax in fact collected, shall constitute a debt owed to the village by the person delivering the
electricity; provided, that the person delivering electricity shall be allowed credit for such tax related to deliveries of electricity the charges for which are
written off as uncollectible; and provided further, that if such charges are thereafter collected, the delivering supplier shall be obligated to remit such tax.
C. Persons delivering electricity shall collect the tax from the purchaser by adding such tax to the gross charge for delivering the electricity. Persons
delivering electricity shall also be authorized to add to such gross charge an amount equal to three percent (3%) of the tax they collect to reimburse
them for their expenses incurred in keeping records, billing customers, preparing and filing returns, remitting the tax and supplying data to the village
upon request. For purposes of this article, any partial payment of a billed amount not specifically identified by the purchaser shall be deemed to be for
the delivery of electricity. (Ord. O-4-99, 4-26-1999)
3-2B-4: TAX REMITTANCE AND RETURN:
A. Every tax collector shall, on a monthly basis, file a return in a form prescribed by the village treasurer. The return and accompanying remittance shall be
due on or before the last day of the month following the month during which the tax is collected.
B. If the person delivering electricity fails to collect the tax from the purchaser, then the purchaser shall file a return in a form prescribed by the village
treasurer and pay the tax directly to the village on or before the last day of the month following the month during which the electricity is used or
consumed. (Ord. O-4-99, 4-26-1999)
3-2B-5: RESALES:
A. Electricity that is delivered to a person in this village shall be considered to be for use and consumption by that person unless the person receiving the
electricity has an active resale number issued by the village and furnishes that number to the person who delivers the electricity, and certifies to that
personthat the sale is either entirely or partially nontaxable as a sale for resale.
B. If a person who receives electricity in this village claims to be an authorized reseller of electricity, that person shall apply to the village for a resale
number. The applicant shall state facts showing why it is not liable for the tax imposed by this article on any purchases of electricity and shall furnish
such additional information as the village may reasonably require.
C. Upon approval of the application, the village shall assign a resale number to the applicant and shall certify the number to the applicant.
D. The village may cancel the resale number of any person if the person fails to pay any tax payable under this article for electricity used or consumed by
the person, or if the number either: 1) was obtained through misrepresentation; or 2) is no longer necessary because the person has discontinued
making resales.
E. If a reseller has acquired electricity partly for use or consumption and partly for resale, the reseller shall pay the tax imposed by this article directly to the
village pursuant to section 3-2B-2 of this article on the amount of electricity that the reseller uses or consumes, and shall collect the tax pursuant to
section 3-2B-3 of this article and remit the tax pursuant to subsection 3-2B-4A of this article on the amount of electricity delivered by the reseller to a
purchaser.
Any person who delivers electricity to a reseller having an active resale number and complying with all other conditions of this article, shall be excused
from collecting and remitting the tax on any portion of the electricity delivered to the reseller, provided that the person reports to the village the total
amount of electricity delivered to the reseller, and such other information that the village may reasonably require. (Ord. O-4-99, 4-26-1999)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 63/416
3-2B-6: BOOKS AND RECORDS:
Every tax collector and every taxpayer required to pay the tax imposed by this article, shall keep accurate books and records of its business or activity,
including contemporaneous books and records denoting the transactions that gave rise, or may have given rise, to any tax liability under this article. The
books and records shall be subject to and available for inspection at all times during business hours of the day. (Ord. O-4-99, 4-26-1999)
3-2B-7: CREDITS AND REFUNDS:
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, in order to permit sound fiscal planning and budgeting by the village, noperson shall be entitled to a
refund of, or credit for, a tax imposed under this article unless the person files a claim for refund or credit within one year after the date on which the tax
was paid or remitted to the village. (Ord. O-4-99, 4-26-1999)
ARTICLE C. AMUSEMENT RENTAL TAX
3-2C-1: DEFINITIONS:
AMUSEMENT/VIDEOCASSETTE LESSOR: All persons or entities maintaining a place of business within the corporate limits of the village at which
videocassette, DVD, video game, VCRs, DVD players or game system rentals occur.
DIGITAL VIDEO DISK: A silicon disk used to store electronic and audio images for subsequent playback and/or broadcasting and shall otherwise be
referred to as a DVD.
DVD PLAYER: A digital video disc player or recorder that use DVDs.
GAME SYSTEMS: Any video or personal computer game that can be played in videocassette, DVD or cartridge format.
GROSS RECEIPTS: The consideration paid for the rental of a videocassette, DVD, video game, VCR, DVD player, game system or any other related
device valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services and property of every kind and nature and shall be
determined without any deduction on account of the cost of the videocassette, DVD, video game, VCR, DVD player, game system or any other related
device, labor or service cost or any other expenses whatsoever.
PERSON: Any natural individual or individuals, estate, partnership, association, joint venture, corporation, receiver, trustee or guardian.
TAXPAYER: Any person renting any videocassette, DVD, video game, VCR, DVD player, game system or any other related device.
VCR: A videocassette recorder that plays or records videocassettes.
VIDEO GAME: A magnetic tape or disk used to store electronic and audio images for subsequent play.
VIDEOCASSETTE: A magnetic tape used to record television ormotion picture images, usually together with associated sound, for subsequent playback
and/or broadcasting. (Ord. O-33-03, 9-8-2003)
3-2C-2: TAX IMPOSED:
A tax is hereby imposed on the act or privilege of renting a videocassette, DVD, video game, VCR, DVD player, game system or any other related service
within the corporate limits of the village at the rate of seven percent (7%) of the gross receipts collected therefrom after the effective date hereof. However,
such tax is not imposed on such act or privileges to the extent such act or privilege may not be made the subject of taxation by municipalities under the
Illinois constitution. (Ord. O-33-03, 9-8-2003)
3-2C-3: COLLECTION OF TAX:
The tax authorized by this article shall be collected from the taxpayers by all amusement/videocassette lessors located within the village limits and shall be
remitted by all amusement/videocassette lessors to the village. Any tax required to be collected pursuant to this article and any such tax collected by the
amusement/videocassette lessors shall constitute a debt owed by the amusement/videocassette lessor to the village. Amusement/videocassette lessors
shall collect the tax from the taxpayer by adding the tax to the gross charge for the act or privilege of rental of such videocassette, DVD, video game, VCR,
DVD player, game system or any other related service. The tax authorized by this article shall constitute a debt of the taxpayer to the
amusement/videocassette lessor who provides such rental and, if unpaid, is recoverable at law in the same manner as the original charge for the rental. If
the amusement/videocassette lessor fails to collect the tax from the taxpayer, then the taxpayer shall be required to pay the tax directly to the village.
Whenever possible, the tax authorized by this article shall, when collected, be stated as a distinct item separate and apart from the gross charge for the
rental. (Ord. O-33-03, 9-8-2003)
3-2C-4: RETURNS, FILING, PAYMENT OF TAX:
On or before January 31 of each year, each amusement/videocassette lessor shall make a return to the finance director for the months of October,
November and December, stating: its name, principal place of business, the gross receipts during those months upon the basis of which the tax is
imposed, the amount of tax collected and such other reasonably related information as the village may require. On or before the last day of very third
month thereafter, each amusement/videocassette lessor shall make a like return to the finance director for the corresponding three (3) month period. The
amusement/videocassette lessor making the return hereinprovided for shall, at the time of making such return, pay to the village the amount of tax
imposed, based upon seven percent (7%) of gross receipts collected during that time period. Returns shall be filed on or before the last day of April, July,
October and January of each year. (Ord. O-33-03, 9-8-2003)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 64/416
3-2C-5: BOOKS AND RECORDS:
Every amusement/videocassette lessor shall keep books and records which are adequate to reflect that the tax imposed by this article is being collected in
the proper amount. All books and records and other papers and documents required by this article to be kept shall, at all times during business hours, be
subject to inspection by the village or its duly authorized agents and employees. Books and records reflecting gross receipts with respect to which the tax
is imposed shall be preserved until the expiration of three (3) years following the period for which the tax was incurred, unless the village, in writing,
authorizes their destruction or disposal at an earlier date. (Ord. O-33-03, 9-8-2003)
3-2C-6: FAILURE TO MAKE RETURN; FRAUDULENT RETURNS:
Any amusement/videocassette lessor who fails to make a return or who makes a fraudulent return, or who wilfully violates any other provisions of this
article, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined as provided in the general penalty in section 1-3-1 of this code for each
such offense, and in addition shall be liable in a civil action for the amount of the tax due. (Ord. O-33-03, 9-8-2003; amd. 2004 Code)
ARTICLE D. MUNICIPAL UTILITY TAX RELIEF
3-2D-1: PURPOSE:
This article shall relate to the payment of grants to the elderly, the disabled and other residents with limited income to relieve the burden of the municipal
utility tax, and its purpose is to provide grants to such persons to relieve those citizens from the burdens of utility taxes against their restricted earning
power. (Ord. O-17-94, 9-12-1994)
3-2D-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, the following terms shall apply, unless the context otherwise requires:
CLAIMANT: An individual who has filed a claim under this article.
HOUSEHOLD: A claimant or a claimant and his spouse living together in the same residence.
HOUSEHOLD INCOME: The combined income of the members of a household.
INCOME: Adjusted gross income, properly reportable for federal income tax purposes under the provisions of the internal revenue code, modified by
adding thereto the sum of the following amounts to the extent deducted or excluded from gross income in the computation of adjusted gross income:
A. An amount equal to all amounts paid or accrued as interest or dividends during the taxable year;
B. An amount equal to all amounts received during the taxable year as an annuity under an annuity, endowment or life insurance contract or under any
other contract or agreement;
C. An amount equal to the amount of benefits paidunder the federal social security act during the taxable year;
D. An amount equal to the amount of benefits paid under the railroad retirement act during the taxable year;
E. An amount equal to the total amount of cash public assistance payments received from any governmental agency during the taxable year.
INTERNAL REVENUE CODE: The United States internal revenue code of 1954 or any successor law or laws relating to federal income taxes in effect for
the year.
MUNICIPAL UTILITY TAX: The tax imposed by articles A and B of this chapter.
RESIDENCE: The principal dwelling place occupied in the village by a household and so much of the surrounding land as is reasonably necessary for use
of the dwelling as a home, and includes rental property, mobile homes, single-family dwellings and units in multi-family, multi-dwelling or multi-purpose
buildings. If the assessor has established a specific legal description for a portion of property constituting the residence, then that portion of property shall
be deemed residence for the purposes of this article.
VILLAGE: The village of Forest Park, Cook County, Illinois. (Ord. O-17-94, 9-12-1994)
3-2D-3: AMOUNT OF GRANT:
A. In General: Any individual whose annual household income is twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) or less and whose household is liable for payment
of municipal utility taxes and is domiciled in the village at the time he files his claim is entitled to claim a grant under this article.
B. Limitation: The amount of grant which a claimant is entitled to claim for relief from municipal utility taxes which were paid or payable during the last
preceding tax year are as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 65/416
Income Amount Of Grant
$10,000.00 or less 100 percent of municipal utility taxes
$10,001.00 to $14,000.00 The greater of $25.00 or 75 percent of municipal utility taxes
$14,001.00 to $17,000.00 The greater of $25.00 or 50 percent of municipal utility taxes
$17,001.00 to $20,000.00 The greater of $25.00 or 25 percent of municipal utility taxes
(Ord. O-07-01, 1-22-2001)
C. More Than One Residence: If a claimant has occupied more than one residence in the taxable year, he may claim only one residence for any part of a
month. (Ord. O-17-94, 9-12-1994)
D. Procedures:
1. In General: Claims for the taxable year must be filed between January 1 and April 1 of the following year on forms prescribed by the village. (Ord. O-
07-01, 1-22-2001)
2. Claim Is Personal: The right to file a claim under this article shall be personal to the claimant and shall not survive his death, but such right may be
exercised on behalf of a claimant by his legal guardian or attorney in fact. If a claimant dies after having filed a timely claim, the amount thereof shall
be disbursed to his surviving spouse or, if no spouse survives, to his surviving dependent minor children in equal parts, provided the spouse or child,
as the case may be, resided with the claimant at the time he filed his claim. If at the time of disbursement neither the claimant nor his spouse is
surviving, and no dependent minor children of the claimant are surviving, the amount of the claim shall escheat to the village.
3. One Claim Per Household: Only one member of a household may file a claim under this article in any calendar year; where both members of a
household are otherwise entitled to claim a grant under this article, they must agree as to which of them will file a claim for that year. (Ord. O-17-94,
9-12-1994)
3-2D-4: ADMINISTRATION:
A. In General: Upon receipt of a timely filed claim, the village clerk shall determine whether the claimant is a person entitled to a grant under this article
and the amount of grant to which he is entitled. The village may require the claimant to furnish reasonable proof of the statements of domicile,
household income, municipal utility taxes paid and other matters on which entitlement is based, and may withhold payment of a grant until such
additional proof is furnished.
B. Fraudulent Claims: The village clerk shall deny claims which have been fraudulently prepared or when he finds that the claimant has acquired title to his
residence or has paid utilities for his residence primarily for the purpose of receiving a grant under this article. (Ord. O-17-94, 9-12-1994)
3-2D-5: PAYMENT AND DENIAL OF CLAIMS:
A. In General: The village clerk shall order the payment from appropriations made for that purpose of grants to claimants under this article in the amounts
to which the village clerk has determined they are entitled. If a claim is denied, the village clerk shall cause written notice of that denial and the reasons
for that denial to be sent to the claimant.
B. Right To Appeal: Any claimant aggrieved by the action of the village clerk under this article, whether in the reduction of the amount of the grant claimed
or in the denial of the claim, may request in writing that the village clerk reconsider his prior determination, setting out the facts on which his request is
based. The village clerk shall consider the request and either modify or affirm his prior determination.
C. Village Council Review: The decision of the village clerk to affirm his prior determination, or the failure of the village clerk to act on a request for
reconsideration within sixty (60) days, may be appealed to the village council for review. The village council shall consider the appeal and either modify
or affirm the village clerk's prior recommendation. (Ord. O-17-94, 9-12-1994)
3-2D-6: RECORDS:
A. Every claimant of a grant under this article shall keep such records, render such statements, file such forms and comply with such rules and regulations
as the village may from time to time prescribe.
B. All information received by the village from claims filed under this article, or from any investigation conducted under the provisions of this article, shall be
confidential, except for official purposes within the village pursuant to the freedom of information act of the state of Illinois.
C. Nothing contained in this article shall prevent the village from publishing or making available reasonable statistics concerning the operation of the grant
programs contained in this article wherein the contents of claims are grouped into aggregates in such a way that information contained in any individual
claim shall not be disclosed. (Ord. O-17-94, 9-12-1994)
3-2D-7: FRAUDULENT CLAIMS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 66/416
Any person who files a fraudulent claim for a grant under this article, or who for compensation prepares a claim for a grant and knowingly enters false
information on a claim form for any claimant under this article, or who fraudulently files multiple claim forms, upon a finding of guilty, shall be fined as
provided in the general penalty in section 1-3-1 of this code. (Ord. O-17-94, 9-12-1994; amd. 2004 Code)
In addition, a person convicted of such fraud shall be permanently barred from the program of utility tax relief established under this article. The village
may recover from a claimant any amount paid under this article on account of an erroneous or fraudulent claim, together with six percent (6%) interest per
year. A prosecution for a violation of this article may be commenced at any time within three (3) years of the commission of that violation. (Ord. O-17-94, 9-
12-1994)
ARTICLE E. NONHOME RULE MUNICIPAL RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX
3-2E-1: TAX IMPOSED:
A. Effective July 1, 2014, a tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property, other than an item of
tangible personal property which is titled and registered by any agency of the government of the state of Illinois, at retail in the village of Forest Park, at
the rate of one percent (1%) of the gross receipts from such sales. The tax imposed pursuant to this section and all civil penalties that may be
assessed as an incident thereof shall be collected and enforced by the state department of revenue.
B. The tax imposed pursuant to this section shall not be imposed on the sale of food for human consumption that is to be consumed off the premises
where it is sold (other than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks, and food that has been prepared for immediate consumption) and prescription and
nonprescription medicines, drugs, medical appliances, and insulin, urine testing materials, syringes, and needles used by diabetics. (Ord. O-15-14, 5-
15-2014)
ARTICLE F. NONHOME RULE MUNICIPAL SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX
3-2F-1: TAX IMPOSED:
A. Effective July 1, 2014, a tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged, in the village of Forest Park, in the business of making sales of service, at the
rate of one percent (1%) of the selling price of all tangible personal property transferred by such servicemen either in the form of tangible personal
property or in the form of real estate, as an incident to a sale of service. The tax imposed pursuant to this section and all civil penalties that may be
assessed as an incident thereof shall be collected and enforced by the state department of revenue.
B. The tax imposed pursuant to this section shall not be imposed on the sale of food for human consumption that is to be consumed off the premises
where it is sold (other than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks, and food that has been prepared for immediate consumption) and prescription and
nonprescription medicines, drugs, medical appliances, and insulin, urine testing materials, syringes, and needles used by diabetics. (Ord. O-15-14, 5-
15-2014)
Chapter 3
LIQUOR CONTROL
3-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the content otherwise requires, the following terms in this section shall be construed according to the definitions given below:
ALCOHOL1: The product of distillation of any fermented liquid, whether rectified or diluted, whatever may be the origin thereof, and includes synthetic ethyl
alcohol. It does not include denatured alcohol or wood alcohol.
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR2: Includes alcohol, spirits, wine and beer, and every liquid or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and
capable of being consumed as a beverage by a human being. The provisions of the liquor control act shall not apply to alcohol used in the manufacture of
denatured alcohol produced in accordance with acts of congress and regulations promulgated thereunder, nor to any liquid or solid containing one-half of
one percent (0.5%) or less of alcohol by volume. No tax provided for in article VIII of the liquor control act shall apply to wine intended for use and used by
any church or religious organization for sacramental purposes, provided that such wine shall be purchased from a licensed manufacturer or importing
distributor under said liquor control act.
CLUB3: A corporation organized under the laws of this state, not for pecuniary profit, solely for the promotion of some common object other than the sale
or consumption of alcoholic liquors, kept, used and maintained by its members through the payment of annual dues, and owning, hiring or leasing a
building or space in a building, of such extent and character as may be suitable and adequate for the reasonable and comfortable use and accommodation
of its members and their guests and provided with suitable and adequate kitchen and dining room space and equipment and maintaining a sufficient
number of servants and employees for cooking, preparing and serving food and meals for its members and their guests; provided, that such club files with
the local liquor control commissioner at the time of its application for a license under the liquor control act two (2) copies of a list of names and residences
of its members, and similarly files within ten (10) days of the election of any additional member his name and address; and, provided further, that its affairs
and management are conducted by a board of directors, executive committee or similar body chosen by the members at their annual meeting and that no
member or any officer, agent or employee of the club is paid, or directly or indirectly receives, in the form of salary or other compensation any profits from
the distribution or sale of alcoholic liquor to the club or the members of the club or its guests introduced by members beyond the amount of such salary as
may be fixed and voted at any annual meeting by the members or by its board of directors or other governing body out of the general revenue of the club.
CONDITIONAL BYOB LICENSE: A license subject to the conditions set forth in subsection 3-3-5K of this chapter, issued by the local liquor control
commissioner to a restaurant which allows its patrons to bring into the premises beer and wine for their personal consumption while being served a meal in
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 67/416
said establishment.
HOTEL4: Every building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public to be a place where food is actually served and
consumed and sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers and guests, whether transient, permanent or residential, in which
twenty five (25) or more rooms are used for the sleeping accommodations of such guests and having one or more public dining rooms where meals are
served to such guests, such sleeping accommodations and dining rooms being conducted in the same building or buildings in connection therewith and
such building or buildings, structure or structures being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and capacity.
ORIGINAL PACKAGE: Any bottle, flask, jug, can, cask, barrel, keg, hogshead or other receptacle or container whatsoever, used, corked or capped, sealed
or labeled by the manufacturer of alcoholic liquor, to contain and convey any alcoholic liquor.
PREMISES: A structure or building complying with all ordinances of the village and statutes, rules and regulations of the state of Illinois.
RESTAURANT5: Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are served, and where meals are
actually and regularly served, without sleeping accommodations, such space being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room
equipment and capacity and having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its guests.
RETAIL SALE: The sale for use or consumption and not for resale.
SERVICE BAR: A work area from which alcoholic liquors are mixed or prepared for human consumption and situated in a restaurant, from which work
area the alcoholic liquors are so mixed or prepared for the purpose only of being taken by the employees of such establishments to tables occupied by
patrons of such restaurant, for consumption, in connection with and as a part of the meals sold to the customers of such business. (Village code § 7-1;
amd. Ord. O-15-73, 7-14-1973; Ord. O-21-03, 6-9-2003; Ord. O-43-03, 10-27-2003; 2004 Code)
3-3-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail or to deliver any alcoholic liquor in the village without having a retail liquor dealer's license, or to do so in
violation of the terms of such license. (Ord. O-09-08, 3-24-2008)
3-3-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
A. Application Filing Fee: All applications for each license shall be addressed to the local liquor control commissioner of the village in writing, signed by the
applicant if an individual, or by a duly authorized agent if a club, or by all officers of a corporation, verified by oath or affidavit. (Ord. O-10-96, 4-22-
1996)
An application filing fee in the amount of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per individual investigated, plus fingerprinting costs, shall accompany
each application. These fees and costs shall be in addition to the license fees required by section 3-3-6 of this chapter. (Ord. O-09-08, 3-24-2008)
1. The name, age and address of the applicant, in the case of an individual; in the case of a copartnership, the persons entitled to share in the profits
thereof; and, in the case of a corporation for profit, or a club, the date of incorporation, the objects for which it was organized, the names and
addresses of the officers and directors, and if a majority in interest of the stock of such corporations is owned by one person or his nominees, the
name and address of such person.
2. The citizenship of the applicant, his place of birth and, if a naturalized citizen, the time and place of his naturalization.
3. The character of business of the applicant; and, in case of a corporation, the objects for which it was formed.
4. The length of time that said applicant has been in business of that character or, in the case of a corporation, the date on which its charter was
issued.
5. The amount of goods, wares and merchandise at hand at the time of application.
6. The location and description of the premises or place of business which is to be operated under such license.
7. A statement whether applicant has made similar application for a similar other license on premises other than described in this application, and the
disposition of such application.
8. A statement that applicant was never convicted of a felony and is not disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter or thing contained in
this chapter, laws of this state or ordinances of this village.
9. Whether a previous license by any state or subdivision thereof, or by the federal government, has been revoked, and the reasons therefor.
10. A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the laws of the state of Illinois or of the United States, or any ordinances of the village in the
conduct of his place of business.
B. Investigate Applicant: Each of such applicants shall, in the first instance, file his aforesaid application with the local liquor control commissioner, who
shall make such investigation or examination of the applicant as is permitted by law for the purpose of determining the fitness of such applicant to
receive a license under the provisions of the laws of the village; and, after such examination shall have been completed, the local liquor control
commissioner shall approve or disapprove such application. (Village Code § 7-3)
3-3-4: LICENSE RESTRICTIONS:
No license shall be issued to:
A. A person who is not a resident of the village.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 68/416
B. A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community in which he resides.
C. A person who is not a citizen of the United States.
D. A person who has been convicted of a felony under the laws of the state of Illinois.
E. A person who has been convicted of being the keeper or is keeping, a house of ill fame.
F. A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or misdemeanor opposed to decency or morality.
G. A person whose license, issued under this chapter, has been revoked for cause.
H. A person who, at the time of application for renewal of any license issued hereunder, would not be eligible for such license upon a first application.
I. A copartnership, unless all the members of such copartnership, shall be qualified to obtain a license.
J. A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than five percent (5%) of the
stock of such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason other than citizenship and residence within the political
subdivision.
K. A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent, unless said manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required of
the licensee.
L. A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal or state law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor
subsequent to the passage of this chapter, or shall have forfeited his bond to appear in court in answer to charges for any such violation.
M. A person who does not own the premises for which a license is sought, or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for which the license is to be
issued. (Village code § 7-4)
N. Any law enforcing public official, including members of local liquor control commissions, any mayor or member of the city council or commission, any
president of the village board of trustees, any member of a village board of trustees, or any president or member of a county board, and no such official
shall be interested directly in the manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic liquor, except that a license may be granted to such official in relation to
premises that are not located within the territory subject to the jurisdiction of that official if the issuance of such license is approved by the state liquor
control commission and except that a license may be granted, in a city or village with a population of fifty thousand (50,000) or less, to any alderman,
member of a city council or member of a village board of trustees in relation to premises that are located within the territory subject to the jurisdiction of
that official if: 1) the sale of alcoholic liquor pursuant to the license is incidental to the selling of food; 2) the issuance of the license is approved by the
state commission; 3) the issuance of the license is in accordance with all applicable local ordinances in effect where the premises are located; and 4)
the official granted a license does not vote on alcoholic liquor issues pending before the board or council to which the license holder is elected. (Village
code § 7-4; amd. 2004 Code)
3-3-5: LICENSE CLASSIFICATIONS:
A. Class A: This license shall authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor mixed or prepared and consumed at a dispensing station (bar) in a restaurant and also
by employees thereof and taken by the employee to tables in such establishment occupied by patrons for consumption in connection with, and as part
of, the meals sold to them by such business. As a condition of such class A license, a licensee shall derive not more than fifty percent (50%) of its
gross sales per annum from the sale of alcoholic liquor, and shall be required to keep financial records evidencing compliance with such condition,
which financial records shall be available for inspection and review from time to time by the local liquor control commissioner and for the purpose of the
renewal of such license.
B. Class A1: This license shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor at one dispensing station (bar) for consumption only on the premises specified.
C. Class A2: This license shall authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor mixed or prepared at a service bar in a restaurant by employees thereof and taken by
the employee to tables in such establishment occupied by patrons for consumption in connection with, and as part of, the meals sold to them by such
business. As a condition of such class A2 license, a licensee shall derive not more than fifty percent (50%) of its gross sales per annum from the sale
of alcoholic liquor, and shall be required to keep financial records evidencing compliance with such condition, which financial records shall be available
for inspection and review from time to time by the local liquor control commissioner and for the purpose of the renewal of such license.
D. Class A3: This license shall authorize the retail sale of wine and beer only, in a restaurant and taken by an employee thereof to tables in such
establishment occupied by patrons for consumption in connection with, and as part of, the meals sold to them by such business.
E. Class A4: This license shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises in private clubs, organized as a not for profit
under the laws of the state of Illinois.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 69/416
F. Class A5: This license shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises owned or occupied by any of the following
entities organized under the general not for profit act of the state of Illinois and not for pecuniary profit: a hospital, nursing, convalescent, or retirement
home organized solely for the promotion of a common humanitarian object other than the sale or consumption of alcoholic liquors; or any nationally
recognized veterans' organization, membership in which is comprised of persons who have served in the military services of the United States.
G. Class A6: This license shall only authorize the sale of wine for consumption on the premises or in bottles or other packages for consumption not on the
premises, but such sales shall be limited to members of a group assembled on the premises for the purpose of attending a cooking class or wine class
offered by a cooking school, or in connection with an event catered by a cooking school. For purposes of this subsection, the term "cooking school"
shall be defined as a business which provides culinary instruction, both demonstration style and hands on, to persons of all levels of cooking
experience.
H. Class A7 Brewpub License: This license shall authorize the retail sale of beer manufactured on premises for consumption on and off the licensed
premises and to store beer on the premises, provided, however, that such licensee shall not sell for off premises consumption more than fifty thousand
(50,000) gallons of manufactured beer per year. The holder of a class A7 license shall at all times maintain a valid state of Illinois brewpub license or
craft brew license as required and authorized under section 5-1 of the Illinois liquor control act6, as amended.
I. Class B1: This license shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquors (packaged products) for consumption not on the premises where sold.
J. Class B2: This license shall authorize the retail sale of wine only, in bottles or other packages for consumption not on the premises where sold, except in
connection with winetasting events conducted on said premises.
K. Class C (BYOB): This license shall authorize the consumption of beer or wine only, brought onto the premises of a restaurant by a patron for their
personal consumption while being served a meal in said establishment, subject to the following conditions and restrictions:
1. Only beer and wine are allowed to be consumed on the licensed premises.
2. The license holder is only allowed to provide glasses and ice for the patrons.
3. The license holder, its agents and/or employees are prohibited from opening, serving, pouring, storing and/or disposing of any alcoholic liquor for its
patrons.
4. Patrons are prohibited from taking any opened alcoholic liquor from the premises. Any opened and unconsumed alcoholic liquor must be disposed of
by the patron prior to exiting the premises, in a proper drain and trash receptacle which is to be made available to the patron by the establishment,
and which shall be emptied by the establishment at the close of each business day.
L. Supplemental Patio (Beer Garden) License: The local liquor control commissioner may issue to holders of a class A, A1, A2, A3 or C license, a
supplemental patio license, which license shall permit the sale and/or consumption of alcoholic liquor in a patio area contiguous and adjacent to the
licensed premises in which food is served under a restaurant license, where such use is permitted by the zoning ordinance of the village. The following
conditions and restrictions shall apply to the issuance and validity of a supplemental patio license:
1. Alcoholic liquor may only be served or consumed in the patio area between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M. and twelve o'clock (12:00)
midnight on any day of the week.
2. No live entertainment or live music shall be permitted on the patio area.
3. The patio area shall be paved, screened and separated from the adjacent private or public property by a solid wood fence or appropriate structure or
barrier acceptable to the village and not less than five feet (5') in height, and which shall be maintained in good and attractive condition.
4. Entrance to and exit from the patio area shall be through the licensed premises.
M. Supplemental Sidewalk Cafe License: The local liquor control commissioner may issue to holders of a class A, A2, A3, or C license, a supplemental
sidewalk cafe license, which shall permit the sale and consumption of alcoholic liquor in an outdoor dining area on public sidewalks/bumpouts
contiguous and adjacent to the licensed premises, where such use is permitted by the zoning ordinance of the Village. The service of food for
consumption must constitute at least fifty percent (50%) of the gross business activity under the restaurant license. The following conditions and
restrictions shall apply to the issuance and continued validity of a supplemental sidewalk cafe license:
1. Alcoholic liquor may only be served or consumed in the sidewalk cafe between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M. and twelve o'clock (12:00)
midnight on any day of the week.
2. No live entertainment or live music shall be permitted in the sidewalk cafe area.
3. The outdoor dining area shall conform to the provisions set forth in title 4, chapter 3, article A of this Code. (Ord. O-34-14, 10-27-2014)
N. Class O (Off Site Caterer) License: This license shall authorize the sale and service of alcoholic liquor for consumption not on the licensed premises as
an incidental part of food service, as part of a private function or event, where prepared meals and alcoholic liquor are sold as part of an agreed upon
package price. (Ord. O-22-15, 9-14-2015)
O. Class V (Video Gaming) License: A supplemental liquor license only, which permits video gaming only in a licensed establishment, otherwise qualified
to hold a video gaming license under the Video Gaming Act. Class V licenses shall only be issued to holders of Class A, A1, A2, A3 or A7 local liquor
licenses, licensed fraternal establishments and licensed veterans' establishments. No Class V license shall be issued to any establishment organized
or existing primarily for the purpose of promoting video gaming.
1. A complete and accurate application to the Village for the issuance of a video gaming license shall be deemed an application for the issuance of a
Class V supplemental liquor license.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 70/416
2. Class V licenses may only be issued to qualified licensed establishments in good standing which have continuously held a Class A, A1, A2, A3 or A7
local liquor license, fraternal establishments and veterans' establishments and that have operated their business in good standing on a regular basis,
for a period of at least twelve (12) consecutive months prior to the date of application for a Class V license.
3. Class V licenses shall have the same hours of operation as provided for the underlying liquor license as set forth in section 3-3-9 of this chapter.
(Ord. O-26-16, 10-24-2016)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 03-19 - LIQUOR CONTROL. Go to new ordinance.
3-3-6: LICENSE FEES AND NUMBER:
Classification Annual Fees Number Of Licenses
A $1,800.00 16
A1 1,800.00 19
A2 1,600.00 4
A3 1,300.00 6
A4 250.00 0
A5 250.00 2
A6 1,200.00 0
A7 1,200.00 1
B1 1,800.00 7
B2 1,300.00 0
C (BYOB) 500.00 2
O 1,000.00 1
V 5,000.00 20
Additional fees:
Supplemental patio license $150.00 per approved license
Supplemental sidewalk cafe license $150.00 per approved license
Extra bar(s) on premises $150.00 per each additional public bar exceeding 1
(Ord. O-34-14, 10-27-2014; amd. Ord. O-22-15, 9-14-2015; Ord. O-23-15, 9-14-2015; Ord. O-23-16, 9-12-2016; Ord. O-24-16, 9-12-2016; Ord. O-26-16,
10-24-2016; Ord. O-01-17, 1-9-2017; Ord. O-05-17, 2-27-2017; Ord. O-28-17, 11-13-2017; Ord. O-13-18, 4-23-2018)
3-3-7: TERM; CONDITIONS REGARDING FEES:
A. Term Of License; Renewal Fees: Each license shall be issued for a period no longer than six (6) months and shall terminate on either April 30 or
October 31 next following its issuance. One-half (1/2) of the annual license fee must be paid on or before May 1 each license year, and one-half (1/2) of
the annual license fee must be paid on or before November 1 each license year. Failure to make the required payment by the dates set forth herein
shall preclude the issuance or renewal of a license. (Ord. O-09-08, 3-24-2008)
B. Failure To Pay; Revocation: In the event installments are not paid when due, the mayor shall promptly revoke such licenses and the failure to make
such payment shall also be cause for revocation. (Village code § 7-10)
C. Proration Of Fee: The fee to be paid shall be reduced in proportion to the full calendar months which have expired in the license year prior to the issued
license. (Village code § 7-11)
D. Disposition Of Fees: All such fees shall be paid to the local liquor control commissioner at the time of application being made, and shall be forthwith
turned over to the village treasurer. In the event the license applied for is denied, the fee shall be returned to the applicant. If the license is granted, the
fee shall be deposited in the general corporate fund or in such other fund as shall have been designated by the local liquor control commissioner by
proper action. (Village code § 7-12)
3-3-8: RECORDS:
The local liquor control commissioner shall keep, or cause to be kept, a complete record of all such licenses issued by him, and shall furnish the village
clerk, village treasurer and chief of police each with a copy thereof. Upon the issuance of any new license or the revocation of any old license, the local
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 71/416
liquor control commissioner shall give written notice of such action to each of these officers within forty eight (48) hours of such action. (Village code § 7-
13)
3-3-9: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
A. Transfer And Renewal: A license shall be purely a personal privilege, good for not to exceed one year after issuance, unless sooner revoked as in this
chapter provided, and shall not constitute property; nor shall it be subject to attachment, garnishment or execution; nor shall it be alienable or
transferable voluntarily or involuntarily or subject to being encumbered or hypothecated. Such license shall cease upon the death of the licensee, and
shall not descend by the laws of testate or intestate devolution, provided that executors or administrators of the estate of any deceased licensee, and
the trustee or any insolvent or bankrupt licensee, when such estate consists in part of alcoholic liquor, may continue the business of the sale or
manufacture of alcoholic liquor under the order of the appropriate court, and may exercise the privileges of the deceased or insolvent or bankrupt
licensee after the death of such decedent or such insolvency or bankruptcy, until the expiration of such license, but no longer than six (6) months after
the death, bankruptcy or insolvency of such licensee. A refund shall be made of that portion of the license fee paid for any period in which the licensee
shall be prevented from operating under the license, in accordance with the provisions in this subsection. (Village code § 7-18)
B. Location:
1. General: No license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor within one hundred feet (100') of any church, school (except schools
offering instruction limited to cooking or wine classes), hospital, home for aged or indigent persons, or for veterans, their spouses or children, or any
military or naval station; provided, however, that this prohibition shall not apply to hotels offering restaurant service, regularly organized clubs, or to
restaurants, food shops or other places where sale of alcoholic liquor is not the principal business carried on, nor to the renewal of a license for the
sale at retail of alcoholic liquor on premises within one hundred feet (100') of any church or school where such church or school has been
established within such one hundred feet (100') since the issuance of the original license.
Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit the issuance of a license to a church or a private school to sell at retail alcoholic liquor if any such sales are
limited to periods when groups are assembled on the premises solely for the promotion of some common object other than the sale or consumption
of alcoholic liquors. (Ord. O-54-03, 12-22-2003)
2. Change Of Location: A retail liquor dealer's license shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquor only in the premises prescribed in the application and
license. Such location may be changed only upon the written permit to make such change issued by the local liquor control commissioner. No
change of location shall be permitted unless the proposed location is a proper one for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor under the laws of this state
and the ordinances of the village. (Village code § 7-19)
C. View From Street: In premises upon which the sale of alcoholic liquor is licensed (other than a restaurant, hotel or club or a premises which is licensed
pursuant to the class A6 or B2 license provisions), no screen, blind, curtain, partition, article or thing shall be permitted in the windows or upon the
doors of such licensed premises, nor inside such premises, from the street, road or sidewalk at all times; and no booth screen partition, or other
obstruction, nor any arrangement of lights or lighting, shall be permitted in or about the interior of such premises, which shall prevent a clear view into
the interior from the street, road or sidewalk. Said premises must be so located that there shall be a full view of the entire interior of such premises from
the street, road or sidewalk. All rooms where liquor is sold for consumption upon the premises shall be continuously lighted during the business hours
by a natural light or artificial, white light so that all parts of the interior of the premises shall be clearly visible. In case the view into any such licensed
premises, required by the foregoing provisions, shall be wilfully obscured by the licensee or by him wilfully suffered to be obscured, or in any manner
obstructed, then such license shall be subject to revocation in the manner provided by law. In order to enforce the provisions of this section, the local
liquor control commissioner shall have the right to require the filing with him of plans, drawings and photographs showing the clearance of view as
above described and required. (Ord. O-30-06, 5-8-2006; amd. Ord. O-09-08, 3-24-2008)
D. Closing Hours:
1. General:
a. Except as provided in subsection D2, D3, D4, D5 or D6 of this section, it shall be unlawful to sell, permit to sell, or give away, alcoholic liquor
between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M., except on Saturday and Sunday and on any day officially designated
for observance of the following holidays: New Year's Day (January 1), the day after St. Patrick's Day (March 18), and Thanksgiving Day, on which
days alcoholic liquor may not be sold between the hours of three o'clock (3:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
b. It shall be unlawful to remain open for business, or to admit the public to any premises in, or on, which alcoholic liquor is sold at retail, during the
hours within which the sale of such liquor is prohibited, provided, however, that restaurants, clubs or hotels may remain open during such hours, so
long as no alcoholic liquor may be sold or consumed by the public during such hours.
2. Class A2 Licenses: Hours for the consumption of alcoholic liquor in a restaurant with a class A2 license shall be from eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M. to
eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. Sunday through Thursday, and eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M. to twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on Friday and Saturday.
3. Class A6 Licenses: Hours for the consumption of wine and the sale of packaged wine products in a premises with a class A6 license shall be from
eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M. to eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. on any day of the week. (Ord. O-09-08, 3-24-2008)
4. Class B1 Licenses: Effective November 1, 2013, it shall be unlawful to sell, give away or deliver, alcoholic liquor between the hours of eleven o'clock
(11:00) P.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. on each day. (Ord. O-26-13, 9-23-2013)
5. Class B2 Licenses: Hours for the consumption of wine and the sale of packaged wine products in a premises with a class B2 license shall be from
eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M. to eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. on any day of the week.
6. Class C Licenses: Hours for the consumption of alcoholic liquor in a restaurant with a class C license shall be from eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M. to
eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. Sunday through Thursday, and eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M. to twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on Friday and Saturday.
(Ord. O-09-08, 3-24-2008; amd. Ord. O-26-13, 9-23-2013)
E. Insurance And Indemnification: No license shall be granted to any applicant until such applicant shall furnish evidence satisfactory to the local liquor
control commissioner that such applicant is covered by a policy of dramshop insurance issued by a responsible insurance company authorized and
licensed to do business in the state of Illinois, insuring such applicant against liability which applicant may incur under the provisions of 235 Illinois
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 72/416
Compiled Statutes 5/6-21. The village shall be named a certificate holder on such policy of insurance, which shall provide that such policy shall not be
canceled or denied renewal unless the village is provided at least thirty (30) days' prior written notice thereof.
The provisions of this subsection shall be liberally construed and each applicant and license holder shall have the burden of providing the local liquor
control commissioner with satisfactory evidence that said insurance is in full force and effect at any particular time during the term of any such license.
Failure to do so after the issuance of any local liquor license shall render said license void ab initio.
As a condition of such license, the licensee shall be required to save and hold harmless, and indemnify the village, its officers, agents, employees and
officials from any and all claims or causes of action arising out of the consumption of alcoholic liquor on the licensed premises or the sale of alcoholic
liquor. (Ord. O-09-08, 3-24-2008)
F. Live Music: In any premises upon which the sale of alcoholic liquor is licensed, all exterior windows and doors to the licensed premises shall remain
closed during the playing or performing of any live music. (Ord. O-20-08, 5-27-2008)
G. Removal Of Waste Material And Litter: It shall be the duty of any person conducting a licensed business in the village to maintain the exterior of the
licensed premises in a safe, clean and sanitary manner at all times, including the duty to remove all waste material and all litter, including, but not
limited to, cigarette and cigar butts and paper from the public sidewalk, parkway and right of way adjacent to the licensed premises. All such waste
material and litter shall be placed in a refuse container for removal by the licensed premises' waste hauler. Any violation of such duty may result in the
revocation of the liquor license in the manner provided by law. (Ord. O-41-08, 10-14-2008)
3-3-10: SANITARY REQUIREMENTS:
A. Premises: All premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor, or for the storage of such liquor for such sale, shall be kept in a clean and sanitary
condition and shall be provided with sanitary equipment as follows:
1. Hot and cold running water for the cleaning and washing of glassware and similar utensils; and, the trough wherein said glassware and utensils are
cleaned and washed shall contain a nonharmful, humane chemical of sufficient potency to eliminate bacteria.
2. Sinks for kitchen use.
3. Not less than one lavatory and water closet for the use of each sex. (Village code § 7-21)
4. The wastewater from sinks, dishwashing machines, and all other fixtures likely to contain grease, located in any such establishment, shall before
entering the sewer, go into an approved and separating catch basin or grease trap. In the event a grease trap is used in said establishment, it shall
first be approved by the director of public health and safety. (Village code § 7-21; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
5. In addition to the foregoing requirements, the said establishment shall fully comply with all the ordinances of the village and statutes of the state of
Illinois regulating the conditions of premises used for the storage or sale of food for human consumption. (Village code § 7-21)
B. Employees: It shall be unlawful to employ, in any premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor, any person who is afflicted with, or who is a carrier
of, any contagious, infectious or venereal disease; and it shall be unlawful for any person, who is afflicted with or a carrier of any such disease, to work
in or about any premises or to engage in any way in the handling, preparation or distribution of such liquor. (Village code § 7-22)
3-3-11: MINORS:
A. Employment: No person under the age of twenty one (21) years shall sell, draw or mix or be permitted to sell, draw or mix any alcoholic liquor in any
premises licensed for the sale or dispensing of alcoholic liquor under this chapter. The provisions of this subsection shall not be construed to prevent
the employment of persons who are at least eighteen (18) years of age as waiters or waitresses in restaurants, hotels, or motels for the purpose of
serving food and alcoholic liquor on the licensed premises. (Ord. O-20-08, 5-27-2008)
B. Sales To:
1. No licensee or any officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of any licensee shall sell, give or deliver alcoholic liquor to any
person under the age of twenty one (21) years or to any intoxicated person or to any person known to him to be under legal disability or in need of
mental treatment.
2. No person, after purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic liquor, shall give or deliver alcoholic liquor to another person under the age of twenty
one (21) years except in the performance of a religious ceremony or service.
C. Purchases By: No person to whom the sale, gift or delivery of alcoholic liquor is prohibited shall consume, purchase or accept alcoholic liquor or have
alcoholic liquor in his possession. This subsection shall not apply to the dispensing or consumption of alcoholic liquor by a person under twenty one
(21) years of age in the performance of a religious ceremony or service, or the consumption by a person under twenty one (21) years of age under the
direct supervision of the parent, or parents or person in loco parentis in the privacy of a home. (Ord. O-22-96, 8-12-1996)
D. Misrepresentation Of Age: It shall be unlawful for any minor to misrepresent his age for the purpose of purchasing, obtaining or consuming alcoholic
liquor in any place within the village where alcoholic liquor is sold or offered for consumption. (Ord. O-29-00, 7-10-2000)
E. Presence Of Minors Prohibited:
1. Unlawful: It shall be unlawful for the holder of a liquor license, his agent or employee, to permit any person under the age of twenty one (21), except
waiters and waitresses, to be in or remain in any room or place in which alcoholic liquor (inclusive of beer and/or wine) is served, within an
establishment whose principal business is the sale of alcoholic liquor.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 73/416
2. Exceptions:
a. This subsection shall not apply to any minor who is accompanied by his parent(s) or legal guardian(s); however, the presence of such parent or
guardian does not grant the right or privilege to any person under the age of twenty one (21) to consume or possess any type of alcoholic liquor.
b. This subsection shall not apply to any restaurant or other establishment whose principal business activity is not the sale of alcoholic liquor.
However, such exception shall not apply to restaurants or other establishments wherein the kitchen/food preparation area is closed and food is no
longer being consumed or offered for sale and the premises are dispensing alcoholic liquor in any room or place in the premises. (Ord. O-30-00, 7-
10-2000)
3-3-12: AMUSEMENT ESTABLISHMENTS:
A. Definition: The term "amusement" as used herein is defined to mean and include any public show, theatrical, animate or inanimate exhibition, musical,
music, mechanical or manually operated entertainment device, or any other entertainment offered, operated, presented or exhibited to the public.
B. Restrictions:
1. No licensee shall sponsor, conduct, or permit amusements in any licensed premises unless the application for a license therefor has been submitted
to and approved by the local liquor commissioner and the village council.
2. In addition to the other regulations in this code governing the issuance of licenses or permits for amusements in any licensed premises, animated
entertainment in premises with a class A license with less than three thousand one (3,001) square feet shall not consist of more than three (3)
persons. (Ord. O-12-80, 6-23-1980)
3-3-13: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
A. Peddling Prohibited: It shall be unlawful to peddle alcoholic liquor in the village. (Village code § 7-20)
B. Preservation Of The Peace:
1. It shall be the duty and responsibility of each liquor license holder, his agents or employees to maintain the premises in a peaceable and orderly
manner so as not to allow any employee, patron or member of the public to commit any act, which act is done in an unreasonable manner so as to
alarm or disturb another or to provoke a breach of the peace.
2. Each liquor license holder shall employ sufficient agents or employees on the premises in order to maintain the peace. Any employee, agent or
person acting on behalf of the liquor license holder shall be suitably trained to maintain the peace of the premises and shall not act in any manner so
as to promote or aggravate situations which may result in physical altercations, fighting or other acts of an unreasonable manner so as to alarm or
disturb another or provoke a breach of the peace.
3. No liquor license holder, his agents or employees shall knowingly permit any fighting which shall consist of physical contact of an insulting or
provoking nature or cause physical harm to an individual.
4. "Premises", as defined for the purposes of this section shall mean the actual physical space within the establishment where alcoholic beverages are
sold to the public, any area set aside for the use by the general public (restrooms or lounges), any area used by the liquor license holder, his agents
or employees for preparation of services (kitchen and storage areas) and any outdoor area wherein the public is served or waiting to be served or
where customers are authorized to park any vehicle as well as the areas of ingress and egress to such parking facility.
5. Every liquor license holder, agent or employee who is present and observes any type of criminal activity or fighting, as defined above, is required to
immediately notify the police department. The police department shall then notify the local liquor commissioner of any conduct or patrons or other
persons on the premises of a liquor license establishment which results in any type of criminal activity, fighting or a breach of the peace.
6. Failure to report any incident as required under this subsection within two (2) business days may subject the liquor license holder to a revocation or
suspension of the retail liquor dealer's license, as well as possible fines imposed by the local liquor commissioner in the manner provided by statute.
7. The local liquor commissioner shall have the right and/or authority to revoke or suspend the retail liquor dealer's license as well as impose fines or
take any other legal action necessary to prevent the reoccurrence of a public nuisance as hereinabove defined in the manner provided by statute.
(Ord. O-31-00, 7-10-2000)
3-3-14: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE; IMPOSITION OF FINES:
A. Examination: The mayor of the village of Forest Park shall serve as local liquor control commissioner and he shall have the right to examine, or cause to
be examined, under oath, any applicant for a local liquor license or any licensee upon whom notice of revocation or suspension and/or fine has been
served, as provided by statute or this chapter, and to examine or cause to be examined the books and records of any such licensee to hear testimony
and take proof for his information in the performance of his duties, and for such purpose to issue subpoenas which shall be effective in any part of this
state. For the purpose of obtaining any of the information desired by the local liquor control commissioner under this chapter, he may authorize his
agent to act on his behalf, as provided by statute.
B. Powers And Duties: The local liquor control commissioner shall have the following powers, functions and duties with respect to licenses issued
hereunder:
1. To suspend for not more than thirty (30) days or revoke any local liquor license issued by him, if he determines that the local liquor licensee has
violated any ordinance, resolution or regulation enacted by the village or the licensee has violated any of the provisions of the liquor control act of
1934 or other law of the state of Illinois or any regulation adopted by the state of Illinois liquor control commission.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 74/416
2. In addition to or in lieu of a license suspension or revocation as herein provided, the local liquor control commissioner is further authorized to levy a
fine upon the licensee if he determines that the local liquor licensee has violated any ordinance, resolution or regulation enacted by the village or the
licensee has violated any of the provisions of the liquor control act of 1934 or other law of the state of Illinois or any regulation adopted by the state of
Illinois liquor control commission. The fine imposed shall not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for a first violation within a twelve (12) month
period, one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) for a second violation within a twelve (12) month period, and two thousand five hundred
dollars ($2,500.00) for a third or subsequent violation within a twelve (12) month period. Each day upon which a violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no more than fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) in fines may be imposed upon any licensee
during the annual period of his or her license. All proceeds from such fines shall be paid into the general corporate fund of the village of Forest Park.
3. The local liquor control commissioner is hereby authorized to enter or to authorize any law enforcing officer to enter at any time upon any premises
licensed hereunder to determine whether any of the provisions of the municipal code or resolution or regulations of the village of Forest Park or any
provisions of the Illinois liquor control act of 1934 or other law of the state of Illinois or this chapter, or any of the rules or regulations adopted by him
or by the state commission have been or are being violated, and at such time to examine the premises of said licensee in connection therewith.
C. Hearing Procedure:
1. Notice: No local liquor license shall be revoked, suspended, and no licensee shall be fined except after a public hearing before the local liquor
control commissioner or his or her designee with no less than a three (3) day written notice to the licensee setting forth the nature of the violation(s)
alleged and affording the licensee an opportunity to appear and defend.
2. Procedure:
a. Open To Public; Record Of Proceedings: All such hearings shall be open to the public and an official record shall be made by a certified court
reporter in attendance;
b. Motions To Be In Writing: All motions shall be in writing and shall be served upon the local liquor control commissioner at least one day prior to
presentation;
c. Motion For Continuance: No motion for a continuance first made on the date of the hearing shall be granted unless by agreement of the parties
and approved by the local liquor control commissioner or for good cause shown;
d. Disposition By Determination, Stipulation, Agreed Settlement, Consent Order, Or Default: Disposition of any matter brought before the local liquor
control commissioner for hearing may be made by determination by the local liquor control commissioner, or by stipulation, agreed settlement,
consent order, or default;
e. Reasons For Action; Service: If the local liquor control commissioner determines that the licensee is not liable for the offense charged or that the
local liquor license shall be revoked or suspended and/or a fine imposed, the local liquor control commissioner shall state the reasons for such
determination in a written order setting forth that the licensee is not liable for the offense charged or setting forth the period of suspension or that
the license has been revoked and/or the amount of the fine imposed, as the case may be; and he shall serve a copy of such written order within
five (5) days upon the licensee;
f. Emergency Closure: If the local liquor control commissioner has reason to believe that continued operation of any licensed premises presents an
imminent threat to the health or welfare of the village, he may, upon the issuance of a written order stating the reason(s) for such conclusion and
without notice or prior hearing, order the licensed premises closed for a period not to exceed seven (7) days. The local liquor control commissioner
shall afford the licensee an opportunity to be heard during the seven (7) day period in accordance with the hearing procedures set forth herein;
g. Appeal Of Local Liquor Control Commissioner Decision: Any licensee aggrieved by a decision of the local liquor control commissioner may appeal
that decision pursuant to the provisions of section 5/7-9 of the Illinois liquor control act of 19347, provided, however, that any appeal of the
proceedings for the imposition of a revocation or suspension and/or fine shall be limited to review of the official record of the proceedings before
the local liquor control commissioner.
D. Use Of Premises After Revocation: When any local liquor license shall have been revoked for cause, no local liquor license shall be granted to any
person or entity for the period of one year thereafter for the conduct of the sale of alcoholic liquor in the premises described in the order of revocation,
unless the local liquor control commissioner vacates the revocation order or unless the revocation order was entered as to the offending licensee only.
(Ord. O-51-09, 8-10-2009)
3-3-15: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
(Rep. by Ord. O-51-09, 8-10-2009)
3-3-16: LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL HEARING OFFICER:
A. There is hereby created the administrative position of local liquor control hearing officer. The local liquor control hearing officer shall serve at the
discretion of the mayor. Such appointment or removal of the local liquor control hearing officer shall be made in writing by the mayor and such
appointment shall set forth the duties and responsibilities of the local liquor control hearing officer consistent with the provisions of the liquor control act
of 19348.
B. Compensation for the local liquor control hearing officer shall be as from time to time determined by the village council. (Ord. O-55-07, 11-13-2007)
3-3-17: ALCOHOL SELLERS AND SERVERS EDUCATION AND TRAINING:
A. Definitions:
ALCOHOL SERVER: Person(s) who sell, pour, mix or serve open containers of alcoholic beverages at retail and anyone whose job description entails
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 75/416
the checking of identification for the purchase of open containers of alcoholic beverages at retail or for entry into the licensed premises. The definition
of alcohol server excludes a distributor or importing distributor conducting product sampling as authorized in section 6-31 of the liquor control act of
19349, a registered tasting representative, as provided in 11 Illinois administrative code 100.40, conducting a tasting, as defined in 11 Illinois
administrative code 100.10, a special event retailer or volunteer serving alcoholic beverages at a charitable function or an instructor engaged in training
or educating on the proper technique for using a system that dispenses alcoholic beverages.
LICENSEE: The holder of a village of Forest Park class A, A1, A2, A3, A7, B1 or B2 village of Forest Park retail local liquor license.
STATE CERTIFIED BASSET TRAINING PROGRAM: A BASSET program licensed by the state of Illinois liquor control commission (ILCC) as required
by sections 3-12 (11.1) and 6-27 of the liquor control act of 193410 and title 77 of the Illinois administrative code, chapter XVI, section 3500.
B. Completion Of Program: All alcohol servers, as herein defined, and managers of liquor licensed establishments shall have successfully completed an
ILCC BASSET approved seller/server training program within one hundred twenty (120) days of the first date of their employment by the licensee.
C. New Employees: New employees required to successfully complete BASSET training shall perform their duties under the direct supervision of a person
who has successfully completed BASSET training until they have successfully completed an ILCC BASSET approved seller/server training program.
D. Certificates Of Completion: Photocopies of certificates of completion for all persons required by this section to have completed BASSET training shall
be maintained, by the licensed establishment, on the licensed premises, in such a manner that will allow the immediate inspection, upon demand, by
any law enforcement officer of the village of Forest Park, Illinois state police, agents of the Illinois liquor control commission or local liquor control
commissioner of the village of Forest Park.
E. Penalty: It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any licensee to employ or act as agent or manager to any person in violation of this
section. (Ord. O-30-15, 11-9-2015)
Chapter 4
AMUSEMENTS
3-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
AMUSEMENT: Any public show, theatrical exhibition, circus or any other entertainment offered, operated, presented or exhibited to the public.
AMUSEMENT PLACE: Any building, hall, room, grounds, picnic grove or enclosure where the public may be admitted, with or without the payment of a fee
or charge, for the purpose of witnessing or engaging in an amusement, whether musical or otherwise, picnics, dancing or skating by patrons or other
persons. (Village Code § 8-1)
3-4-2: LICENSES REQUIRED; FEES:
No person shall operate or manage any amusement which is open to the public without obtaining a license therefor. Applications for such licenses shall be
made in the manner provided for in this code. The license fees for such licenses shall be as provided in section 3-5-1 of this title.
Any person sponsoring an amusement or place of amusement defined herein shall be required to provide adequate police protection for such activity
consisting of at least one officer or other authorized person for each one hundred (100) patrons or less, and shall be responsible for the payment of such
police protection. (Ord. O-11-80, 6-23-1980)
3-4-3: COIN OPERATED MUSICAL DEVICES:
A. Definition: The term "coin operated musical device" is hereby defined to mean and include all devices, machines or apparatus designed and used for
the electrical or mechanical reproduction of music for amusement or entertainment, the operation of which is governed or controlled by the deposit of
coins or tokens.
B. License Required: It shall be unlawful to own, operate, keep or maintain a coin operated musical device in any place ofbusiness open to the public in
the village without first obtaining a license therefor.
C. Application For License: The application for a license to own, operate, keep or maintain a coin operated musical or amusement device, or machine shall
be made in the manner provided for in this chapter.
D. License Fee: The annual license fee for each device or machine shall be as provided in section 3-5-1 of this title.
E. Conditions Of License:
1. License Not Assignable Or Transferable: No license granted pursuant to the terms of this section shall be assigned or transferred to any other
person, nor shall any such license authorizing any person, other than the licensee named herein, to keep, operate or maintain said device, or
machine, unless the entire business in which the device is located has been sold and the assets thereof transferred to the purchaser.
2. Hours Of Operation: No person shall permit the operation of any device licensed hereunder between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and nine
o'clock (9:00) A.M., with the exception of duly authorized liquor licensees in whose establishments the device may be operated between the hours
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 76/416
during which the sale of alcoholic liquor is permitted1. (Ord. O-2-96, 1-22-1996)
3-4-4: COIN AUTOMATIC AMUSEMENTS:
A. Definition: For purposes of this section, the term "automatic amusement" shall mean any mechanical or electronic amusement machine or device, the
operation of which is governed by the insertion of coins, tokens, chips or similar objects (and which does not return any money or property to the
player) returns to the player thereof no money or property, excluding machines or devices which return vocal or musical sounds or which are regulated
in section 3-4-3 of this chapter.
B. License Required: No person shall deliver, install or cause to be delivered or installed, an automatic amusement machine within the village for use by
any other person for gain or profit from operation unless a license has been issued for the current license period.
C. Application For License: In addition to the license application provided for in this section, the applicant for the license provided for herein shall file a
statement of the method and manner that will be employed to assure that the automatic amusement machines will not be used for gambling and will
not be accessible to minors unaccompanied by a parent or legal guardian.
D. License Fee: An annual license fee as provided in section 3-5-1 of this title is imposed upon each qualifying automatic amusement used in the village
for gain or profit from operation.
E. Conditions Of License:
1. Gambling Prohibited: No person shall keep, permit to be kept or use an automatic amusement for the awarding of money, property or anything else
of value. No license shall be issued for any automatic machines that display a poker hand or dice or other material commonly associated with a
gambling activity in the manner as displayed and used in play.
2. Display Of License: It shall be the duty of the licensee to affix the license in a conspicuous place on the licensed automatic amusement machines.
Inspections of the machines for licenses can be conducted anytime and at least twice annually.
3. Use By Minors: No person shall permit or allow any minor unaccompanied by a parent or legal guardian to use an automatic amusement machine.
4. Miscellaneous Provisions:
a. The annual license fee for the machine shall be paid at the time of the application's approval and is nonrefundable and nontransferable. (Ord. O-1-
96, 1-22-1996)
b. The village clerk shall either approve a license, require the statement be modified to further comply with this section, deny the application or
impose conditions upon the licensee to require conformance with this section. (Ord. O-1-96, 1-22-1996; amd. 2004 Code)
c. The applicant may appeal the decision of the village clerk to the entire village council by filing a notice of appeal with the village clerk within thirty
(30) days of the date of decision by the village clerk.
d. The license for any coin operated amusement currently licensed upon the terms of this section will be forfeited in the event that the machine fails
to comply with all provisions of this section at any time during the license period. A fine for a violation of this section and a new license fee may be
imposed if the license is thereafter reinstated.
e. The applicant for a license under this section must provide the name, address and current phone number for the distributor of the machines to be
used, and that distributor may be subject to a detailed background investigation.
f. The location in which additional coin operated amusements are placed will be inspected at any time by the fire department and may be evaluated
to determine compliance with occupancy requirements. (Ord. O-1-96, 1-22-1996)
F. Violations: Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof be fined as provided in the general penalty in section 1-3-
1 of this code for each offense. (Ord. O-1-96, 1-22-1996; amd. 2004 Code)
3-4-5: MOTION PICTURE AND OTHER THEATERS:
A. License Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a moving picture or vaudeville show, or similar entertainment, where an admission fee,
except for the benefit of a religious, educational or charitable organization, is charged and regular performance is given, until a license for the same has
been issued, as hereinafter provided. (Village Code § 8-9)
B. Application: Applications for such licenses shall be made in the manner provided for in this code. (Village Code § 8-10)
C. License Fees: The annual fee for such license shall be as provided in section 3-5-1 of this title. (Village Code § 8-11)
D. Conditions Of License:
1. Aisles: Aisles and rooms used for this purpose, shall have in the aggregate a width of not less than twenty inches (20") for each one hundred (100)
of seating capacity of such room, and no aisle shall have a width of less than two feet six inches (2'6"). Every aisle passageway, entrance and exit
shall be free of turnstiles, railings or other obstructions. (Village Code § 8-12)
2. Exits: A least two (2) entrance doors shall be provided, and no entrance door shall be less than four feet (4') in width. If the rear of the building abuts
upon any alley, there shall be provided not less than two (2) emergency exits leading directly to said alley. If the side of the auditorium abuts upon a
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 77/416
street or alley, one exit shall be placed at a distance of not more than five feet (5') from the stage and the other exit shall be located at a distance half
way between the foyer and the stage wall. (Village Code § 8-13)
3. Doors: All doors affording ingress, or egress, to the building shall open outward and shall not be obscured by curtains or draperies; and no door shall
be locked or fastened during the time such building is open to the public. (Village Code § 8-14)
4. Projection Booths: The walls, floor and ceiling of every moving picture booth or machine house, shall be built of four inch (4") hollow tile or four inch
(4") solid concrete, supported on iron beams or columns. The door of the operating room to be metal clad and swing outward. There shall be a metal
smoke or flue pipe eighteen inches (18") in diameter, extending from the ceiling to three feet (3') above the roof of the machine house, and
terminating in the open air. (Village Code § 8-15)
5. Exit Signs: The word "exit" shall appear in letters six inches (6") high over the openings to every means of egress from suchroom. (Village Code § 8-
16)
6. Fire Apparatus: Approved portable fire extinguishers, or pumps, shall always be kept ready for use about the room; and each theater shall be
provided with an approved automatic fire alarm apparatus connected with the fire hose. (Village Code § 8-17)
7. Lighting: All electrical lighting shall be installed in accordance with the electrical code, and shall be of such intensity as to adequately illuminate all
areas. (Village Code § 8-18)
E. Carnivals, Street Shows, Etc.: No permit shall be granted for any carnival, street show, circus or other amusement, on any public street or sidewalk,
except by order of the village council. (Village Code § 8-21)
F. Athletic Exhibitions:
1. It shall be unlawful to conduct operate or exhibit, any race, baseball game, boxing or wrestling match or any other athletic contest, or exhibition, for
private gain, for admission to which a fee is charged, without having procured a license therefor.
2. The proprietor of such exhibition shall submit to the village clerk, a statement verified under oath, of the gross receipts of each game, contest or race
within one week after such exhibition. At the same time, such proprietor, or person exhibiting or operating such exhibition, shall pay to the village
clerk, a sum equal to three percent (3%) of the gross receipts2.
3. Sufficient members of the police department shall be admitted, free of charge to all such exhibitions for the purpose of preserving and maintaining
order. The village clerk may post a person, or any number of persons, at the box office of each such performance; and may examine all the books
pertaining to such performance showing, or tending to show, the gross receipts. (Village Code § 8-22)
G. Violation; Penalty: Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall be fined as provided in the general penalty in section 1-3-1 of
this code for each offense. Each day that the violation continues shall be regarded as constituting a distinct and separate offense. (Village Code § 8-24;
amd. 2004 Code)
3-4-6: BILLIARD AND POOL TABLES:
A. License Required: No person shall operate, maintain or conduct a billiard, pool, bagatelle or pigeonhole table, open to the public, without first obtaining
a license therefor. (Village Code§ 8-25)
B. License Fee: The annual fee for any such license shall be as provided in section 3-5-1 of this title. (Village Code § 8-26)
C. Conditions Of License:
1. Minors: No person who keeps, conducts or operates any billiard or pool table, or who keeps, conducts or operates any room or rooms, or enclosures
or such as kept, operated or conducted shall permit, or allow, any minors under the age of eighteen (18) years to play thereon; or to use such table;
or to be, or remain in, or frequent any such room or enclosure. (Village Code § 8-27; amd. 2004 Code)
2. Hours Of Operation: No billiard hall, or other hall licensed hereunder, shall be open for business, or used, between the hours of one o'clock (1:00)
A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. (Village Code § 8-28)
D. Penalty: Any person violating the provision of this section shall be fined as provided in the general penalty in section 1-3-1 of this code for each offense.
Al separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during, or which, a violation occurs or continues. (Village Code § 8-29; amd. 2004 Code)
3-4-7: BOWLING ALLEYS:
A. License Required: No person shall operate or maintain a bowling alley open to the public without first obtaining a license therefor. (Village Code § 8-30)
B. License Fee: The annual fee for such license shall be as provided in section 3-5-1 of this title. (Village Code § 8-31)
C. Penalty: Any person violating any provision of this section shall be fined as provided in the general penalty in section 1-3-1 of this code for each
offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Village Code § 8-32; amd.
2004 Code)
3-4-8: MODEL AUTO RACEWAYS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 78/416
A. License Required: No person shall operate or maintain a model auto raceway open to the public without first obtaining a license therefor. (Village Code
§ 8-33)
B. License Fee: The annual license fee for a model auto raceway shall be as provided in section 3-5-1 of this title. (Village Code § 8-34)
C. Penalty: Any person violating any provision of this section shall be fined as provided in the general penalty in section 1-3-1 of this code for each
offense. A separate offense shall bedeemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Village Code § 8-35; amd.
2004 Code)
Chapter 5
BUSINESSES, OCCUPATIONS AND TRADES
3-5-1: SPECIFIC LICENSES AND FEES:
A. Business Licenses And Fees: Unless otherwise provided, annual license and permit fees for businesses, occupations and trades in the Village shall be
as follows:
Advertisers, outdoor $ 50.00
Ambulance 100.00
Ambulance, use of Village:
For residents and non-residents of Forest Park:
Basic life support 700.00
Advanced life support level 1 1,200.00
Advanced life support level 2 1,400.00
ALS2 - medicare 650.00
Oxygen 75.00
Pulse ox 75.00
Cardiac monitor 200.00
Mileage $25.00 per mile, with a 3 mile minimum
Mileage - med and PA $ 10.00
Amusements:
Carnivals, per day 50.00
Circuses, per day 50.00
Coin operated device 200.00
Coin operated musical device 200.00
Auctions and auctioneers:
Per year 300.00
Per day 60.00
Auto raceways, model 100.00
Automobile establishments:
Accessories, tires and body repair 125.00
Repair 125.00
Sales 250.00
Barber and beauty shops 100.00
Benches, each 5.00
Bicycle shop 100.00
Billiard and pool halls, per table 150.00
Boiler and heating plant dealers:
Annual fee prior to November 1 of any year 50.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 79/416
After November 1 of any year 12.50
Employees over 1, each 2.50
Bowling alley, per alley 25.00
Brokers 100.00
Catch basin/sewer cleaners 100.00
Contractors:
Roofer1 100.00
Sheet metal 100.00
Sign hanger 100.00
Druggist 100.00
Dry cleaners 100.00
Dry goods 100.00
Elevator/escalator 75.00 per inspection
Employees:
Type 1, each 2.50
Type 2, each 5.00
Entertainment:
Type 1 (1 person) 100.00
Type 2 (2 or 3 persons) 125.00
Type 3 (4 to 6 persons) 175.00
Type 4 (over 6 persons) 250.00
Excavator 25.00
Express services 100.00
Financial institution 125.00
5/10 store 100.00
Florist 100.00
Food establishments:
Ambulatory food establishment:
First vehicle 100.00
Each additional vehicle 50.00
Bakery 100.00
Deli/grocery 100.00
Meats/poultry/fish market 100.00
Outdoor dining:
Application fee 125.00
Annual fee 125.00
Restaurant 100.00
Supermarket:
Under 10,000 square feet 300.00
Over 10,000 square feet 450.00
Vehicle carrying foodstuff 50.00
Fuel oil distributor 150.00
Furniture/appliance 100.00
Gasoline filling station (1,000 gallon tank or fraction thereof), each 100.00
General store 150.00
Hardware/paint 125.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 80/416
Hotels, for each sleeping room for guests 1.00
Junk shops:
Annual fee 500.00
Collection of junk 50.00
Landscaper/forestry 100.00
Laundry and launderettes:
First 10 machines 100.00
Each additional machine 5.00
Lumber and materials yard 300.00
Machine shop:
1 employee 100.00
Each additional employee 2.50
Mall business:
Type 1 (first 1,000 square feet) 50.00
Type 2 (each additional 1,000 square feet) 25.00
Type 3 (over 40,500 square feet) 1,000.00
Mall carts:
Type 1 (30 consecutive days) 25.00
Type 2 (90 consecutive days) 75.00
Type 3 (annual) 125.00
Massage:
Establishments, filing fee 100.00
Therapists:
Initial application 25.00
Renewal applications 10.00
Miscellaneous business 100.00
Multimarts:
Under 3,000 square feet 150.00
3,000 to 10,000 square feet 200.00
Over 10,000 square feet but not considered a supermarket 250.00
Newspaper vending 5.00
Newsstand 100.00
Nurseries 100.00
Nursery, childcare 100.00
Nursing home 300.00
Office equipment/supplies 125.00
Parking garage:
Where capacity is 25 or less, per space 3.00
Where capacity exceeds 25 vehicles, plus $1.50 for each vehicle space in excess of 25 75.00
Where vehicles are sold or exchanged, an additional annual fee of 112.50
Parking lots:
Type 1 (up to 25 spaces) 100.00
Type 2 (over 25 spaces), each 3.00
Type 3 (maximum) 300.00
Pawnbroker 100.00
Peddlers, commercial solicitors and itinerant vendors 90.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 81/416
Picnics, per day 25.00
Printing/publishing 100.00
Plus, per employee 2.50
Residential sales (garage and yard), per sale:
Conducted by residents of the premises 10.00
All other sales, i.e., estate sale, house sale, block or multi-family sale 25.00
Rooming houses, per person 5.00
Scavenger 2,500.00
Secondhand dealers 25.00
Shoe repair 100.00
Storage 125.00
Taxicabs:
Type 1 (1 to 5 cabs) 100.00
Type 2 (over 6 cabs) 150.00
Theater:
Type 1 (1 to 500 seats) 200.00
Type 2 (501 to 1,000 seats) 550.00
Type 3 (1,001 to 1,500 seats) 850.00
Type 4 (over 1,501 seats) 1,300.00
Tobacco dealers:
Retailer 300.00
Tumbling centers 50.00
Undertaker 150.00
Vending machines:
1 to 5 slots 15.00
Over 5 slots, each 2.50
Veterinary hospital 125.00
Wholesale meat distributor 125.00
Workshop/manufacturer 125.00
Note:
1.See subsection 3-5D-4C of this chapter for individual permit fees.
(Ord. O-6-90, 3-26-1990; amd. Ord. O-02-02, 1-14-2002; Ord. O-16-02, 3-25-2002; Ord. O-17-05, 5-9-2005; Ord. O-30-05, 6-27-2005; Ord. O-35-05, 7-26-
2005; Ord. O-35-08, 7-14-2008; Ord. O-31-09, 4-27-2009; Ord. O-06-18, 3-26-2018; Ord. O-14-18, 5-14-2018)
B. Fees Prorated:
1. Any person conducting or engaging in any of the foregoing businesses, trades, callings, occupations or employments, as set forth in this chapter,
who has commenced a new business, trade, occupation, calling or employment between May 1 and October 31, shall pay the full license or permit
fee as set forth above.
2. Any person conducting or engaging in any of the foregoing businesses, trades, callings, occupations or employments, as set forth in this chapter,
who has commenced a new business, trade, occupation, calling or employment between November 1 and April 30, shall pay one-half (1/2) of the
license or permit fee as set forth above. (Ord. O-13-01, 3-26-2001)
C. Renewal Required: All annual licenses issued to a person conducting or engaging in any of the foregoing businesses, trades, callings, occupations, or
employments, as set forth in this chapter, shall be renewed before May 1 of each year upon payment of the required fee. The administrative
procedures as outlined in chapter 1 of this title and the penalty provisions as set forth in section 3-5-2 of this chapter, shall apply to such renewal and to
any noncompliance on the part of a licensee. (Ord. O-17-07, 4-23-2007)
3-5-2: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 82/416
A. Any person convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, and the articles contained herein, shall be punished as provided in the
general penalty provisions of section 1-3-1 of this code. Each day any violation of any provision of this chapter shall continue shall constitute a separate
offense.
B. In addition to the general penalties provided for noncompliance with this chapter, any person who has not complied with the requirements contained in
subsection 3-5-1C of this chapter shall incur a penalty as follows:
1. If renewal in accordance with subsection 3-5-1C of this chapter does not occur before June 1, the licensee shall incur a penalty of one hundred
percent (100%) of the original license fee.
2. If renewal in accordance with subsection 3-5-1C of this chapter does not occur before July 1, the licensee shall incur a penalty of two hundred
percent (200%) of the original license fee. (Ord. O-17-07, 4-23-2007)
ARTICLE A. SALES AND RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS
3-5A-1: DRY GOODS STORES:
A. License Required: No person shall own, operate or conduct a dry goods store, children's wear store, dress shop, vanity goods, fur shop, gift shop,
hosiery shop, millinery store, men's furnishings store or lingerie store without first obtaining a license therefor. (Village Code § 11-95; amd. 2004 Code)
B. License Fee: The annual license fee for a dry goods store, or any of the miscellaneous shops or stores set forth in this section, shall be as set out in
section 3-5-1 of this chapter. (Village Code § 11-96)
C. Sanitation Requirements: All such stores and shops must be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition at all times. (Village Code § 11-97)
3-5A-2: HARDWARE AND PAINT STORES:
A. Definitions:
RETAIL HARDWARE STORE: Any establishment operated for the sale of, or offering for sale, at retail, any of the following articles: hardware, tinware,
aluminum ware, enamel ware, cutlery, tools, implements, apparatus, machinery, plumbing; engineer's, janitor's, blacksmith's, contractor's or electrical
supplies; gas, plumbing or electrical fixtures; other articles or wares, made largely of metals; kerosene. Provided, however, that dealers, or
establishments; or parts of establishments of a similar nature, specifically defined and licensed elsewhere in this code, shall be exempt from the
provisions of this section.
RETAIL PAINT STORE: Any establishment operated for the sale, at retail, of any paints, dry colors, wallpaper, varnishes, calcimine, white or red lead,
raw or boiled linseed oil, turpentine, drier, benzine, naphtha; or painters' tools, supplies or equipment. Provided, however, that dealers or
establishments of a similar nature specifically defined and licensed by other provisions of this code, shall be exempt from the provisions of this section.
(Village Code § 11-123)
B. License Required: No person shall engage in the business of a retail hardware or paint store without having first obtained a license therefor. (Village
Code § 11-124)
C. License Fees: Fees for retail hardware and/or paint stores, as licensed herein, are set out in section 3-5-1 of this chapter. (Village Code § 11-125)
3-5A-3: BICYCLE SHOPS:
A. Definitions:
BICYCLE SHOP: A shop, store or other place of business where bicycles are sold at retail, or where bicycle accessories are sold, or where bicycles
are repaired or rented. (Village code § 11-43)
B. License Required: No person shall establish, maintain or operate a bicycle shop for the sale or rental of bicycles without first obtaining a license
therefor. (Village code § 11-44)
C. License Fee: The annual license fee for a bicycle shop shall be as set out in section 3-5-1 of this chapter. (Village code § 11-45)
D. Rental Agencies: Bicycles offered for rent by a rental agency shall be equipped with lights and all safety equipment required and shall be kept in safe
working order. The chief of police shall make periodic inspection of bicycle shops to ascertain that they are complying with all the requirements of the
laws of the village and of the state of Illinois. (Village code § 11-46)
3-5A-4: BOILER AND HEATING PLANT DEALERS:
A. License Required: No person shall engage in the business of installing steam, vapor or hot water boilers within the village, without first obtaining a
license therefor. (Village code § 11-47)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 83/416
B. License Fees: License fees for conducting the business of selling, installing or replacing steam, vapor or hot water boilers, shall be as set out in section
3-5-1 of this chapter. The number of employees shall be determined by the largest number employed at any time, in the preceding year. For the first
year, the fee and license shall be for the number of employees stated in the application. (Village code § 11-48)
C. Approval Required: Any such person conducting the business of installing or replacing boilers or furnaces, shall comply with the provisions of the
ordinances relative to buildings; and work shall be subject to the approval of the director of public health and safety. (Village code § 11-49; amd. Ord.
O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
D. Disposal Of Wastes: Any person conducting the business of installing boilers shall, upon completion of each job, remove all old or surplus material
within three (3) days. Said material shall not be placed on vacant lots, streets or alleys, but must be removed outside of the corporate limits of the
village within the time above specified. (Village code § 11-50)
3-5A-5: MACHINE SHOPS:
A. Definition:
MACHINE SHOP: A place, building or structure in which machines are made or metal parts thereof are repaired, or where parts of machines, tools,
implements, gears, dies, screws or other metal articles are cut, filed, shaped, punched, stamped or repaired by means of various articles of machinery.
(Village code § 11-163)
B. License Required: No person shall operate a machine shop without first obtaining a license therefor. Provided, however, that this section shall not apply
to any other businesses, if any, specifically licensed under this code. (Village code § 11-164)
C. License Fee: The annual license fee for a machine shop shall be as set out in section 3-5-1 of this chapter. (Village code § 11-165)
D. Sanitary Requirements:
1. Every machine shop shall be kept in a clean, sanitary condition. All articles made, altered, repaired or finished in such establishment shall be kept
free from vermin and any other matter of an infectious or contagious nature. No person suffering from any active, contagious or infectious disease
shall be employed in any such establishment.
2. All waste matter shall be disposed of at least once each day, and in such manner as not to cause a nuisance.
3. In all machine shops, adequate ventilation, washing and toilet facilities shall be provided. (Village code § 11-166)
3-5A-6: PAWNBROKERS:
A. License Required: No person shall operate or conduct the business of a pawnbroker without obtaining a license therefor. (Village code § 11-194)
B. License Fee: The annual license fee for a pawnbroker shall be as set out in section 3-5-1 of this chapter. (Village code § 11-195)
C. Records Kept: Every pawnbroker, doing business in the village, shall keep a record of every article pledged with him, or sold to him. This record shall be
open to the inspection of any police officer at any time. (Village Code § 11-196)
D. Weapons: Every pawnbroker shall keep every revolver, pistol, blackjack or other weapon in his possession under lock and key. (Village Code § 11-197)
3-5A-7: PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND ITINERANT VENDORS:
A. Definitions:
COMMERCIAL SOLICITOR: A person engaged in the business of obtaining orders or subscriptions for merchandise while going from place to place, in
the village, on the public ways, in commercial establishments, or on residential property, in order to contact persons where such persons have made no
previous request, invitation or appointment.
ITINERANT VENDOR: A person who conducts a temporary or transient business selling goods, wares or merchandise, with the intention of not
continuing such business for more than one hundred twenty (120) days, and who, for the purpose of carrying on such business, uses, leases, or
occupies a room, building, or other structure, for the exhibition of such wares or merchandise.
NONCOMMERCIAL SOLICITOR: A person engaged in an appeal for funds, support or aid for nonprofit organizations promoting charitable,
educational, religious or legitimate public action causes.
PEDDLER: A person who sells or offers for sale any commodity or article while traveling from place to place, and who carries such commodity or article
on his person or in a vehicle for delivery at the time of sale.
SOLICITOR: A person engaged in a business for profit, who seeks to obtain subscriptions for books, magazines, newspapers or other publications, not
delivered at the time of sale, or offering to furnish services or inviting orders for services.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 84/416
B. License Required:
1. Application: Every person seeking to be a "peddler", "solicitor", "itinerant vendor", or "commercial solicitor", as those terms are defined in subsection
A of this section, must first obtain a license from the village clerk by completing an application on a form to be furnished by the village clerk, and such
applicant shall furnish the following information:
a. Name and address of present place of residence and length of residence at such address, and residence address for three (3) years next
preceding the date of application;
b. Business address if other than residence address;
c. The applicant's social security number and date of birth;
d. A physical description of the applicant;
e. Name and address of the person by whom the applicant is employed or represents, and the length of time of such employment or representation;
f. Name and address of employer during the past three (3) years, if other than the present employer;
g. A brief description of the nature and purpose of the business, promotion, solicitation, organization, cause, and/or the goods or services offered;
h. Period of time for which license is sought;
i. The date, or approximate date, of the latest previous application for license under this section, if any;
j. Whether any similar license issued to the applicant has ever been revoked by any municipality;
k. Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this section or an ordinance of any other municipality
regulating such similar activity;
l. Evidence that the applicant is authorized to solicit for the organization represented;
m. Whether the applicant has been convicted of a felony within the preceding ten (10) years, or convicted of a misdemeanor or ordinance violation
within the preceding ten (10) years, and the nature of the offense.
n. The applicant shall also furnish a form of photo identification, either a valid driver's license or a state issued photo ID, at the time the application is
submitted to the village clerk.
2. Investigation: The application shall be investigated by the police department, which shall conduct a criminal background check to determine whether
the applicant has been convicted of a felony, misdemeanor or ordinance violation within the last ten (10) years. The applicant shall pay the cost of
such criminal background investigation, which shall be included within the license fee set forth in subsection B4 of this section.
3. Issuance Prohibited: No license shall be issued to a person who:
a. Submits an application containing any false information;
b. Has been convicted of a felony within the last ten (10) years;
c. Has been convicted of a misdemeanor or ordinance violation within the last ten (10) years, if the basis for the conviction is reasonably related to
the activity for which such license is sought.
4. License Fee: The annual license fee for activities described in this section shall be as set out in section 3-5-1 of this chapter, which license fee shall
include the cost of conducting a criminal background investigation and of furnishing a photo identification card to the licensee.
C. Regulations For Peddlers, Commercial Solicitors, Solicitors And Itinerant Vendors:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the activities regulated by subsection B of this section without first securing a license therefor.
2. Each person shall at all times, while exercising the privilege in the village incident to such license, carry and display upon his person a photo
identification card which shall be issued by the village at the time that the license is issued. Such identification card shall be required to be returned
to the village upon the expiration of the license. A fee for the cost of furnishing such identification card shall be included in the license fee identified in
subsection B4 of this section.
3. It shall be unlawful for any such person to remain upon any private property after having been asked by the owner or occupant thereof to leave such
property.
4. It shall be unlawful for any such person who is uninvited by the owner or occupant to engage in such licensed activity upon any private premises or
residence or business located thereon, if such premises or residence has posted thereon a sign which reads "No Solicitation" in a location which is
reasonably visible to persons who intend to enter upon such property.
5. It shall be unlawful for any person who engages in such licensed activity to use any plan, scheme or ruse or make any statement which indicates or
implies that the purpose of such person's solicitation is other than to obtain orders for or to make sales of goods or services.
6. No such person shall interfere with either vehicular or pedestrian traffic on the public right of way.
7. It shall be unlawful for any such person to perform the licensed activity by shouting or by using any sound device in connection with such licensed
activity, including bells or amplifying systems.
D. Revocation Of License: The village council may revoke licenses required by this section upon receipt of information or upon its own investigation, after
hearing and upon notice to the holder of the license, by reason of the violation of any provisions of this section or the misrepresentation of any
statement set forth in the application for such license.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 85/416
E. Noncommercial Solicitors:
1. Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit funds for charitable, religious, patriotic or philanthropic purposes within the village
without first securing a permit therefor. This provision shall not apply to any organization operated without profit where the solicitation is among its
members or in the form of contributions or donations at the regular services of any church, society, lodge, benevolent order or fraternity or similar
organizations and such organizations are exempt from the following subsections regulating solicitations. All noncommercial solicitors, as the term is
defined in subsection A of this section, shall submit to the village clerk evidence of compliance with all federal and state requirements for the
organization for which the applicant seeks to solicit. Solicitors for national or local organizations who have obtained a permit and have engaged in
noncommercial solicitation in the village for over five (5) years shall not be required to submit an application for permit required in this subsection,
provided such organization may be required to register the names and addresses of its solicitors with the chief of police. No fee shall be charged for
a noncommercial solicitor.
2. Application: Any person not exempt by the preceding subsection desiring to engage in the solicitation of funds for charitable, religious, patriotic or
philanthropic purposes, shall file with the village clerk an application for a permit, which permit shall state the name of the organization applying for
the permit, its address and headquarters, the names and address of its principal officers and manager, the purpose for which the solicitation is made,
the name of the person by whom the receipts shall be disbursed, the name and address of the person in direct charge of conducting the solicitation,
an outline of the methods to be used in conducting the solicitation, the beginning and ending of the period of such solicitation, the amount of wages,
fees, commissions, expenses or emoluments to be paid to anyone in connection with the solicitation, to whom paid and the amount thereof, a
financial statement for the last fiscal year including the amount raised and the cost of raising it and its final disposition, a statement of the character of
work done by the organization within the village, such other information as may be required by the village council in order for it to fully determine the
kind and character of the proposed solicitation, and whether such a solicitation is in the interest of and not inimical to the public welfare, and the
statement that the permit will not be used or represented as an endorsement by the village council.
3. Investigation: Upon receipt of the application provided for in the preceding subsection, the council shall make, or cause to be made, such
investigation as it shall deem necessary, and if satisfied that the solicitation is for a bona fide charitable, religious, patriotic or philanthropic purpose,
and is prompted solely by a desire to finance the cause in question, that the persons in charge of the solicitation are responsible and reliable
persons, the village council shall then direct the village clerk to issue a permit to such organization for a period not to exceed one month.
4. Revocation: The village council may revoke permits required by this section upon receipt of information or upon its own investigation, after hearing
and upon notice to the holder of a permit, by reason of the violation of any provision of this section or the misrepresentation of any statement set
forth in the application for such permit.
5. Exemption: The following organizations or individuals shall be exempt from the provisions of this subsection E:
a. Scouting organizations;
b. Campfire Girls;
c. Children's sports organizations;
d. Children soliciting for school supported activities.
F. Hours Of Operation:
1. Noncommercial solicitors shall be permitted to solicit from ten thirty o'clock (10:30) A.M. to nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. local time, Monday through
Saturday. Soliciting shall not be conducted at any other times.
2. Peddlers, solicitors (other than noncommercial), itinerant vendors and commercial solicitors shall not engage in such activity except between nine
o'clock (9:00) A.M. to five o'clock (5:00) P.M. local time on Monday through Friday. (Ord. O-17-05, 5-9-2005)
3-5A-8: SECONDHAND DEALERS:
A. License Required: No person shall operate or conduct a secondhand store without first having obtained a license therefor. (Village Code § 11-217)
B. License Fee: The annual license fee for a secondhand store shall be as set out in section 3-5-1 of this chapter. (Village Code § 11-218)
C. Records Kept: Every person operating a secondhand store shall keep a record of all articles purchased and sold, which shall be open to the inspection
of the police department at all times. (Village Code § 11-219)
3-5A-9: JUNK SHOPS:
A. License Required:
1. No person shall exercise, carry on or engage in the business of keeping a junk shop, or what is commonly called a junk shop, for the purchase, sale,
barter, exchange or other dealing in or storage of: rags, paper, bagging, old rope, old iron, brass, copper, tin, slush, lead, empty bottles or other junk;
nor exercise, engage in or carry on any such business at any other house or place, other than that designated in his license; nor draw, drive or cause
to be drawn or driven through the streets of this village any handcart, wheelbarrow or other car or vehicle, for the purpose of collecting or disposing
of such article; nor shall any person be entitled to have a cart, or carts, or other vehicle or vehicles to be used for the aforesaid purpose without first
obtaining a license therefor. (Village Code § 11-132)
2. A separate license shall be obtained by every junk dealer for each cart, wagon or other vehicle used in his business. (Village Code § 11-134)
3. No keeper of a junk shop shall, during the period of his license as such, receive or hold a license to carry on the business of a pawnbroker or of a
secondhand dealer. (Village Code § 11-140)
B. License Fee: The annual license fee for a junk shop shall be as set out in section 3-5-1 of this chapter. (Village Code § 11-133)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 86/416
C. Bond: Every person licensed under the provisions of this section shall, at the time of receiving his license, execute a bond to the village, with good and
sufficient sureties to be approved by the village council, in the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), conditioned for the due observance of all
ordinances of the village, now in force, or which may hereafter be passed, respecting the keeping of junk shops and junk wagons. (Village Code § 11-
137)
D. Location Restrictions:
1. Every license granted to any keeper of a junk shop shall designate the house or place in which the person receiving such license, shall be
authorized to carry on such business. (Village Code § 11-135)
2. No person shall locate, establish, conduct or maintain any junk shop or junk yard within four hundred feet (400') of any church, hospital, public or
parochial school. Said distance shall be measured by the shortest, straight line between the junk shop or junkyard sought to be located and
established, conducted or maintained, and any such building used for the purpose of a church, hospital or parochial or public school. (Village Code
§ 11-146)
3. In case any person, so licensed as aforesaid, shall remove his place of business from the place designated in such license, he shall immediately
give notice to the village collector, and have the change noted upon such license. (Village Code § 11-136)
E. Vehicle Requirements: Every vehicle used in the collection of junk shall be marked on the outside of such vehicle, in letters and figures at least two
inches (2") in height, with the name and address of the licensee. When the location for the business licensed hereunder is changed, the new location
shall be changed on the sides of the vehicle used by such licensed dealer, and made to correspond with such new place of business. (Village Code
§§ 11-136, 11-138)
F. Conditions Of License:
1. Services Offered: No keeper of a junk shop shall receive any article or thing by way of pledge or pawn, nor shall he loan or advance any sum of
money on the security of any article or thing. (Village Code § 11-139)
2. Purchases From Minors Prohibited: No keeper of a junk shop shall purchase any articles of whatsoever nature from any minors without the written
consent of their parents or guardians under a penalty as provided in the general penalty in section 1-3-1 of this code for each offense. (Village Code
§ 11-141; amd. 2004 Code)
3. Time Of Possession: No keeper of a junk shop shall expose for sale, sell or dispose of any article or articles within ten (10) days of the time of
purchasing the same, nor until the same has been in the premises, wherein the same are offered, exposed or sold, at least ten (10) days, under a
penalty as provided in the general penalty in section 1-3-1 of this code. (Village Code § 11-142; amd. 2004 Code)
4. Hours Of Operation: No keeper of a junk shop shall purchase, in the way of his business, any goods, articles or things from any person between the
hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. (Village Code § 11-143)
5. Lost Or Stolen Goods: Every keeper of a junk shop, who shall receive or be in possession of any goods, articles or things which may have been lost
or stolen, or alleged or supposed to have been lost or stolen, shall forthwith, on demand, exhibit the same to any member of the police department.
(Village Code § 11-144)
6. Disturbing The Peace: It shall be unlawful for any person conducting or maintaining a junkyard, to break up old boilers, iron or other junk by means
of hammers, sledges or other mechanical devices in such a manner as to disturb the peace and quiet of the residents in the immediate vicinity of any
such secondhand store, junk shop or junk yard; or to do any other act or acts which will disturb the peace and quiet of any such resident. (Village
Code § 11-147)
7. Sanitary Requirements: It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or maintain any such junk place of business, as herein described, in such
manner that the premises, and the sidewalks in front thereof, are kept and permitted to remain in an unsanitary condition. (Village Code § 11-148)
G. Supervision And Inspection: The chief of police by himself, or by any officer designated by him, shall have general supervision over all keepers of junk
shops; and shall also have the power to inspect their respective places of business, and all articles or things kept therein, whenever he shall deem it
necessary so to do. (Village Code § 11-145)
3-5A-10: RESIDENTIAL (GARAGE AND YARD) SALES:
A. Defined: A residential sale includes the sale of more than five (5) items of personal property from a residential premises and includes, but is not limited
to, sales designated "garage", "rummage", "estate", "yard", "lawn", "patio", "room", "attic" or "porch" sale. (Village Code § 11-267)
B. Registration: No person shall conduct a residential sale in the village without first submitting an application for such sale with the village clerk who shall
review the same and, provided the applicant qualifies under the provisions of this section, the village clerk shall issue an approved receipt.
C. Fees: The registration fee for a residential sale shall be as set out in section 3-5-1 of this chapter. (Village Code § 11-268)
D. Limitations:
1. No more than two (2) sales may be conducted by any member of a family, or an estate in any residence during any calendar year. Participation by a
person or representative of an estate in any other residence sale shall be considered one sale for such participant.
2. A residential sale shall be conducted during daylight hours and for not more than three (3) days.
3. Personal property offered for sale may not be displayed in any front yard or any public property adjacent to the residential premises.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 87/416
4. Signs advertising such sale may not be posted on public property or any public way. Any signs posted on public property or on any public way will be
removed and the permit holder will be charged twenty five dollars ($25.00) per sign for removal. A double faced sign not exceeding six (6) square
feet may be posted on the premises during the time the sale is being conducted. (Village Code § 11-269)
3-5A-11: VENDING MACHINES:
A. Definition:
VENDING MACHINE: Any mechanical container or device used for the sale or offering for sale of any article, the operating of which is governed or
controlled by the deposit of a coin or token.
B. License Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of installing, keeping or maintaining vending machines within the village
without first having obtained a license therefor. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, use or permit to be used, upon his premises any vending
machine owned and operated by a person who has not obtained a license as herein provided.
C. Application And Inspection: The village clerk shall require the execution of an application form with all of the information to be required included thereon,
including the name and home address of the applicant, together with the business and business address and the type of machine and place where said
machine is to be installed.
The health officer of the village shall cause an inspection to be made of the premises where any food vending machine is to be placed and shall also
inspect the food vending machine. (Ord. O-19-77, 6-27-1977)
D. License Fee: The annual license fee shall be as set out in section 3-5-1 of this chapter. (Ord. O-19-77, 6-27-1977; amd. Ord. O-49-01, 12-10-2001)
E. Requirements: No food vending machine shall be installed or kept in any toilet or washroom. The health officer of the village shall make periodic
inspections of the place of business of the food vending machines and the articles of food purveyed therefrom.
The health officer shall also see that all such equipment and food products are in a clean, sanitary and wholesome condition. (Ord. O-19-77, 6-27-
1977)
ARTICLE B. SERVICE BUSINESSES AND ESTABLISHMENTS
3-5B-1: AUCTIONS AND AUCTIONEERS:
A. License Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct an auction or to do business as an auctioneer without having first obtained a license
therefor.
B. License Fee: The fee for auctioneers shall be as set out in section 3-5-1 of this chapter. (Village code § 11-1)
C. Requirements And Restrictions:
1. Auctions In Public Places: No person shall sell or attempt to sell at public auction any goods, wares, merchandise or other things upon any street,
alley or public place in the village. (Village code § 11-2)
2. Disturbances: All auctions shall be conducted in an orderly manner, and it shall be unlawful to create or permit any disturbance or disorderly conduct
at any auction. (Village code § 11-3)
3-5B-2: BARBERSHOPS:
A. Definition: A "barbershop" is hereby defined to mean any place maintained or conducted, where shaving and/or haircutting of men, women or children,
or other tonsorial work, is carried on. (Village code § 11-13)
B. License Required: No person shall operate a barbershop without having first obtained a license therefor. (Village code § 11-14)
C. License Fee: The annual fee shall be as set out in section 3-5-1 of this chapter. (Village code § 11-15)
D. Conditions Of License:
1. Sanitary Requirements: All places used as barbershops shall be kept in a clean, proper and sanitary condition. All necessary measures shall be
taken to properly safeguard the life and health of all patrons and persons employed therein against communicable and contagious diseases. (Village
code § 11-16)
2. Hygienic Requirements: All persons employed or working in any barbershop shall be clean and free from disease. All towels and washcloths used
shall be washed with soap and water and boiled before each use. All receptacles, finger bowls, utensils, vessels and other appliances shall be kept
in a clean and sanitary condition. Receptacles used for soiled articles shall be of metal construction or other impervious material. Headrests must be
covered with a clean cloth or paper, and such covers must be renewed after each use by a patron. All scissors, clippers, razors, combs and brushes
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 88/416
must be kept clean and free from infected material and must be thoroughly sterilized by the use of an approved disinfectant, or by boiling after use on
each person. (Village code § 11-17)
E. Revocation Of License: The director of public health and safety may, at any time, recommend a revocation of any license issued under the terms of this
section. The village council shall revoke such license whenever it shall appear that a licensee has violated the provisions of any law or ordinance.
Procedures for revocation of licenses are found at section 3-1-6 of this title. (Village code § 11-18; amd. 2004 Code; Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
3-5B-3: BEAUTY PARLORS:
A. Definition: A "beauty parlor" is herein defined to mean any building, room, place or establishment or established for the purpose of cosmetic or
beautifying treatments, wherein is carried on the application of cosmetic preparations to the human body by the use of devices, apparatus, appliances
or other means; or, whenever it takes place, the arranging, dressing, marcelling, curling, waving, cleansing, singeing, bleaching, coloring, dyeing, tinting
or other treatments, to the hair of any person. (Village code § 11-19)
B. License Required: No person shall establish, maintain or operate any "beauty parlor", as defined herein, without first having obtained a license therefor.
(Village code § 11-20)
C. License Fee: The annual license fee for a beauty parlor shall be as provided in section 3-5-1 of this chapter. (Village code § 11-21)
D. Conditions Of License:
1. Sanitary Requirements: It shall be the duty of every person licensed to conduct a beauty parlor to, at all times, keep the premises wherein such
establishments are conducted in a clean and sanitary condition. All measures must be taken to properly safeguard the life and health of all patrons of
such establishments. (Village code § 11-22)
2. Hygienic Requirements: No person suffering from a contagious or communicable disease, shall be employed in a beauty parlor. All scissors,
clippers, tweezers, razors, scalpels, combs, brushes or other instruments must be kept free and clean from infected material, and must be thoroughly
sterilized by the application of an approved disinfectant or by boiling after each use upon a patron. Shaving mugs and brushes must be thoroughly
scalded before being used by any person. Headrests must be covered with a clean cloth or paper, and such covering shall be removed after each
use by a patron. (Village code § 11-23)
E. Revocation Of License: The director of public health and safety may, at any time, recommend the revocation of any license issued under the terms of
this section. The village council shall revoke any license whenever it shall appear to their satisfaction that a licensee has violated the provisions of any
law or ordinance. Procedures for revocation of licenses are found at section 3-1-6 of this title. (Village code § 11-24; amd. 2004 Code; Ord. O-7-10, 2-
8-2010)
3-5B-4: BENCHES:
A. Definition: A "bench" is a seat, located upon public property along any public way for the accommodation of passersby awaiting transportation. (Village
code § 11-25)
B. Permit Required:
1. Required: No person shall install or maintain any bench on any street without a permit. A separate permit must be obtained for each bench, which
permit shall be valid only for the particular location specified thereon. Each permit shall bear a separate number, and not more than two (2) permits
shall be issued for any one location. (Village code § 11-27)
2. Application Denied: The application shall be denied if the village council shall find that the maintenance of the bench would tend to obstruct passage
along any public way, or to create a hazard, or would otherwise be detrimental to the public safety, welfare or convenience. (Village code § 11-29)
3. Permit Displayed: Each bench must have displayed thereon, in a conspicuous place, the name of the permittee and the permit number. (Village code
§ 11-35)
4. Time Limitation: Any permit issued under this section shall be canceled and revoked if the permittee fails to install the bench within sixty (60) days
after the date of the issuance of the permit. (Village code § 11-32)
5. Revocation Of Permit: Any permit may be revoked, or renewal thereof denied, for any violation or any of the provisions of this section, for any fraud
or misrepresentation in the application or any reason which would have been grounds for denial of the application. Procedures for revocation of
licenses are found at section 3-1-6 of this title. (Village code § 11-30; amd. 2004 Code)
C. Fees: Annual fees shall be as set out in section 3-5-1 of this chapter. The application shall be canceled and denied if the applicant fails to deposit the
annual fee and accept the permit within ten (10) days after notice of the approval of the application by the village council. (Village Code §§ 11-28, 11-
31)
D. Insurance Requirements:
1. Insurance Required:
a. No permit shall be issued pursuant to this section unless the applicant shall post and maintain with the village council a policy of public liability
insurance approved by the village council and conditioned as hereinafter provided.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 89/416
b. The policy shall be conditioned that the permittee will indemnify and save harmless the village, its officers and employees, from any and all loss,
costs, damages, expenses or liability which may result from or arise out of the granting of the permit, or the installation or maintenance of the
bench for which the permit is issued. The permittee will pay any and all loss or damage that may be sustained by any person as a result of, or
which may be caused by or arise out of such installation or maintenance. The policy of insurance shall be maintained in its original amount by the
permittee at his expense at all times during the period for which the permit is in effect. In the event that two (2) or more permits are issued to one
permittee, one such policy of insurance may be furnished to cover two (2) or more benches. Each policy shall be of such a type that its coverage
shall be automatically restored immediately from and after the time of the reporting of any accident from which liability may thereafter accrue.
(Village Code § 11-41)
2. Insurance Limits: The limits of liability upon any policy of insurance, posted pursuant to the requirements of this section, shall, in no case, be less
than thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00) for bodily injuries or death of one person. The permissible limit of liability for bodily injuries or death of more
than one person shall depend upon the number of bench permits covered thereby, and shall not be less than the amount specified in the following
schedule:
No. Of Bench Permits Limit Of Liability
1 to 10 $ 30,000.00
11 to 50 40,000.00
51 to 100 60,000.00
101 or more 100,000.00
(Village Code § 11-42)
E. Conditions Of Permit:
1. Location: The village council shall designate the locations where said benches are to be erected. (Village Code § 11-40)
2. Distance From Curbs: No permittee shall locate or maintain any bench at a point less than eighteen inches (18") or more than thirty inches (30") from
the face of the curb, and each bench must be kept parallel with the curb. (Village Code § 11-33)
3. Dimensions: No bench shall be more than forty two inches (42") high, nor more than two feet six inches (2'6") wide, nor more than seven feet (7')
long overall. (Village Code § 11-34)
F. Advertising On Benches:
1. Placement: No advertising matter or sign shall be displayed upon any bench except upon the front and rear surfaces of the backrest, and not more
than seventy five percent (75%) of each such surface shall be used. (Village Code § 11-37)
2. Create Traffic Distractions: No advertisement or sign on any bench shall display the words "stop", "look", "drive-in", "danger" or any other word,
phrase, symbol or character calculated to interfere with, mislead or distract traffic. (Village Code § 11-38)
G. Prohibited Locations: Benches are prohibited in the following locations:
1. In any alley.
2. At any location where the distance from the face of the curb to the property line is less than eight feet (8').
3. At any location, at a distance more than fifty feet (50') from the nearest intersecting street. Provided that, wherever, in the opinion of the village
council, observance of this requirement would result in inconvenience or hardship, this requirement may be waived by the village council.
4. At any place, except an existing street railway stop or passenger bus stop. (Village Code § 11-26)
H. Inspection And Maintenance: It shall be the duty of the permittee to maintain such bench at all times in a safe condition and at its proper and lawful
location, and to inspect each bench periodically. The director of public health and safety shall supervise the maintenance and erection of all benches
under the provisions of this section. (Village code §§ 11-36, 11-39; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
3-5B-5: DRUGSTORES AND DRUGGISTS:
A. Definition:
RETAIL DRUGSTORE: Any establishment where prescriptions for drugs or medicines are filled or compounded; or where medicines, drugs, chemicals,
therapeutic preparations, druggist sundries, invalid and infant foods, physicians' supplies, proprietary medicines, toilet articles and other articles
commonly sold in drugstores are sold, offered for sale or kept with the intention of selling at retail or supplying to physicians, dentists, veterinarians or
other practitioners. (Village code § 11-86)
B. License Required: No person shall operate a drugstore without having first obtained a license therefor. (Village code § 11-87)
C. License Fee: The annual license fee for such a license shall be as set out in section 3-5-1 of this chapter. (Village code § 11-88)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 90/416
D. Sanitary Requirements: It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any drugstore in an unsanitary condition. Unsanitary conditions shall be deemed
to exist if drugs, medicines or food preparations, used in the process of drugs or other articles, are not securely protected from flies or other insects or
vermin; from dust, dirt or other foreign or injurious matter; or if refuse, dirt or waste products are allowed to accumulate; or if measures, containers or
other utensils or apparatus are not kept clean; or if the clothing of operatives or persons employed in the handling or preparation of drugs, medicines or
food preparation is unclean; or if adequate toilet facilities, soap and clean towels are not provided for in such drugstores. (Village code § 11-89)
3-5B-6: DRY CLEANING ESTABLISHMENTS:
A. Definition:
DRY CLEANING ESTABLISHMENT: Any structure, store, building or other place where the service of dry cleaning, wet cleaning (as a process
incidental to dry cleaning), dyeing, spotting and/or finishing any cloth fabric is rendered as a business. (Village code § 11-90)
B. License Required: No person shall conduct, operate or maintain any dry cleaning establishment in the village without having first obtained a license
therefor. (Village code § 11-91)
C. License Fee: The annual license fee for such cleaning establishments shall be as set out in section 3-5-1 of this chapter. (Village code § 11-92)
D. Sanitary Requirements: A dry cleaning establishment shall be kept free from inflammable wastes so far as possible. It shall be unlawful to maintain or
permit a stove or open flame of any kind on the premises. Smoking on such premises is hereby prohibited, and appropriate signs to that effect shall be
posted in conspicuous places in the establishment. The premises must be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, free from rats, mice and vermin. No
person afflicted with a contagious or venereal disease shall be employed in any such establishment. (Village code § 11-93)
E. Inspections: It shall be the duty of the fire chief, or his duly authorized officer, to inspect each dry cleaning establishment at least once every six (6)
months. (Village code § 11-94)
3-5B-7: LAUNDRIES AND LAUNDERETTES:
A. Laundries:
1. Definition:
LAUNDRY: Any place, building, structure, room, establishment or portion thereof which is used for the purpose of washing, drying, starching or
ironing shirts, dresses, underwear, collars, cuffs or other wearing apparel; table, bed or other household linens, towels, curtains, draperies or other
washable fabrics for the general public. It also includes any private laundry maintained or operated in connection with any hotel, restaurant or public
institution, except a hospital, school or charitable institution, where no charge is made for laundry services. (Village code § 11-149)
2. License Required: No person shall operate the business of a "laundry", as defined in this section, without first obtaining a license therefor. (Village
code § 11-150)
3. License Fee: The annual license fee for maintaining and operating a laundry shall be as set out in section 3-5-1 of this chapter. (Village code § 11-
152)
4. Conditions Of License:
a. Hygienic And Sanitary Requirements: No person shall be permitted to sleep in any laundry; nor shall any sleeping room or living room, be in direct
communication with any laundry. No laundered or unlaundered fabric belonging to the trade of any laundry shall be stored or kept in any room
which is used for living purposes. (Village code § 11-153)
b. Maintenance Required: Every room or place used as a laundry, or for the storage of unlaundered or laundered fabrics in connection therewith,
shall at all times be kept in good repair and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition; and shall be kept free from rats, mice, vermin and all
matters of an infectious or contagious nature.
c. Employees: No person who has a contagious disease, tuberculosis or other similar malady shall work in any laundry. (Village code § 11-154)
d. Plumbing And Drainage: Every laundry shall be provided with adequate sanitary plumbing and drainage facilities. (Village code § 11-155)
e. Segregation Of Fabrics: Every person owning, managing or conducting any laundry shall be required to provide proper facilities and equipment for
the separate handling of clean and soiled fabrics. No clean or laundered fabrics shall be allowed to come in contact with any unlaundered or soiled
fabrics of any kind at any time. (Village code § 11-156)
5. Inspections: It shall be the duty of the director of public health and safety to inspect, or cause to be inspected, at least three (3) times per year, all
premises wherein laundries are conducted, for the purpose of ascertaining whether the provisions of this section and the laws of the state of Illinois
are being complied with. (Village code § 11-157; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
6. Revocation: A license issued under this section may be revoked for cause by the village council, upon a report by the director of public health and
safety, that the maintenance of any laundry is detrimental to the health and welfare of the residents of the village. Procedures for revocation of
licenses are found at section 3-1-6 of this title. (Village code § 11-151; amd. 2004 Code; Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
B. Launderettes:
1. Definition:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 91/416
LAUNDERETTE: Any place, building or structure having one or more automatic washing machines, which are rented, leased or hired out to the
public for consideration and for use upon the premises. (Village code § 11-158)
2. License Required: No person shall operate the business of "launderette", as defined in this section, without first obtaining a license therefor. (Village
code § 11-159)
3. License Fee: The annual license fee shall be as set out in section 3-5-1 of this chapter. (Village code § 11-160)
4. Sanitary Requirements: Every launderette shall be kept and maintained in a clean, sanitary condition at all times. (Village code § 11-161)
5. Inspections: The director of public health and safety shall inspect every launderette, at least three (3) times per year, in order to determine that the
provisions of this section and the laws of the state of Illinois are being complied with. (Village code § 11-162; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
3-5B-8: AMBULANCES:
A. License Required: No person shall own or operate any ambulance used for the purpose of transporting sick or injured persons in the village without
obtaining a license therefor. A license shall not be required for any ambulance operated by the United States, state, county, municipal or other
governmental agency but shall conform to all other regulatory portions of this section. (Village Code § 11-102)
B. Application For License: Application for an ambulance license shall be made as required by this code for other licenses on the form supplied by the
village. If the ambulance is to be garaged in the village, the village will cause an investigation to be made of location where the ambulance will be
garaged to determine whether or not the site is sanitary.
The ambulance shall also be inspected to determine whether or not the ambulance is being maintained in a safe, sanitary and healthful manner, carries
the proper equipment to transport the sick and injured, and to ascertain compliance with all national, state and local laws. No license shall be issued
unless the inspections of the premises and/or ambulance are satisfactory. (Village Code § 11-103)
C. License Fee: The license fee for such license shall be as provided in section 3-5-1 of this chapter. (Village Code § 11-104)
D. Village Ambulance:
1. Service: Ambulance service by the village shall be available to a sick or injured person in emergency cases from locations in the village where such
person was stricken by sickness or injured, and except for emergency situations, to be transported to the nearest hospital as selected by a physician
or legal guardian but, in the absence of such selection, to the nearest hospital of the following hospitals as determined by the ambulance crew to be
reasonably specialized in the illness or injury of the patient: Oak Park Hospital, West Suburban, MacNeal, Hines V.A. or Loyola, except that,
whenever possible, trauma victims shall be taken to Loyola. (Ord. O-20-98, 6-22-1998)
2. Fees: The fees to be charged for ambulance service shall be as set out in section 3-5-1 of this chapter.
It shall be the intent of the village to collect all monies owed for services rendered, with no distinction between residents and nonresidents, other than
the fees charged.
The rate shall be adjusted on January 1 of each year considering, among other factors, the inflation factors relating to increases in the consumer
price index. (Ord. O-35-05, 7-26-2005)
3-5B-9: EXPRESS SERVICES:
A. License Required: No person shall operate the business of expressing, carting, delivering or operating hearses, omnibuses, limousine service or other
vehicles for hire, without first obtaining a license therefor.
B. Designation: Every vehicle used for such business shall have printed thereon, in a place easily visible from the side of the vehicle, the name and
address of the owner, in letters legible to one of normal eyesight at a distance of twenty five feet (25').
C. License Fee: The license fee shall be as set out in section 3-5-1 of this chapter. (Ord. O-4-90, 3-12-1990)
3-5B-10: HOTELS:
A. Definition:
HOTEL: Every building, which is not a rooming house, and which is maintained as an inn, hotel, motel, family hotel or apartment hotel, with or without
meals, in which three (3) or more sleeping rooms are used, or maintained, for the accommodation of guests. (Village Code § 11-126)
B. License Required: No person shall own, operate or maintain a hotel without having first obtained a license therefor. (Village Code § 11-127)
C. License Fee: The annual license fee for such license, shall be as set out in section 3-5-1 of this chapter, and shall be payable in advance. (Village Code
§ 11-128)
D. Sanitary Requirements: Every hotel shall be kept clean and free from any accumulation of dirt or similar material. The owner, operator or manager of
any hotel shall thoroughly cleanse the premises to the satisfaction of the director of public health and safety, and every hotel, and part thereof, shall be
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 92/416
kept in good repair. (Village code §§ 11-129, 11-130; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
E. Inspections: Every hotel in the village shall be inspected by the director of public health and safety at least once each year. Such inspection shall cover
all matters pertaining to the sanitary conditions of the premises, including the ventilation of all rooms; and the condition of such rooms with respect to
light, heat, ventilation and general sanitation. (Village code § 11-131; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
3-5B-11: ROOMING HOUSES:
A. Definition:
ROOMING HOUSE: Every dwelling house, furnished room house, lodging house, boarding house and any other similarly occupied building, structure
or portion thereof, kept, held or used, where sleeping or lodging is provided for compensation for three (3) or more persons for a definite period; except
for housing of a college or institution, not operated for profit. (Village code § 11-207)
B. License Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, keep, manage or operate a rooming house without first obtaining a license therefor.
(Village code § 11-208)
C. License Fee: The annual fee for rooming houses shall be as provided in section 3-5-1 of this chapter. (Village code § 11-209)
D. Conditions Of License:
1. Compliance With Code: All rooming houses shall comply with the housing code of the village1. (Village code § 11-210)
2. Inspections: The director of public health and safety shall inspect all rooming houses at least three (3) times per year. (Village code § 11-211; amd.
Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
3. Register Kept: The manager and/or operator of every rooming house shall keep a register in which shall be entered the name and residence of every
person who becomes a lodger, boarder or guest therein. (Village code § 11-212)
3-5B-12: NURSING HOMES:
A. Definition:
NURSING HOME: Any institution or place used for the reception or care of three (3) or more persons who are dependent, or not capable of properly
caring for themselves; and shall include homes for the aged or infirm, refugees and shelters. (Village code § 11-184)
B. License Required: It shall be unlawful for any person, other than the regularly constituted authorities of the United States, state, county or village, or any
other association or institution which has been accredited, certified or licensed by the state of Illinois, pursuant to an act of the legislature to regulate
the treatment and control of the aged and infirm, to open, conduct, manage or maintain any home, as defined in this section, without first having
obtained a license therefor. (Village code § 11-185)
C. License Fee: The annual fee for a nursing home shall be as provided in section 3-5-1 of this chapter. (Village code § 11-186)
3-5B-13: SCAVENGERS:
A. License Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of a scavenger, or the collection or disposal of animal, human or
vegetable refuse or offal, without having first obtained a license therefor. (Village code § 11-213)
B. License Fee: The annual license fee for a scavenger shall be as provided in section 3-5-1 of this code. (Ord. O-16-02, 3-25-2002)
C. Conditions Of License:
1. Vehicles: All vehicles used by a scavenger in his business shall be watertight and equipped with airtight covers, for such portions as are used for the
transportation of refuse. (Village code § 11-215)
2. Disposal: It shall be unlawful for any scavenger to dispose of or store any refuse in any place within the village or within one mile thereof. (Village
code § 11-216)
3-5B-14: UNDERTAKERS:
A. License Requirements:
1. License Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain an undertaking establishment, or to operate as an undertaker or mortician without
first having obtained a license therefor. (Village code § 11-245)
2. License Fee: The annual license fee for an undertaker shall be as set out in section 3-5-1 of this chapter. (Village code § 11-246)
3. Buildings And Premises:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 93/416
a. Specifications: No person shall be licensed to carry on the business of undertaking in any establishment, store or place unless such
establishment, store or place used for the undertaking business shall be provided with a compartment, or room, completely shut off from other
parts of such establishment, store or place. Such compartment or room shall have free outside ventilation and light and its floor shall be
constructed of, or covered with, a nonabsorbent material. The premises shall be connected with a sewer by an approved deep water seal trap, and
all drains from this compartment or room shall be drained by a vitrified tile sewer, which shall not be less than six inches (6") internal diameter.
Said sewer shall begin outside the wall of the building, and shall separately and independently connect such drains with the public sewer in the
street. The walls of the room, to a height of five feet (5') above floor level, shall be constructed of, or covered with, a nonabsorbent material.
(Village code § 11-247)
b. Ventilation:
(1) Windows: In every building, establishment, store or place hereafter erected or converted to carry on the business of undertaking, every room or
anteroom, where practicable, shall have a window, or windows, opening directly upon a street, alley, yard or court. The total area of such
window, or windows, shall be at least ten percent (10%) of the floor area and at least one-half (1/2) of each window shall be made to open.
(Village code § 11-248)
(2) Mechanical: If it is impractical to ventilate such room, or rooms, or anteroom as aforesaid, such room, rooms or anterooms shall be ventilated
by an approved, mechanical ventilation supply system, which system shall supply at least one and two-tenths (12/10) cubic feet of air, per
minute, per square foot of floor area. The supply shall be taken from the outer air, at an uncontaminated source, through a screened opening, at
a point not less than ten feet (10') above the street level; except that, if an air washer or other cleansing medium approved by the director of
public health and safety, is installed in connection with the system, the supply need not be taken from this height. (Village code § 11-249; amd.
Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
It shall be the duty of the owner, agent, architect or party in possession or control of any building, establishment, store or place hereafter erected
or converted, who carries on the business of undertaking in which a mechanical system of ventilation shall have been installed, under the
requirements of this section, upon completion of such system, to notify the director of public health and safety, in writing, at least twenty four (24)
hours in advance of the making of a test of such system. Each such system, or unit, shall be tested for volumetric efficiency by the owner, or his
representative or the director of public health and safety. Such system shall not be considered as meeting the requirements of this section until it
shall have been approved by the director of public health and safety. Every such mechanical ventilating system shall, at all times, be kept in
good repair and operation, so as to ensure the required ventilation of all rooms and compartments planned to be ventilated thereby, during all
hours of human occupancy. (Village code § 11-250; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
4. Applicability Of Provisions: Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as requiring alterations in the construction or equipment of buildings,
establishments, stores or places in existence in which the business of undertaking is being actively carried on at the time of the passage of this
section; and which, at the time of their construction, were built in compliance with the ordinances then in force. (Village code § 11-251)
5. Multiple Locations: Any license, issued as hereinbefore provided, shall entitle the licensee to engage in, carry on or conduct the business of
undertaking only at and from the store, room or place designated in such license. If the applicant for such license shall desire to carry on, conduct or
engage in the business of undertaking at more than one store, room or place in the village, he shall be permitted to do so only upon payment of a
license fee as provided in subsection A2 of this section for such store, room or place. (Village code § 11-252)
6. Operators: No person other than a licensed undertaker or licensed assistant, shall be permitted to manage or control any undertaking room, store,
place or establishment; or to prepare dead bodies for burial or cremation (other than the embalming by a state licensed embalmer); or to conduct
funerals in the capacity of an undertaker. (Village code § 11-253)
B. Dead Bodies:
1. Exposure: No person shall retain, expose or allow to be retained or exposed the dead body of any human being. (Village code § 11-254)
2. Public Exhibition: It shall be unlawful for any person to make public display of, or in any way place on exhibition, the dead body of a person.
Provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall be so construed as to prevent the display of a body to relatives and friends. (Village code
§ 11-255)
3. Duty Of Discovery: It shall be the duty of every person who has discovered the body of a dead human being to notify the police. (Village code § 11-
256)
3-5B-15: VETERINARY HOSPITALS:
A. License Required: No person shall operate the business of a veterinary hospital without first having obtained a license therefor. (Village code § 11-257)
B. License Fee: The annual license fee for each veterinary hospital shall be as set out in section 3-5-1 of this chapter. (Village code § 11-258)
C. Sanitary Requirements: All veterinary hospitals shall be kept free and clean, and maintained in a sanitary condition, satisfactory to the director of public
health and safety. (Village code § 11-259; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
D. Disturbing The Peace: No person licensed under this section, shall keep or harbor any animal which, by noises, shall disturb the peace of any family,
individual or neighborhood. (Village code § 11-260)
3-5B-16: CATCH BASIN AND SEWER CLEANERS:
A. License Required: It shall be unlawful for any person within the village to engage in the business of cleaning, collecting or transporting the contents of
catch basins, sewers or kindred refuse by wagon, cart or otherwise or, in any manner, to engage in the business of cleaning catch basins and sewers
without first obtaining a license therefor. (Village code § 11-79)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 94/416
B. Exceptions: Licensed plumbers or licensed sewer builders who may clean catch basins or sewers as an incident to the repair of such catch basins or
sewers, shall not be required to obtain such license. (Village code § 11-80)
C. License Fee: The annual fee for such a license shall be as set out in section 3-5-1 of this chapter. (Village code § 11-81)
D. Conditions Of License:
1. Disposition Of Sewage: The contents taken from catch basins and sewers, in cleaning and repairing the same, shall not be permitted to remain in
any receptacle, wagon or vehicle used to transport and remove such contents. The same shall be transported and disposed of at a place outside of
the village. (Village code § 11-83)
2. Regulations: All substances taken from catch basins and sewers shall be conveyed to the place of disposal, either in closely covered, watertight, iron
or steel wagons, boxes or receptacles, or in closely covered iron, galvanized iron or steel cans or receptacles. It shall be unlawful for any person to
collect or remove materials from catch basins or sewers in wooden receptacles, or to haul them in wooden wagons or boxes. Such carts, vehicles,
receptacles and utensils used in connection with such business, when not in use, shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. (Village code § 11-
85)
3. Illegal Storage: No such receptacle or vehicle containing such material shall be permitted to be stored overnight in any building, barn, shed, yard or
place on public or private property. The storage overnight of any of the materials taken from catch basins or sewers upon any premises within the
village, shall be deemed and is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. (Village code § 11-84)
E. Revocation: Any license granted under this section may be revoked upon written notice by the village council to the holder, whenever, upon the
recommendation of the director of public health and safety, it shall be made to appear to the village council that the licensee has violated the provision
of this section or is conducting said business in violation of any other ordinance of the village or laws of the state of Illinois. Procedures for revocation of
licenses are found at section 3-1-6 of this title. (Village code § 11-82; amd. 2004 Code; Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
3-5B-17: CHILDCARE NURSERIES:
A. Definition:
NURSERY: An institution or place in which are received three (3) or more children, not of common parentage, during part or all of the day or for less
than twenty four (24) hours of continuous care apart from their parents or guardians. The term is further construed to include day nurseries, nursery
schools, group daycare homes, child playgroups or other similar units operating under any other name. The term shall not include kindergartens or
preschools established under proper public school auspices as provided by law; nor kindergartens or nursery schools established in connection with
parochial or other properly established grade schools. (Village code § 11-178)
B. License Required: It shall be unlawful for any person, other than the regular constituted authorities of the United States, state, county or village, to
conduct or operate a nursery without first having obtained a license therefor. (Village code § 11-179)
C. License Fee: The annual license fee for such nursery shall be as set out in section 3-5-1 of this chapter. (Village code § 11-180)
D. Conditions Of License:
1. Structural Requirements: Every nursery shall be adequately ventilated in conformity with the building provisions of this code2. When necessary,
doors and windows of a nursery shall be provided with screens and every appliance necessary for the exclusion of insects. Each nursery shall be
adequately supplied with hot and cold water and toilet facilities. (Village code § 11-181)
2. Sanitary Requirements: Every nursery shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition according to the requirements of the director of public health
and safety. (Village code § 11-182; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
E. Inspections: It shall be the duty of the director of public health and safety to inspect all nurseries not less than three (3) times per year. (Village code
§ 11-183; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
ARTICLE C. MOTOR VEHICLE ESTABLISHMENTS
3-5C-1: AUTOMOBILE ACCESSORY, TIRE AND BODY REPAIR SHOPS:
A. License Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of selling auto accessories or tires, or to conduct an automotive body
repair shop without having first obtained a license therefor. (Village Code § 11-4)
B. License Fees: License fees are as set out in section 3-5-1 of this chapter. (Village Code §§ 11-5, 11-6)
C. Conditions Of License:
1. Location: It shall be unlawful for any person to locate, build, construct or maintain any repair shop within two hundred feet (200') of any building used
as and for a hospital, church or school or the grounds thereof. No person shall locate, build, construct or maintain any repair shop in the village on
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 95/416
any street in which two-thirds (2/3) of the buildings on both sides of the street are exclusively for residential purposes, or within one hundred feet
(100') of any such block. (Village Code § 11-7)
2. Sanitary Conditions: All repair shops conducted and maintained in accordance with the provisions of this section shall be kept in a clean condition.
Oil, grease, dirt, refuse and inflammable material of any kind shall not be permitted to accumulate in any manner so as to constitute a fire hazard; nor
shall they be carried from any such repair shop onto streets, sidewalks or alleys of the village.
3. Obstructions: Vehicles or obstructions shall not be permitted to block the streets, parkways, sidewalks or alleys near or adjacent to any repair shop.
Vehicles shall not be parked in such a way as to interfere with the free use of the streets, parkways or alleys by the public. (Village Code § 11-8)
3-5C-2: AUTOMOBILE SALESROOMS:
A. Definition:
AUTOMOBILE SALESROOM: Any building, structure, premises, enclosure, lot or other place within the village where the business of dealing in new
and/or used automobiles, trucks or any similar self-propelled vehicles, or parts thereof, is conducted or carried on. (Village Code § 11-9)
B. License Required: No person shall manage, conduct, carry on or operate an automobile salesroom without having first obtained a license therefor.
(Village Code § 11-10)
C. License Fee: The annual license fee for each automobile salesroom shall be as set out in section 3-5-1 of this chapter. (Village Code § 11-12)
D. Location: No person shall manage, conduct, carry on or operate an automobile salesroom within two hundred feet (200') of any building used as and for
a hospital, church or school, or the grounds thereof; nor shall any person manage, conduct, carry on or operate an automobile salesroom or used car
lot in the village in any block in which two-thirds (2/3) of the buildings, on both sides of the street, are used exclusively for residence purposes. (Village
Code § 11-11)
3-5C-3: FILLING STATIONS:
A. Definitions:
FILLING STATION: Any place of business where gasoline or any highly volatile fuels for motor vehicles or internal combustion engines are sold or
offered for sale at retail and dispensed into the fuel tanks of such motor vehicles. This definition shall also include the private storage and dispensing of
such products, whether the storage is maintained for the use, or benefit, of the owner, lessee, agents or employees of either/or of any others. (Village
Code § 11-105)
B. License Required: No person shall manage, conduct, operate or carry on the business of a filling station without having first obtained a license therefor.
(Village Code § 11-106)
C. License Fees: The annual license fee for a filling station shall be as set out in section 3-5-1 of this chapter. (Village Code § 11-107)
D. Conditions Of License:
1. Location: No person shall locate, build, construct or maintain any filling station within two hundred feet (200') of any building used as a church or
school. (Village Code § 11-108)
2. Storage: Except as otherwise permitted by ordinance, storage of flammable liquids shall be outside of buildings. (Village Code § 11-109)
3. Smoking: It shall be unlawful for any person to permit smoking in any filling station. (Village Code § 11-110)
3-5C-4: GARAGES:
A. Definitions:
GARAGE: Any building or structure used for the storing or parking of more than four (4) motor driven vehicles.
STORING OR PARKING: Includes, but is not limited to, storing, parking or display of motor driven vehicles for sale, exchange or repair. (Village Code §
11-118)
B. License Required: No person shall conduct, operate or maintain a garage without first obtaining a license therefor. (Village Code § 11-119)
C. License Fees: The annual license fee for the operation of a garage shall be as set out in section 3-5-1 of this chapter. Provided, however, that the above
fees shall not be charged for spaces allocated for cars that are to be repaired, sold or exchanged. And further provided, no license fee shall be charged
in those cases where a landlord furnishes garage space to provide off-street parking for the use of his tenants only. (Village Code § 11-120)
D. Repairs: No motor vehicle shall be repaired in any garage unless a license for an auto repair shop shall have been obtained. (Village Code § 11-121)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 96/416
E. Inspections: All garages shall be inspected by the building director and the fire chief at least once every three (3) months. (Village Code § 11-122)
3-5C-5: PARKING LOTS:
A. Definition:
PARKING LOT: Any place, premises or enclosure, other than a licensed, public garage, where four (4) or more automobiles may be stored or parked
for compensation. (Village Code § 11-187)
B. License Required: No person shall operate, conduct or maintain a parking lot without obtaining a license therefor. (Village Code § 11-188)
C. License Fees: Fees shall be as set out in section 3-5-1 of this chapter. No license fee shall be charged where a parking lot is established by a landlord
to provide off street parking for the use of tenants only. (Village Code § 11-189)
D. Conditions Of License:
1. Barriers: All owners, operators or managers of parking lots shall maintain a substantial barrier on, or adjacent to, the property lines. The barriers
shall be so located that no portion of any vehicle, parked on a lot, shall extend over the property line. (Village Code § 11-190)
2. Surfacing: Parking lots shall be kept free from dust by frequent sprinkling, or the use of calcium chloride or other material so that the same shall not
become a nuisance to adjacent property owners or others. Parking lots shall have a smooth and durable service, adequately drained, that will not
retain water, and which will remain free from dust or other particles. (Village Code § 11-192)
3. Lighting: Where night parking is permitted, parking lots shall at all times be adequately lighted. Lights shall be so arranged so as to reflect the light
away from adjoining lots, where said adjoining lots are used for residential purposes. (Village Code § 11-193)
4. Maintenance: Each licensee shall keep the sidewalks surrounding the parking lot free from dirt, ice, sleet and snow. (Village Code § 11-191)
ARTICLE D. BUILDING CONTRACTORS AND CONSTRUCTION
3-5D-1: BUILDING CONTRACTORS:
A. License Required: No person shall conduct, manage, operate or carry on the business of:
General contractor
Contractor of carpentry work
Contractor of masonry work
Contractor of cement work
Contractor of plastering and lathing
Contractor of structural iron work
Contractor of painting and decorating
Contractor of tile, marble and mosaic
Contractor of tuck pointing and cleaning
or engage in the construction, erection, finishing, repair, wrecking or alteration of buildings or other structures within the limits of the village, without
obtaining a license as hereinafter provided and posting a ten thousand dollar ($10,000.00) surety bond from an insurance company licensed to transact
business in the state of Illinois. The bond shall be conditional upon the faithful observance and performance of the ordinances of the village, and for the
costs of correcting any and all defective work of the contractor. (Ord. O-21-93, 9-13-1993)
B. Application For License: Any person desiring a license to carry on the business of building contractor, as described in subsection A of this section, and
engaged in the construction, erection, finishing, repair, wrecking or alteration of buildings or dwellings, shall make application to the commissioner of
public property; stating the name and residence of the applicant, if an individual; the officials, if a corporation; and the place of business and kind of
contracting business proposed to be carried on by said applicant; and the experience which said applicant has had. (Village code § 11-56; amd. Ord.
O-36-04, 9-13-2004)
C. Investigation And Approval: The commissioner of public property shall: (Village code § 11-57; amd. Ord. O-36-04, 9-13-2004)
1. Cause an investigation to be made of the statements in such application, and as to whether the applicant has the necessary equipment and
experience to engage in the proposed business. (Village code § 11-57)
2. Transmit to the village council the application together with his recommendation for or against the issuance of such license. Upon payment of the
license fee to the village clerk, the village council shall issue or cause to be issued to the applicant a license. (Village code § 11-58)
D. License Fees: For the purpose of this section, each of the contracting businesses set out in subsection A of this section, including a building wrecking
contractor, shall be and is considered as a separate business, requiring a separate annual license fee as set out in section 3-5-1 of this chapter. Any
contracting business set out in subsection A of this section may, in lieu of an annual license, obtain an individual job license for the fee of twenty five
dollars ($25.00). (Village code §§ 11-59, 11-60; amd. Ord. O-43-10, 8-9-2010)
E. Expiration: Every annual license shall expire on April 30 of each year after its issuance. An individual job license shall expire upon completion of the
specific job for which the license was issued. (Ord. O-43-10, 8-9-2010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 97/416
3-5D-2: EXCAVATORS:
A. Definition:
EXCAVATOR: A person who, with horses and teams, electrically equipped apparatus, steam shovels or other mechanical device or devices, or by day
labor, excavates, removes or carries away dirt, rock, cinders, building material, sand, debris or other substance or materials in order to construct the
foundation of any house, residence, store or other public or private building or structure requiring a foundation to be constructed below the level of the
street, or any sewer, vault or other like work requiring removal of dirt, rock, sand, debris or other substance. (Village Code § 11-98)
B. License Required: No person shall conduct the business of an excavator without first obtaining a license therefor. (Village Code § 11-99)
C. License Fee: The annual license fee to be paid the village collector under the provisions of this section shall be as set out in section 3-5-1 of this
chapter. (Village Code § 11-100)
D. Bond: No person shall proceed with the business of excavation without first having given a bond to the village, in the sum of five thousand dollars
($5,000.00), with sureties, approved by the village council and conditioned to keep and save harmless the village, its officers, agents and employees,
from all liability to any person by reason of damage to person or property growing out of the said operation of excavating, as defined herein. Said
person shall also obtain and maintain adequate liability insurance. (Village Code § 11-101)
3-5D-3: MATERIAL YARDS:
A. License Required: No person shall keep, carry on, conduct or maintain a yard or other place for the purpose of storing, keeping for sale, offering for
sale, selling or buying building materials such as stone, gravel, sand, cement, tile, pipe or other building materials; coal, lumber, tools or other
contractor's equipment, without first obtaining a license therefor. A separate license shall be required for each location of a material yard. (Village Code
§§ 11-167, 11-169)
B. License Fee: The annual license fees for a material yard shall be as set out in section 3-5-1 of this chapter. (Village Code § 11-168)
C. Conditions Of License:
1. Change Of Location: If, after the issuance of a license, any changes are made in the location of the business covered thereby, no business shall be
engaged in or carried on at a new location until notice of such change shall have been given by the licensee to the village clerk and consent to the
transfer to such new location is obtained from the village council. (Village Code § 11-170)
2. Fire Protection: No person shall establish, maintain, conduct or operate any material yard unless such place of business is equipped with suitable
fire protection. In each yard, there shall be a standpipe of a diameter of not less than one and one-half inches (11/2"), connected with the water main.
Such standpipe shall be at least five feet (5') in height and connected with a hose of a diameter of not less than, one and one-half inches (11/2") with
sufficient length of hose to reach any part of the premises occupied by such place. Each lumber yard or yard where lumber is stored shall also be
equipped with not less than two (2) fire extinguishers of five (5) gallon capacity each of a make and design approved by the board of fire
underwriters. (Village Code § 11-171)
3-5D-4: ROOFERS:
A. Definition:
ROOFER: Any person who makes a business of roofing, reroofing or repairing roofs on buildings or other structures. (Village Code § 11-203)
B. License Required: No person shall engage in the business of a roofer without first obtaining a license therefor. (Village Code § 11-204)
C. License Fee: The annual license fee for a roofer shall be as set out in section 3-5-1 of this chapter. However, in lieu of a license, a roofer may apply for,
and obtain, a permit to repair any specified building within the village upon making an application therefor to the director of public health and safety. In
such case, the permit fee shall be ten dollars ($10.00) for an individual job where the contract price shall be less than fifty dollars ($50.00). (Village
code § 11-205; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
D. Bond: Before any person shall engage in the business of a roofer, such person shall file with the village clerk a bond in the sum of ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00), with sureties, to be approved by the village council, which bond shall be conditioned to save the village harmless from any and all
damages that may accrue to or be chargeable against the village on account of an inconsequence of the use of the public ways of the village in such
roofing business; and further conditioned to require immediate repair and clearing of any portion of the public ways utilized by the roofer. (Village code
§ 11-206)
3-5D-5: SHEET METAL WORKERS:
A. License Required: No person shall conduct a sheet metal work business, which includes hot air furnace installation or repair, metal ceiling or gutter
work, or any kind of sheet metal work, without first obtaining a license therefor. (Village code § 11-220)
B. License Fee: The annual license fee for a sheet metal business shall be as provided in section 3-5-1 of this chapter. (Village code § 11-221)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 98/416
C. Removal Of Wastes: All persons engaged in the business of sheet metal or hot air furnace work shall, upon completion of each job, remove any and all
older surplus metal or other material within forty eight (48) hours. No metal or material shall be placed on vacant lots, streets, alleys or public ways.
(Village code § 11-222)
ARTICLE E. BUSINESSES RELATING TO VEGETATION
3-5E-1: FLORISTS:
A. Definition:
FLORIST: Any person engaged in the business of selling flowers, plants, trees or shrubs of all varieties and description, at wholesale or retail. (Village
Code § 11-111)
B. License Required: No person shall operate the business of florist without first having obtained a license therefor. (Village Code § 11-112)
C. License Fee: The annual license fee for doing business as a florist shall be as set out in section 3-5-1 of this chapter. (Village Code § 11-113)
D. Conditions Of License:
1. Sanitary Requirements: Every establishment where the business of florist is operated shall be kept in a sanitary condition. No decayed,
unwholesome, contaminated or diseased flowers, plants or other vegetation shall be allowed to remain in or about said establishment. The florist
establishment shall be kept clear of rubbish and inflammable matter. (Village Code § 11-114)
2. Use Of Public Ways: It shall be unlawful to use any public street, alley, parkway or sidewalk or any other public place in the village for the display of
flowers, plants or shrubs offered for sale. (Village Code § 11-115)
3-5E-2: FORESTRY AND LANDSCAPING:
A. License Required: No person shall engage in the business of forestry or landscaping without first having obtained a license therefor. The term "forestry
or landscaping", as used in this section, shall mean planting, trimming, removal of trees and shrubs and lawn care.
B. License Fee: The annual fee for such license shall be as set out in section 3-5-1 of this chapter. (Village Code § 11-116)
C. Bond: Before any person shall be licensed under this section, he shall deposit with the village clerk a bond in the penal sum of twenty thousand dollars
($20,000.00) with surety, to be approved by the mayor and village council to indemnify and save harmless the village from any and all loss, costs,
expense or liability of any kind whatsoever which the village may suffer by reason of the issuance of such license, or by reason of any act or thing done
or neglected to be done under or by virtue of the authority given in such license.
D. Insurance: No person licensed under this section shall be permitted to plant, trim or remove any tree or shrub in the village unless such person shall
procure and file with the village clerk a standard form of public liability and property damage insurance, insuring the village, its officers and agents from
any and all liability for damage resulting from such planting, trimming or removal of trees within the village. Such insurance policies shall be written by a
qualified insurance company under the laws of the state of Illinois and shall be in the sum of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for one person, one
hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for one accident, and ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for property damage. Such insurance policy shall be
kept in effect for as long as the license shall be valid. (Village Code § 11-117)
Chapter 6
NEWSPAPER STANDS AND VENDING MACHINES
3-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
DISTRIBUTOR: A person, firm or corporation responsible for operating or maintaining a newspaper stand or newspaper vending machine on the public
way in the village.
NEWSPAPER STAND: Any attended structure from which any newspapers, magazines or periodicals are distributed or sold.
NEWSPAPER VENDING MACHINE: Any self-service or coin operated box, container, storage unit or other dispenser used for the display and sale of
newspapers or other news periodicals.
PARKWAY: That area between the sidewalk and the curb of any street, and where there is no sidewalk, that area between the edge of the roadway and
property line adjacent thereto.
PUBLIC WAY: All that area dedicated to public use for public street purposes and shall include, but not be limited to, roadways, parkways, alleys and
sidewalks.
ROADWAY: That portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel.
SIDEWALK: Any surface provided for the exclusive use of pedestrians. (Ord. O-8-82, 5-10-1982)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 99/416
3-6-2: PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE:
A. Permits: It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, place, maintain or operate a newspaper stand or newspaper vending machine on any public way in
the village without first obtaining a permit for such stand or machine from the village clerk.
B. Fee: The annual permit fee for such machine shall be as set out in section 3-5-1 of this title and be due on May 1 of each year and will expire on April
30 of each year, evidenced by a decal in the form prescribed by the village clerk and affixed tosaid newspaper stand or newspaper vending machine.
C. Application For Permit: Application for such permit shall be made in writing to the village clerk upon the form provided, and shall contain the name and
address of the applicant, the proposed specific location of said newspaper vending machine or newspaper stand and shall be signed by the applicant.
(Ord. O-8-82, 5-10-1982)
3-6-3: CONDITIONS OF PERMIT:
A. An express condition of the issuance of such permit, the permittee thereby agrees to indemnify and save harmless the village, its officers and
employees against any loss, liability or damage, including expenses and costs for bodily or personal injury, and for property damage sustained by any
person as the result of installation, use or maintenance of the newspaper vending machine or newspaper stand within the village.
B. Permits shall be valid for one year and shall be renewable upon application in the manner prescribed in subsection 3-6-2C of this chapter and upon
payment of a permit fee.
C. No permit for a newspaper vending machine or newspaper stand shall be issued unless the applicant shall first procure and deliver to the village clerk a
liability and property damage insurance policy in a company and form satisfactory to the village clerk, protecting the village, its officers and agents,
against any and all liability for damages resulting from the installation, use or maintenance of the machine or stand covered by the permit, for not less
than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for one person killed or injured in a single accident; not less than two hundred thousand dollars
($200,000.00) for two (2) or more persons killed or injured in any one accident, and not less than twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for property
damage in any one accident. Such insurance shall be kept in force by the applicant with initial and renewal premiums prepaid in advance of the periods
covered, so long as the machine or stand for which the permit issued shall remain on the public way. (Ord. O-8-82, 5-10-1982)
3-6-4: STANDARDS FOR MAINTENANCE AND INSTALLATION:
A. No newspaper vending machine shall exceed five feet (5') in height, thirty inches (30") in width or two feet (2') in depth.
B. Newspaper stands shall not exceed six feet (6') in height nor occupy more than ten (10) square feet.
C. No newspaper vending machine or stand shall be used for advertising signs or publicity purposes other than the display, sale or purchase of the
newspaper or news periodical sold therein.
D. Each newspaper vending machine shall have affixed in a readily visible place the name and address of the distributor and the telephone number of a
working telephone service to report a malfunction, secure a refund in the event of a malfunction of the coin return mechanism, or give the notices
provided for herein.
E. Newspaper vending machines and newspaper stands shall be kept in good clean and neat maintenance. (Ord. O-8-82, 5-10-1982)
3-6-5: LOCATION AND PLACEMENT:
The location and placement of newspaper stands or newspaper vending machines shall be subject to the following provisions:
A. No newspaper vending machine or stand wholly or in part shall project onto, into or over any part of the roadway of any public street, or which rests,
wholly or in part, upon, along or over any portion of the roadway of any public street.
B. No newspaper vending machine or stand shall be permitted to rest upon, in or over any public sidewalk, parkway or public way, when such site or
location is used for public utility purposes, public transportation purposes or other governmental use, or when such newspaper vending machine
unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, including any legally marked or stopped vehicle, the ingress into or
egress from any residence or place of business, or the use of poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants, mailboxes or other objects permitted at or
near said location.
C. When any newspaper vending machine or stand is chained, bolted or otherwise attached to any public property, such attachment shall be of rust and
stain resistant material.
D. Newspaper vending machines may be placed next to each other, provided that no group of newspaper vending machines shall extend for a distance of
more than seven feet (7') along a curb.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 100/416
E. No newspaper vending machine or newspaper stand shall be placed, installed, used or maintained:
1. Within three feet (3') of any marked crosswalk.
2. Within twelve feet (12') of the curb return of any unmarked crosswalk.
3. Within five feet (5') of any fire hydrant, fire call box, police call box or other emergency facility.
4. Within five feet (5') of any driveway.
5. Within three feet (3') ahead or fifteen feet (15') to the rear of any sign marked a designated bus stop.
6. Within three feet (3') of the outer end of any bus bench.
7. At any location whereby the clear space for the passageway of pedestrians is reduced to less than eighty percent (80%) of clear space for such
passage.
8. Within three feet (3') of or on any public area improved with lawn, flowers, shrubs, trees or other landscaping. (Ord. O-8-82, 5-10-1982)
3-6-6: ABANDONMENT:
Any newspaper vending machine that remains empty for a period of three (3) days shall be deemed to have been abandoned and disposed of by the
department of public property as worthless property. (Ord. O-8-82, 5-10-1982)
3-6-7: VIOLATIONS:
In the event of a violation of the provisions of this chapter, the village clerk shall issue a notice to the distributor to correct the violation. The notice shall be
delivered verbally and confirmed in writing. In the event of failure of the distributor to correct the violation within five (5) days, excluding Saturdays,
Sundays and all legal holidays, after the mailing of said notice, the village clerk shall remove the newspaper vending machine or stand and dispose of the
machine or stand as in the case of abandoned machines or stands set forth in section 3-6-6 of this chapter. (Ord. O-8-82, 5-10-1982)
3-6-8: APPEALS:
If the distributor objects to the determination of the village clerk that the use, installation and maintenance of the newspaper vending machine violates any
provisions of this chapter, then the distributor may within ten (10) days after the notice required in section 3-6-7 of this chapter appeal the determination to
the mayor and village council by letter stating the reason for the appeal and a hearing thereon shall be held within ten (10) days after receipt of the notice
of appeal. The appealing party shall be given not less than five (5) days notice of the hearing. The decision of the mayor and village council shall be final.
(Ord. O-8-82, 5-10-1982)
3-6-9: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
In addition to the enforcement procedures provided in section 3-6-7 of this chapter, it shall be within the power and discretion of the village clerk to
suspend or revoke the permit for continued or repeated violation or infractions of any provision of this chapter. Suspension or revocation shall be
mandatory for the third violation of section 3-6-5 of this chapter. Rights to notice and appeal shall be the same as provided in section 3-6-8 of this chapter
and this section, as inthe case of violations. (Ord. O-8-82, 5-10-1982)
Chapter 7
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
3-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them:
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICIAL: The terms of this chapter shall be administered by the mayor of the village, who shall be the enforcement officer, or his
authorized representative.
EMPLOYEE: Any and all persons other than massage therapists who render any service for the licensee but has no physical contact with customers or
clients.
LICENSEE: The operator of a massage establishment.
MASSAGE: Any method of pressure on, friction against or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, bathing, touching, binding, painting, irritating or
stimulating of external soft parts of the body with hands or with the aid of any manual, mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliance, with or without such
supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptic oils, powder, creams, lotions, soaps, ointments or other similar preparations commonly used in
this practice.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT: Any establishment having its place of business where any person engages in or carries on permits to be engaged or
carried on any of the activities set out in the definition of "massage" herein.
MASSAGE SERVICES: The providing of a massage or massages by any person.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 101/416
MASSAGE THERAPIST: Any person who, for any consideration whatever, engages in the practice of "massage" as herein defined.
PERSON: Any individual, copartnership, firm, association, joint stock company, corporation or any combination of individuals of whatever form or
character.
SEXUAL OR GENITAL AREA: The sexual or genital area of any person shall include the genitals, pubic area, anus or perineum of any person, or the
vulva or breasts of a female. (Ord. O-14-75, 11-8-1975)
3-7-2: MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT LICENSES:
A. License Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on, or to permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, upon
any premises in the village, the operation of a "massage establishment", as herein defined, without first having obtained a license from the village clerk,
after the approval of the administrative official and the village council.
B. Application For License; Fee: Every applicant for a permit to maintain, operate or conduct a massage establishment shall file an application in duplicate,
under oath, with the village clerk upon a form provided by the village clerk, and pay a nonrefundable filing fee as set out in section 3-5-1 of this title to
the village clerk, who shall issue a receipt which shall be attached to the application filed with the village clerk. The village clerk shall, within fifteen (15)
days thereafter, refer copies of such application and all additional information to the board of health, fire department, building department and the
administrative official and village council. Within forty five (45) days, the village agencies shall inspect the premises proposed to be operated as a
massage establishment, and make recommendations to the administrative official concerning compliance with the codes of the village. Upon receipt of
the recommendations of the respective village agencies, the administrative official shall notify the applicant as to whether his application has been
granted, denied or held for further investigation. The period of such additional investigation shall not exceed an additional thirty (30) days unless
otherwise agreed to by the applicant. The administrative official shall advise the applicant in writing as to whether the application has been granted or
denied. If the application is denied or held for further investigation, the administrative official shall advise the applicant in writing of the reason for such
refusal.
The failure or refusal of the applicant to promptly give any information relevant to the investigation of the application, or the refusal or failure of
applicant to appear at any reasonable time and place for examination under oath regarding said application, or the refusal of applicant to submit to or
cooperate with any inspection required by this section, shall be grounds for denial of the application.
C. Contents Of Application: The application for a license to operate a massage establishment shall set forth the exact nature of the massage to be
administered and the proposed place and facilities thereof.
In addition thereto, any applicant for a license, and each partner or limited partner of an applicant, if a partnership applicant, and each officer and
director of a corporate applicant and any stockholder of a corporate applicant holding more than ten percent (10%) of the stock of the corporate
applicant, shall furnish the following information:
1. Written proof that each individual is at least eighteen (18) years of age;
2. All residential addresses for the past three (3) years;
3. The business, occupation or employment of each individual for the three (3) years immediately preceding the date of application;
4. The previous experience of the individual in massage or similar business;
5. Whether the individual has had any license denied, revoked or suspended in the village or any other state or city for a massage establishment, the
reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation of the individual subsequent to such suspension, revocation or denial;
6. Any conviction, forfeiture of bond or plea of nolo contendere upon any criminal violation or village ordinance violation (except minor traffic violations),
within a five (5) year period;
7. If the applicant is a corporation, or a partner of any partnership is a corporation, then the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown
in the articles of incorporation, together with the state of incorporation and proof of authority to do business in the state of Illinois.
D. Issuance Of License: Upon receipt of the recommendation of the respective agencies and with the information contained in the application, together
with all additional information provided therein, the administrative official shall direct the issuance of the license by the village clerk to the applicant to
maintain, operate or conduct a massage establishment, unless the administrative official shall find:
1. That the operation of the massage establishment as proposed by the applicant, if permitted, would not comply with the applicable laws of the state of
Illinois and the village, including, but not limited to, the building, health, planning, housing, fire prevention and zoning codes of the village; or
2. That the applicant or any other person who shall be directly or indirectly engaged in the management and operation of the massage establishment
has been convicted of: a) a felony; b) an offense involving sexual misconduct with children; c) any provision of 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-6
et seq.; or
3. That the operation of the massage establishment as proposed by the applicant, if permitted, would violate the provisions of this chapter.
The license provided herein shall be for an initial term ending April 30 next following the issuance of the license, unless sooner suspended or
revoked. Such license must be renewed annually, and any renewal shall be for a term of one year from May 1 to April 30.
E. Revocation Or Suspension Of License: Any license issued for a massage establishment may be revoked or suspended by the administrative official,
after a hearing, for good cause. The administrative official shall give to the licensee at least fifteen (15) days written notice of the charges and an
opportunity for a public hearing before the administrative official, at which time the licensee may present evidence bearing upon the question. Cause for
revocation or suspension shall include the violation of the provisions of this chapter or of any criminal statute of the state of Illinois by the applicant, or
by any employee of the licensee or any massage therapist employed by the licensee; provided that the violation of this chapter or any criminal law of
the state of Illinois shall not be a cause for revocation or suspension unless the licensee shall have had actual or constructive knowledge of such
violations in the exercise of due diligence. It shall also be cause for revocation or suspension that the applicant has made a false statement on any
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 102/416
application for permit under this chapter, or in the event that the licensee shall refuse to permit any authorized police officer or authorized member of
the police department, building department, board of health or of the fire department of the village to inspect the premises or the operations thereof at
reasonable times.
When any license shall have been revoked for any cause, no license shall be granted to any person for the period one year thereafter for the conduct
of a massage establishment in the premises described in such revoked license. (Ord. O-14-75, 11-8-1975)
3-7-3: MASSAGE THERAPIST PERMITS:
A. Permits Required: Any person who engages in the practice of "massage", as herein defined, shall file an application for a permit as a massage
therapist, which application shall be filed with village clerk upon the form provided by him, and shall pay fees as set out in section 3-5-1 of this title to
the village clerk, who shall issue a receipt which shall be attached to the application filed with the village clerk.
B. Application For Permit: The application for a permit for a massage therapist shall contain the following:
1. Name and residence.
2. Social security number.
3. Written evidence that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age.
4. Business, occupation or employment of the applicant for three (3) years immediately preceding the date of application.
5. Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of, pleaded nolo contendere to, or suffered a forfeiture of bond on a charge of committing any
violation of the village ordinances or state statute (except minor traffic violations). In the event any answer is in the affirmative, then the applicant
shall state the place and court in which such conviction, plea or forfeiture was had, the specific charge and the sentence imposed as a result thereof.
6. The applicant shall further undergo a physical examination and present the written results thereof for contagious and communicable diseases which
shall include a recognized blood test for syphilis, a culture for gonorrhea, a test or tests which will demonstrate freedom from tuberculosis, and each
test shall have been made by a licensed physician and all laboratory tests shall be in laboratories approved by the village. The applicant shall then
present a certificate with the results of each such examination signed by a physician licensed in the state of Illinois stating that the person examined
is either free from any contagious or communicable disease or is incapable of communicating any such disease to others. Each applicant shall
undergo the physical examination provided herein and present to the village clerk the certificate required herein prior to the commencement of
employment and at least once each twelve (12) months thereafter.
7. The applicant shall further meet professional skills requirements established by regulations adopted by the Forest Park board of health. Upon proof
of satisfactory compliance with the board of health regulations the applicant shall be issued a certificate by the board of health certifying compliance
with the regulations and this certificate shall be attached to the license application.
There shall be excepted from the provisions of this subsection any person who shall be registered as a physical therapist by the state of Illinois under
the provisions of 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 90/0.05 et seq., which person shall not also be required to obtain a permit as massage therapist.
C. Issuance Of Permit: The administrative official and village council shall direct the issuance by the village clerk of a permit for a massage therapist within
twenty one (21) days following the application and the providing of all information required by this chapter, unless the administrative official finds that
the applicant for a permit has been convicted of a felony, an offense involving sexual misconduct with children or any violation of 720 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-6 et seq., or unless he finds that the applicant has failed to provide all of the information and certificates required by this chapter.
Each permit for a massage therapist, pursuant to this chapter, shall terminate on April 30 following its issuance, and any renewal shall be for a one year
term commencing May 1 and ending April 30 thereafter and shall be carried by the permit holder while engaged in his employment.
D. Revocation Or Suspension Of Permit: A permit for massage therapist may be revoked or suspended where it appears that the massage therapist has
been convicted of any offense which would be cause for denial of a permit upon an original application, has made a false statement on an application
for a permit or has committed an act in violation of this chapter. The administrative official shall give the permit holder a written notice specifying the
grounds of suspension or revocation. The permit holder may, within fifteen (15) days from the date of such revocation or suspension, file a written
request for public hearing, which hearing shall be held within fifteen (15) days after the filing of request for same, and at which time the permit holder
may present evidence bearing upon the question. The administrative official shall then issue a written order as to whether the permit shall be revoked
or suspended within five (5) days after the date of hearing. (Ord. O-14-75, 11-8-1975)
3-7-4: REQUIRED FACILITIES:
No massage establishment shall receive a permit or be operated, established or maintained unless the establishment shall comply with each of the
following minimum regulations:
A. All massage tables, bathtubs, shower stalls, bath areas and floors shall have surfaces which may be readily disinfected.
B. Separate bathing, dressing, locker, toilet, massage room facilities shall be provided for female and male patrons, so that female and male patrons may
be served simultaneously in the event that patrons of both sexes are permitted.
C. The premises shall have adequate equipment for disinfecting and sterilizing nondisposable instruments and materials used in administering massages.
Such nondisposable instruments and materials shall be disinfected after use on each patron.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 103/416
D. Toilet facilities shall be provided in convenient locations. When five (5) or more employees or patrons of different sexes are on the premises at the same
time, separate toilet facilities shall be provided. Lavatories or washbasins shall be provided with both hot and cold running water and shall be installed
in either the toilet room or vestibule. Lavatories or washbasins shall be provided with soap and a dispenser and with sanitary towels.
E. Closed cabinets shall be provided for use in the storage of clean linens, towels and other material used in administering massages. All soiled linens,
towels and other materials shall be kept in properly covered containers or cabinets which shall be kept separate from the clean storage areas. (Ord. O-
14-75, 11-8-1975)
3-7-5: OPERATING REGULATIONS:
A. Every portion of the massage establishment, including appliances and apparatus, shall be kept clean and operated under sanitary conditions.
B. Price rates for ail services shall be prominently posted in the reception area in a location available to all prospective customers.
C. All employees, including massage therapists, shall wear clean, nontransparent outer garments covering the sexual and genital areas, and such other
garments shall be restricted in use to the massage establishment.
D. A separate dressing room for each sex must be available on the premises, with individual lockers for each employee, massage therapist.
E. Doors to the dressing rooms shall open inward and shall be self-closing.
F. All massage establishments shall be provided with clean laundered sheets and towels in sufficient quantity and shall be laundered after each use
thereof and stored in a sanitary manner.
G. The sexual or genital areas of patrons must be covered with towels, cloths or undergarments when in the presence of an employee, massage therapist.
H. It shall be unlawful for any person in a massage establishment to place his hand upon or to touch with any part of his body, or to fondle in any manner,
or to massage, a sexual or genital area of any person.
I. No massage therapist, employee or licensee, shall perform, offer or agree to perform any act which shall require the touching of the patron's genital
area.
J. All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, baths and steam rooms and any other physical facilities shall be in good repair and maintained in a clean and
sanitary condition.
K. Oils, creams, lotions and other preparations used in administering massages shall be kept in clean closed containers or cabinets.
L. No massage therapist shall administer a massage to a patron exhibiting any skin fungus, skin infection, skin inflammation or skin eruption, unless a
physician duly licensed by the state of Illinois shall certify in writing that such person may be safely massaged, describing the conditions under which
such massage may be performed.
M. Each massage therapist shall wash his or her hands in hot running water using a proper soap or disinfectant before administering any massage to any
patron.
N. No massage establishment shall permit any agent or employee who is a member of one sex to treat a member of the opposite sex unless such
treatment is undertaken by or under the immediate direction or supervision of a person who is licensed in the practice of medicine, physical therapy or
beauty culture by the state of Illinois. (Ord. O-14-75, 11-8-1975)
3-7-6: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE AND PERMIT:
A. Advertising: No massage establishment holding a license under this chapter shall depict, place, publish, distribute or cause to be depicted, placed,
published or distributed any advertising matter that suggests to prospective patrons that any services are available other than those services permitted
by this chapter, or which would suggest that employees, massage therapists are dressed in any manner other than that permitted by this chapter, and
all advertisements shall contain the number of the village license held by the massage establishment.
B. Outcall Registration: Any massage therapist who provides any of the services provided in this chapter at any hotel or motel must first register his name
and the permit number with the owner, manager or person in charge of such hotel or motel. No outcall massage service may be operated other than by
a licensed establishment, and each outcall massage service must be performed within the manner provided in this chapter. (Ord. O-14-75, 11-8-1975)
C. Inspection: The police department shall, from time to time, and at least twice a year, make an inspection of each massage establishment granted a
license under the provisions of this chapter for the purposes of determining that the provisions of this chapter are complied with. Such inspection shall
be made at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to fail to allow such inspection officer access to the
premises or to hinder such inspection officer in any manner. (Ord. O-14-75, 11-8-1975; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 104/416
D. Employment Of Minors: It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator, proprietor, manager or other person in charge of any massage establishment to
employ any person who is not at least eighteen (18) years of age.
E. Transfer Of Permits: No permits for the operation of a massage establishment shall be transferable except with a written consent of the administrative
official; provided, however, that upon the death or incapacity of the licensee, the massage establishment may continue in business for a reasonable
period of time to permit an orderly transfer of the license to the personal representative of the licensee or to a transferee of the license.
F. Display Of Permit: Each licensee shall display a valid current permit in a conspicuous place within the massage establishment so that the same may be
readily seen by persons entering the establishment. (Ord. O-14-75, 11-8-1975)
3-7-7: EXCEPTIONS TO LICENSE:
No license shall be required for hospitals, nursing homes, sanatoriums or persons holding an unrevoked certificate to practice medicine under the laws of
the state of Illinois, or to persons working under the personal direction of any such persons or in any such establishments, nor shall this chapter apply to
barber or cosmetologists lawfully carrying out their profession and holding a valid unrevoked license or certificate or registration issued by the state of
Illinois, nor shall the provisions of this chapter apply to participants in any professional or amateur sports competition. (Ord. O-14-75, 11-8-1975)
3-7-8: VIOLATION AND PENALTY:
Any person who violates any section of this chapter, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in the general penalty in section 1-3-1 of this
code for each offense. (Ord. O-14-75, 11-8-1975; amd. 2004 Code)
Chapter 8
TUMBLING CENTERS
3-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
TUMBLING CENTER: A premises or place where tumbling equipment is provided and maintained for public use.
TUMBLING EQUIPMENT: A fabric bed or surface designed to provide resilience by virtue of its own elasticity; or that provided by an elastic or spring
suspension system, or both, within a stable and tested frame, and intended to be used for jumping, bouncing or acrobatic tumbling. (Village code § 11-227)
3-8-2: LICENSE REQUIREMENTS:
A. License Fee: The annual license fee for a tumbling center shall be as set out in section 3-5-1 of this title. (Village code § 11-228)
B. Insurance Requirements: Each tumbling center shall be protected against personal injuries by a liability insurance policy for each tumbling equipment,
in the amount of not less than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for one occurrence, and twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for any one person.
A certificate of such insurance policy shall be filed with the village clerk at all times that said license is in effect. (Village code § 11-229)
3-8-3: SUPERVISION AND INSPECTIONS:
A. Supervision:
1. When open for use, a tumbling center shall be under the direct supervision of as many supervisors as are necessary to comply with the posted rules;
and supervisors shall observe the equipment when in use. There shall be at least one supervisor on duty for each twelve (12) units, or fractional part
thereof, in use. (Village code § 11-232)
2. A supervisor shall be eighteen (18) years of age or over; of good moral character; trained and experienced in the supervision and control of
personnel (both skilled and unskilled) in tumbling; and shall be physically able to manage the tumbling center. (Village code § 11-233)
B. Inspections: The director of public health and safety shall annually inspect every tumbling center. (Village code § 11-242; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
3-8-4: EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS:
A. General: All tumbling equipment shall be maintained in a good state of repair. (Village code § 11-230)
B. Location And Spacing: Tumbling equipment shall be located on a level surface in such a way as to be within view of the operator, or attendant at all
times. The spacing of equipment units shall conform to the following minimum dimensions, as measured from the inside edge of the frame:
1. Three feet (3') between sides of units.
2. Four feet (4') between ends of units.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 105/416
3. Five feet (5') from ends to nearest fence, building, or other similar construction.
4. Three feet (3') from sides, or corners, to nearest fence, building, or other similar construction.
5. The area surrounding the tumbling equipment shall be surfaced to prevent a dust nuisance; and have a reasonable, level surface of pea gravel, or
equivalent type material, from a safety and dust control standpoint. (Village code § 11-237)
C. Pits: Pits for tumbling centers shall be so constructed that they will not interfere with the operation of the equipment and of a depth not less than three
feet (3'), nor more than four feet (4') at centers. Such pits shall be so framed that the tumbling equipment is held in a level position, and is supported on
a solid stable surface. Lumber used as framing for pits shall be not less than two inches (2") in thickness and shall be securely connected together.
(Village code § 11-238)
D. Construction: Precautionary measures shall be taken to prevent broken springs on tumbling equipment, disengaging from the assembly. (Village code
§ 11-239)
E. Padding: The frames of tumbling equipment shall be completely padded to provide reasonable safety. Pads two inches (2") thick, filled with cotton
liners, shall be deemed to meet this requirement. (Village code § 11-240)
3-8-5: PREMISES REQUIREMENTS:
A. Sanitary Requirements: A tumbling center, and all facilities on the premises, shall be kept in a clean condition. Appropriate antilitter signs and waste
containers shall be provided. A tumbling center shall be provided with the following:
1. A sanitary drinking fountain or bottled water and proper cups in a suitable, sanitary dispenser. (Village code §§ 11-235, 11-236; amd. 2004 Code)
2. Adequate, sanitary toilet facilities, consisting of separate accommodations for men and women. These shall include a flush water closet connected to
the sewer system of the village, and shall be subject to the approval of the director of public health and safety. (Village code §§ 11-235, 11-236; amd.
2004 Code; Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
B. Fences: The entire tumbling center shall be completely enclosed by fencing not less than five feet (5') in height. (Village code § 11-241)
C. Parking: A tumbling center shall provide adequate parking facilities for patrons, in accordance with the provisions of this code. (Village code § 11-243)
D. Music: There shall be no music or loudspeaker operations after ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. Any playing of music or loudspeaker announcements at any
other time shall be so conducted as not to create a nuisance or disturbance to the surrounding property owners, or their tenants. (Village code § 11-
244)
3-8-6: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The following rules and regulations shall be printed in clear, easily read letters not less than one inch (1") in size and posted at not less than two (2) places
within the tumbling equipment center:
A. Not over one person on the apparatus at one time.
B. No flips, twists or similar routines shall be performed unless under supervision of a qualified instructor, or unless the patron so performing is qualified in
the opinion of the operator whose decision shall be fixed.
C. Street shoes and bare feet performances are not permitted.
D. Jumping from apparatus to apparatus is not permitted.
E. Persons under the influence of alcoholic beverage may not use equipment.
F. Children under the age of six (6) years shall not use the equipment unless accompanied by a responsible person.
G. No smoking, eating or drinking while using the equipment. (Village code § 11-231)
3-8-7: ACCIDENTS:
The operator of a tumbling center shall provide for competent medical and hospital care for all accident and injury victims. He shall have a telephone on
the premises available for emergency use. Said operator shall also provide adequate first aid facilities as recommended by the American Red Cross first
aid manual. (Village code § 11-234)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 106/416
Chapter 9
FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE COMPANIES
3-9-1: ANNUAL TAX:
All corporations, companies and associations not incorporated under the laws of this state which are engaged in the village in effecting fire insurance, shall
pay to the village treasurer on or before July 15 of each and every year the sum of two percent (2%) of the gross receipts or premiums received by the
company, corporation or association, or their agent or agents, for business effected or transacted for fire insurance within the village for the year ending
July 1 preceding said dates1. (Village Code § 16-1)
3-9-2: REPORTS:
A. Every person acting as agent or otherwise for or on behalf of such corporation, company or association in soliciting or effecting insurance, shall, on or
before July 15 of each and every year, render to the village clerk a full and just account, verified by oath, of all premiums which, during the year ending
July 1 preceding such dates, shall have been received on behalf of such company, corporation or association. Said person shall fully and specifically
set out in such report the amount or amounts so received for such fire insurance. Said agent or agents shall also, at the time of making such report,
pay to the village treasurer the sum of two percent (2%) upon the gross receipts of such corporation, company or association obtained as such
premium for effecting fire insurance in the village as specified in section 3-9-1 of this chapter. (Village Code § 16-2)
B. If such account be not rendered on or before July 1 or if the above mentioned rates for the said tax or license fee shall remain unpaid after said date, it
shall be unlawful for such corporation, company or association to transact any business of fire insurance in the village until the requirements hereof
have been fully complied with. Nevertheless, these provisions shall in no way, affect the validity of any risk that maybe taken in violation hereof
between such corporation, company or association and the person so insured. (Village Code § 16-3)
3-9-3: APPLICATION OF FUNDS:
All the monies paid to the village treasurer under this chapter shall be kept in a separate fund for the use, maintenance and benefit of the department
specifically related to equipment for the safety and/or protection of the members of the fire department. (Ord. O-21-89, 12-27-1989)
3-9-4: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
If a corporation, company or association fails to render the account or report designated by the date required by this chapter, or, if the above mentioned
rate, as a tax or license fee, shall remain unpaid after the date designated, every corporation, company or association shall be fined as provided in the
general penalty in section 1-3-1 of this code upon conviction for each and every offense. In addition to such penalty, the village shall recover in an action in
its name and for its use against said corporation, company or association so failing to make such report or to pay such license fee or tax in the full amount
which would be due under the provisions hereof. (Village Code § 16-4; amd. 2004 Code)
Chapter 10
TAXICABS, TAXIMETERS AND DRIVERS
3-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless otherwise expressly stated, whenever used in this chapter, the following terms shall respectively be deemed to mean:
DRIVER: Any person driving a taxicab.
OPERATOR: Any person engaging in the business of the operation of a taxicab and having control of the operation and maintenance of a taxicab or of the
collection of revenue from its operation.
OWNER: Every person having the use or control of one or more taxicabs as defined herein.
TAXICAB: All public vehicles driven by mechanical power used to transport passengers for hire, except those vehicles commonly known as buses.
TAXICAB COMPANY: Every individual, trustee, partnership, association, firm, or corporation engaged in business as a proprietor, franchisor or dispatcher
of one or more taxicabs.
TAXIMETER: A mechanical instrument or device by which the charge for hire of a taxicab is mechanically calculated, either for distance traveled or for
waiting time, or for both, and upon which such charge shall be indicated by means of figures. (Ord. O-10-08, 3-24-2008)
3-10-2: SCOPE; JURISDICTION; NUMBER OF LICENSES ISSUED:
A. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit any public passenger vehicle from coming into the village to discharge passengers accepted for
transportation outside the village.
B. The village clerk shall be responsible for licensing all taxicabs and owner/operators operating taxicabs within the village. (Ord. O-10-08, 3-24-2008)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 107/416
C. The village clerk shall issue taxicab vehicle licenses on an annual basis. Applications must be complete at the time of submission with the village clerk's
office and no incomplete application will be held by the village clerk pending submission of the required information. There shall be no limit on the
number of taxicab company licenses nor the number of taxicab vehicle licenses. (Ord. O-10-11, 4-25-2011)
3-10-3: TAXICAB SERVICE:
Every owner and driver is required to furnish reasonably safe and adequate service at just and reasonable rates within the village as may reasonably be
required to ensure adequate accommodations to the public in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. O-10-08, 3-24-2008)
3-10-4: LICENSES REQUIRED:
3-10-4-1: TAXICAB COMPANY LICENSE:
No taxicab company shall engage in business unless there shall first have been obtained therefor licenses from the village clerk. (Ord. O-10-08, 3-24-
2008)
3-10-4-2: TAXICAB VEHICLE LICENSE:
No person shall operate a taxicab without first having obtained a valid taxicab vehicle license in the manner set forth in this chapter, and unless the license
is in full force and effect. (Ord. O-10-08, 3-24-2008)
3-10-4-3: TAXICAB DRIVER'S LICENSE:
No person shall operate a taxicab as the driver thereof without first having obtained a valid taxicab driver's license in the manner set forth in this chapter,
and unless the license is in full force and effect. (Ord. O-10-08, 3-24-2008)
3-10-5: TAXICAB COMPANY LICENSES:
3-10-5-1: APPLICATION; TERM; RENEWAL; LATE PENALTY:
A. Application: Applications for taxicab company licenses shall be made in writing to the village clerk on forms as reasonably required and approved by the
village administrator. Such application shall contain the following:
1. The address of the company's principal place of business.
2. The full name and address of the owner or operator.
3. The financial status of the applicant, including the amounts of all unpaid judgments against the applicant and the nature of the transaction or acts
giving rise to such judgments.
4. The number of vehicles to be operated or controlled by the applicant and the location of proposed depots and terminals.
5. The color scheme or insignia to be used to designate the vehicle or vehicles of the applicant.
6. A rate sheet to be in effect for the period the taxicab company license shall be in effect.
7. Any facts which the applicant believes tend to prove that public convenience and necessity require the granting of a license.
8. Such further information as the village clerk may require.
B. Color Similarity: All taxicabs owned or operated by or on behalf of a taxicab business licensee shall be identically painted so that they are readily
identifiable. However, no coloring scheme or name shall be similar to that of any other taxicab company which has previously been issued a taxicab
license by the village.
C. License Fee: Each applicant for a taxicab company license shall submit to the village clerk at the time of filing its application, a license fee as is set out
in section 3-5-1 of this title. This license fee shall be nonrefundable.
D. Renewal: Each licensee shall annually pay the license fee in full for each taxicab company license before May 1 of each year.
E. Penalty: If licensee does not renew his/her license and pay the annual license fee in accordance with subsection D of this section before June 1, the
licensee will incur a penalty of one hundred percent (100%) of the annual license fee, in addition to the annual license fee. If licensee does not renew
his/her license and pay the annual license fee in accordance with subsection D of this section before July 1, the licensee will incur a penalty of two
hundred percent (200%) of the annual license fee, in addition to the annual license fee.
F. Change Of Address: If a licensee holding a taxicab company license under this chapter changes its principal place of business, it shall notify the village
clerk in writing. Upon receipt, the village clerk shall make the necessary alteration to the village's records. No fee shall be required for a change in
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 108/416
address.
G. Change Of Ownership: If ownership of a cab company licensed under this chapter is conveyed to a new owner, said new owner shall apply for a new
license in its name in accordance with this chapter. There shall be no transfer of a license from one owner of a business to another.
H. License For Each Taxicab: Each taxicab company, along with its application for a taxicab company license, shall license or cause to be licensed each
individual taxicab operated by, for or on behalf of such company within the village, in accordance with this section. (Ord. O-10-08, 3-24-2008)
3-10-5-2: INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Every licensee shall carry public liability and property damage insurance and, where applicable, workers' compensation insurance for his employees
with solvent and responsible insurers approved by the village attorney, licensed by and authorized to do business in the state of Illinois, and qualified
under the laws of Illinois to assume the risk in the amounts hereinafter set forth, to secure payment by the licensee, his agents, employees or lessees
of any final judgment or settlement of any claim against them resulting from any occurrence caused by or arising out of the operation or use of any of
the licensee's public passenger vehicles.
B. Every insurance policy or contract for such insurance shall provide that suit may be brought in any court of competent jurisdiction upon such policy or
contract by any person for the payment and satisfaction of any final judgment rendered against the licensee or person insured arising from the
operation or use of such vehicle.
C. Every public liability insurance policy must meet the requirements of state law, governing coverage for damages from owners or operators of uninsured
motor vehicles, hit and run motor vehicles, and underinsured motorists.
D. Each public liability insurance policy shall provide for coverage in an amount as required by state law, as may be amended from time to time1.
E. The insurance policy shall contain a description of each public passenger vehicle insured, manufacturer's name and number, the state license number
and the public passenger vehicle license number.
F. In lieu of an insurance policy or contract, a surety bond or bonds with a corporate surety or sureties licensed by and authorized to do business under the
laws of Illinois, may be accepted by the village for all or any part of such insurance; provided, that each bond shall be in the form and language
prescribed by the village and approved as to form and legality by the village attorney and shall provide terms and conditions for the payment and
satisfaction of any final judgment in conformity with and containing equivalent indemnity provisions of an insurance policy or contract required by this
section.
G. All insurance policies or contracts or surety bonds required by this section, or copies thereof certified by the insurers or sureties shall be filed with the
village clerk. The policy or contract or bond shall be further endorsed to provide thirty (30) day advance notice of any cancellation thereof to the village
clerk. If any insurance policy or contract or bond is canceled or permitted to lapse for any reason, the village shall suspend the license for the vehicle
affected for a period not to exceed ten (10) days to permit another insurance policy or contract or bond to be supplied in compliance with the provisions
of this section. If such other insurance policy or contract or bond is not supplied within the period of suspension of the license, the village shall revoke
the license for such vehicle. In the event that such insurance or bond is supplied, the commissioner shall nevertheless suspend the license for each
vehicle affected for an additional period of five (5) days for every day of noncompliance, except by reason of the insolvency of the insurer without
advance written notice to the licensee, for the first such violation of insurance or bond requirements, and a period of ten (10) days for every day of
noncompliance for the second such violation within any three (3) year period. The third violation of this insurance or bond requirement within any three
(3) year period shall result in revocation of the licenses of the affected vehicles. (Ord. O-10-08, 3-24-2008)
3-10-5-3: DISPATCH CENTER:
Each taxicab company must be equipped with a central, twenty four (24) hour dispatch office wherein customer calls are received and drivers are
dispatched. Each dispatch center must maintain records of calls received and rides dispatched for a minimum of thirty (30) days. Each licensee shall
cause the telephone number for the dispatch center to be published in the local telephone directory. Each company shall answer all calls received by it for
service inside the corporate limits of the village as soon as it can do so, and if said service cannot be rendered within a reasonable time, the taxicab
company shall notify the prospective passenger(s) how long it will be before the call can be answered. Each dispatch center must maintain a lost and
found. (Ord. O-10-08, 3-24-2008)
3-10-6: TAXICAB VEHICLE LICENSES:
No taxicab vehicle may be operated in the village unless the person who owns or operates or drives or controls the taxicabs shall have first obtained and
shall have in force a taxicab vehicle license issued under the provisions of this section. The requirements of this section shall be in force in addition to
those of section 3-10-5 of this chapter, relating to taxicab company licenses. (Ord. O-10-08, 3-24-2008)
3-10-6-1: APPLICATION; TERM; RENEWAL; LATE PENALTY:
A. Contents Of Application: Each taxicab vehicle license applicant shall submit in writing to the clerk an application that includes the following information:
1. A full description of the motor vehicle for which the license is desired, including the make, model and vehicle identification number and the state
license number;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 109/416
2. The length of time the vehicle has been in use, the number of persons it is capable of carrying;
3. Any other information that the mayor or the village clerk may require.
B. License Fees: Each applicant shall submit the annual fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) to the village clerk at the time of submitting the application. This annual
license fee shall be paid for each and every taxicab which shall operate upon the streets of the village. Such license fee shall be in lieu of the regular
annual vehicle sticker fees charged by the village for motor vehicles housed in the village as heretofore established.
C. Renewal: Each licensee shall annually pay the license fee in full for each taxicab company license before May 1 of each year.
D. Penalty: If licensee does not renew his/her license and pay the annual license fee in accordance with subsection C of this section before June 1, the
licensee will incur a penalty of one hundred percent (100%) of the annual license fee, in addition to the annual license fee. If licensee does not renew
his/her license and pay the annual license fee in accordance with subsection C of this section before July 1, the licensee will incur a penalty of two
hundred percent (200%) of the annual license fee, in addition to the annual license fee.
E. Verification Of State Registration: Such application shall thereupon be referred by the village clerk to the chief of police who shall verify that the taxicab
is properly registered with the state of Illinois. Upon approval of the chief of police of the application, he shall so endorse the application and file same
with the village clerk who shall, upon payment of the required fee, issue the license.
F. Issuance Of License: Upon approval of the chief of police, payment of the fee, and verification that the applicant has complied with all requirements of
this chapter, the village clerk shall issue the license.
G. Term Of License: Such licenses shall be issued annually on May 1 in each and every year and shall be valid for one year to and including April 30 next
succeeding unless sooner suspended or revoked. (Ord. O-10-08, 3-24-2008)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 06-19 - TAXICABS, TAXIMETERS AND DRIVERS. Go to new ordinance.
3-10-6-2: VEHICLE INSPECTIONS:
A. Safety Test: All licenses under this chapter must be accompanied by a satisfactory completed vehicle inspection report stating that the vehicle is in a
good and safe mechanical condition. Said safety test shall be conducted by a duly licensed state mechanic. The passing of the safety test shall not be
a bar at any time to prosecution for operating or causing to be operated a taxicab not in good and safe condition. Charges for all safety inspections are
to be paid by the owner/operator of the taxicab.
B. Outward Appearance: Any member of the police department designated by the chief of police shall inspect the outward appearance of all taxicabs to
assure compliance with similar colors, signage, lighted dome light, taximeter placement and lighted dial and general condition of the vehicle before
licensing by the village clerk.
C. Owner To Submit Vehicle For Inspection: It shall be the duty of the owner of each taxicab to submit to the chief of police each taxicab for inspection
prior to the issuance of a license.
D. Age Of Vehicle: No vehicle shall be licensed as a taxicab, whether upon application or renewal, unless it is less than ten (10) years old at the time of
application in calendar years 2008 and 2009, and less than eight (8) years old in calendar years 2010 and subsequent years.
E. Safe Condition Required: No vehicle shall be issued a license until it has been thoroughly inspected and examined and found to be in a thoroughly safe
condition for the transportation of passengers, clean, fit, of good appearance and well painted.
F. Periodic Inspections: The chief of police or his designated inspector(s) may inspect any taxicab from time to time that he may feel is in a condition not fit
for public use in compliance with this chapter as written and Illinois state law, or on the complaint of any person or persons. (Ord. O-10-08, 3-24-2008)
3-10-6-3: VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Size: Licenses may be issued for vehicles to operate as taxicabs only if the vehicle has a capacity for no more than six (6) passengers, excluding the
driver. No vehicle shall be licensed unless it has two (2) doors on each side, and is a "full size" vehicle or larger. Exceptions shall be made for specialty
vehicles or hybrid vehicles.
B. Name And Phone Number: Every taxicab licensed as provided in this chapter shall bear on the outside of the vehicle, in a conspicuous place, the name
and phone number of the operator thereof, in letters not less than two inches (2") high, which letters shall be of a contrasting color to the color of the
vehicle, and shall be properly proportioned and legible.
C. Lighted Dome: The cab shall also have a lighted dome light on the roof of the vehicle noting that the vehicle is a taxicab.
D. License Decal: The taxicab vehicle license to be issued by the village clerk as hereinabove provided shall be in the form of a decal which shall contain
the official license number of the taxicab, together with the date of the safety inspection. Such decal shall be signed by the village clerk and shall be of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 110/416
a distinctly different color each year. Said decal shall be affixed to the bottom left rear window of the taxicab.
E. Safety Features: No license for a taxicab shall be issued or renewed unless the taxicab is equipped with at least one of the following safety features or
combination of safety features:
1. A bulletproof safety shield device capable of completely separating the driver's seat from the rear passenger compartment; or
2. A mounted camera unit that will take a visual record or photograph(s) of the passenger(s); or
3. Such other system that the chief of police determines provides at least as much protection as the systems described above.
The equipment required by this subsection E shall be maintained in good working order at all times. The license of any licensee who violates this
section shall be subject to immediate suspension until the licensee demonstrates compliance with this section.
The requirements of this subsection E do not apply to a licensee who owns or controls no more than one taxicab license and who certifies that no
person other than the licensee, the licensee's spouse or natural or legally adopted child of the licensee will operate the taxicab throughout the entire
license period. Any licensee who makes such a certification and permits any other person other than those persons specified above to operate the
taxicab during the license period shall be subject to a fine not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each
offense, plus the revocation of his or her taxicab license.
F. Taximeter: Every taxicab operated by a taxicab company and licensed by the village shall be equipped with a taximeter, in good working order,
connected with and operating from the transmission of the taxicab.
1. Functioning: No taxicab vehicle license shall be issued unless and until said taximeter functions as follows:
a. During the period between sunset and sunrise, be equipped with a light which shall be so reflected upon the dial of the taximeter as to enable the
passenger or passengers engaging and using such taxicab to read the figures indicated thereon.
b. Every taximeter hereafter placed on a taxicab shall be so arranged that the dial thereof is in plain view of the passenger while riding in such
taxicab, or upon alighting from the same.
2. Inspection: No license shall be issued for a taxicab until the taximeter attached thereto shall have been inspected by the inspector of weights and
measures as provided herein and proof thereof provided to the village clerk.
3. Testing: No person owning or operating any taxicab shall offer or let the same for hire or reward anywhere within the village unless the taximeter
placed, attached or installed thereon has been inspected and tested by said inspector.
4. Transfer Of Meters: No person shall detach any certified or inspected taximeter from any taxicab and attach the same to any other taxicab, the front
wheels of which are of different diameter than those with reference to which said taximeter was originally tested, unless a new inspection or
certification is made on such taximeter.
5. Unapproved Meters: No person shall drive a vehicle to which is attached a taximeter that has not been duly inspected and approved.
G. Navigational Tools: Each vehicle shall be equipped with either of the following:
1. Global positioning system (GPS) in good working order; or
2. Detailed street map.
H. Two-Way Dispatch: Each vehicle shall be equipped with a two-way radio dispatch system as follows:
1. "Two-way radio dispatch system" means a method of radio communication by which a dispatcher may communicate with the drivers of all vehicles in
the organization, with the exception of those vehicles described in subsection H4 of this section.
2. With respect to an unaffiliated licensee, the term "organization" refers to the licensee and all vehicles for which a license is owned or controlled by
him; with respect to an affiliation, the term "organization" refers to the affiliation and all its affiliate's vehicles.
3. A two-way radio dispatch system shall enable the dispatcher to communicate with the drivers of all vehicles in the organization simultaneously and
for each driver to communicate with the dispatcher for the purpose of both providing service to customers and driver safety.
4. In the case of a taxicab company licensee who is an individual and who is not a member of an affiliation and who holds no more than one taxicab
vehicle license and who certifies that no person other than the licensee, the licensee's spouse or a natural or legally adopted child of the licensee will
operate the taxicab throughout the entire license period, a "two-way radio dispatch system" may consist of any two-way radio communication device
which permits direct customer communication with the driver of the vehicle, including a telephonic device.
I. Credit Card Payments: Each vehicle shall be equipped to process credit card payments by passengers.
J. No Smoking: It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke any tobacco at any time in any taxicab.
K. Cellular Telephones: Taxicab operators may not use cellular telephones while transporting passengers.
L. Insurance: The application for a taxicab vehicle license shall be accompanied by evidence of the liability insurance as required in section 3-10-5-2 of this
chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 111/416
M. Nontransferable: It shall be unlawful to transfer any taxicab vehicle license from one vehicle to another. Transferring any taxicab vehicle license shall be
grounds for revocation of all licenses issued pursuant to this chapter to both the owner of the license and the vehicle to which the license is transferred.
(Ord. O-10-08, 3-24-2008)
3-10-7: RATES OF FARE:
Taxicab maximum rates shall be as follows:
A. Two dollars twenty five cents ($2.25) upon hire for the first passenger and one dollar ($1.00) for each additional passenger above the age of twelve
(12), provided that there shall be no more than four (4) passengers, including passengers over the age of twelve (12), permitted in a taxicab which is an
automobile or more than seven (7) passengers, including passengers over the age of twelve (12), in a taxicab which is a minivan;
B. An additional twenty two cents ($0.22) for each one-tenth (1/10) mile or fraction thereof that is traveled in the taxicab except that:
1. Persons whose domicile is in the village of Forest Park shall be charged a flat rate of three dollars fifty cents ($3.50) per trip from a location in the
village of Forest Park to any single destination within the village of Forest Park; and
2. Persons whose domicile is in the village of Forest Park who are age sixty two (62) years or older shall be charged the flat rate indicated when
transported from a location in the village of Forest Park to the following destinations:
22nd and Harlem shopping area $3.50
Lake Street and Harlem shopping area 3.50
Loyola Hospital Maywood 3.50
West Suburban Hospital 5.00
Rush Oak Park Hospital 3.50
(Ord. O-10-08, 3-24-2008)
3-10-8: TAXICAB DRIVER'S LICENSE:
Every person driving a taxicab must be licensed as such and carry said license on his person while operating a taxicab in the village. (Ord. O-10-08, 3-24-
2008)
3-10-8-1: DRIVER QUALIFICATIONS:
Each driver who shall drive any taxicab in the village shall at all times meet the following qualifications:
A. Possess a valid state of Illinois driver's license of a classification required by state law for the transport of persons for hire;
B. Be twenty one (21) years of age or older;
C. Be in good physical condition; and shall not have any nervous, organic, or functional condition or disease which is likely to interfere with the safe
performance of his or her duties as a driver;
D. Be able to read, write and speak the English language, as determined by a test administered by the village clerk. Such test shall consist of the applicant
completing the taxicab driver's license application in the presence of the village clerk or her designee; and
E. Have a secretary of state's court purposes driving abstract showing no convictions for any of the following offenses:
1. Driving under the influence of a controlled substance, cannabis or an intoxicating compound or similar provision of a local ordinance or any like
offense of another state or country within the past five (5) years; and
2. Reckless driving or a similar provision of a local ordinance or any like offense of another state or country, within the past five (5) years; and
3. Any offense originally charged as listed in this subsection and later reduced to any negotiated lesser offense, within the past five (5) years. (Ord. O-
10-08, 3-24-2008)
3-10-8-2: APPLICATION; TERM; RENEWAL; LATE PENALTY:
Any person desiring to secure a license as driver of any public vehicle licensed hereunder and used for the carriage of passengers for hire or reward, shall
make application in writing therefor to the village clerk. Such application shall include the following information:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 112/416
A. Personal Information: The name of the applicant, his residence and occupation.
B. Affidavit: An affidavit filed with the village clerk stating as follows:
1. Applicant's full name, residence, places of residence during the previous five (5) years,
2. Age, sex, race, height, color of eyes and hair, place of birth, whether a citizen of the United States,
3. Places of previous employment,
4. Whether he has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor, whether his driver's license has ever been revoked and for what cause,
5. Whether he has previously been licensed as a driver or chauffeur.
C. Investigation/Approval: Said application shall be referred by the village clerk to the chief of police who shall then verify that the driver is properly
licensed by the state of Illinois. Upon the chief of police's approval of the application, he shall so endorse the application and return same to the village
clerk who shall, upon payment of the fee prescribed herein, issue the license.
D. License Fee: The annual fee for taxicab drivers' licenses shall be ten dollars ($10.00).
E. Term: Taxicab drivers' licenses shall be issued as of May 1 in each and every year, and shall be valid to and including April 30 of the next succeeding
year.
F. Renewal: Each licensee shall annually pay the license fee in full for each taxicab driver's license before May 1 of each year.
G. Penalty: If licensee does not renew his/her license and pay the annual license fee in accordance with subsection D of this section before June 1, the
licensee will incur a penalty of one hundred percent (100%) of the annual license fee, in addition to the annual license fee. If licensee does not renew
his/her license and pay the annual license fee in accordance with subsection D of this section before July 1, the licensee will incur a penalty of two
hundred percent (200%) of the annual license fee, in addition to the annual license fee. (Ord. O-10-08, 3-24-2008)
3-10-8-3: FORM OF LICENSE:
The taxicab driver's license shall contain the following information: driver's name, address, Illinois driver's license number, name of taxicab company,
company phone number and the driver's photograph. (Ord. O-10-08, 3-24-2008)
3-10-8-4: DEFACING LICENSE:
Any licensee who defaces, removes or obliterates any official entry made upon his license shall be punished by the revocation of his license. (Ord. O-10-
08, 3-24-2008)
3-10-8-5: DRIVER'S CHANGE OF RESIDENCE:
If any person licensed as a taxicab driver under this chapter shall change his residence at any time while his license is in force, the driver shall notify the
village clerk within ten (10) days of said change. (Ord. O-10-08, 3-24-2008)
3-10-8-6: RECORD OF LICENSES:
There shall be kept in the office of the village clerk a complete record of each taxicab driver's license and of all renewals, suspensions or revocations
thereof. The village clerk's record shall be kept on file with the original application. (Ord. O-10-08, 3-24-2008)
3-10-8-7: LICENSE SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:
A taxicab driver's license may be suspended or revoked at any time by the mayor for cause. Any such suspension shall be noted on the license, together
with a statement of the reason therefor, and the village shall deprive the driver of his license. (Ord. O-10-08, 3-24-2008)
3-10-9: CONDUCT AND APPEARANCE OF TAXICAB DRIVERS:
3-10-9-1: CONDUCT:
It shall be unlawful for any driver to conduct himself in a disrespectful or contemptuous manner toward any person, or to use abusive or profane language
while so occupied or in charge of such vehicle. (Ord. O-10-08, 3-24-2008)
3-10-9-2: APPEARANCE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 113/416
Every driver of a taxicab shall maintain a reasonable degree of personal hygiene and be dressed in clean clothing. Taxicab drivers are prohibited from
wearing the following articles of clothing as outer garments: underwear, tank tops, swimwear, jogging suits, body shirts, shorts, cutoffs, trunks or similar
attire, or sandals without socks. Bermuda or post office type shorts may be worn between May 1 and September 30. (Ord. O-10-08, 3-24-2008)
3-10-10: MANDATORY OPERATION; ABANDONMENT OF SERVICE:
The applicant shall regularly and daily operate his or its licensed taxicab during each day of the licensed year to the extent reasonably necessary to meet
the public demand for such taxicab service. Upon complete abandonment of taxicab service for the period of ten (10) consecutive days by the owner or
operator of such taxicab service, the chief of police, upon hearing, shall after five (5) days' notice to said owner or operator, thereupon recommend to the
mayor that the license of such owner or operator shall be revoked covering such taxicabs of the said owner or operator. (Ord. O-10-08, 3-24-2008)
3-10-11: REGISTER OF LICENSED VEHICLES:
The village clerk shall keep a register of the name and address of each taxicab company owning or operating a taxicab licensed under this chapter,
together with a list of each licensed driver and each licensed vehicle, with the license number and the description, make and necessary dimensions of
such vehicle, and with the date and complete record of inspections made of it. Such records shall be open to the inspection of the public at all reasonable
times and shall be public records. (Ord. O-10-08, 3-24-2008)
3-10-12: LICENSE SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:
Licenses granted hereunder are subject to revocation at any time by the mayor for good cause shown or if it shall have been determined that said vehicle
is not in good condition for operation. Licenses, when so revoked or suspended, shall not be reissued until the cause of such revocation shall have been
removed to the satisfaction of the mayor. (Ord. O-10-08, 3-24-2008)
3-10-13: TAXICABS FROM OUTSIDE VILLAGE:
It shall be unlawful for any taxicab not licensed by the village to come into the village to pick up a passenger unless that passenger is to return to that
community in which the taxicab is licensed, and then only when such transportation has been arranged for in advance either by writing or by telephone.
While said vehicle is in the village, no roof light shall be used to indicate that the vehicle is vacant or subject to hire, but a white card bearing the words
"Not for Hire" printed in black letters not less than two inches (2") in height shall be displayed on the windshield of said vehicle. No person shall be solicited
or accepted in said vehicle for transportation from any place within the village unless prearranged as indicated above. Any person in control or possession
of said vehicle who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the penalties as herein provided in this chapter. (Ord. O-10-08, 3-24-
2008)
3-10-14: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter shall be ticketed and fined the sum of two hundred dollars ($200.00). If after fourteen (14) days the
ticket is not paid, the fine shall increase to three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00). If the fine is not received within thirty (30) days after issuance, the ticket
will be set up for an adjudication hearing in accordance with the administrative adjudication of traffic and other violations provisions contained in title 1,
chapter 3, article A of this code, and if found to be in violation, could be fined up to the maximum provided in the general penalty in section 1-3-1 of this
code for each violation. In addition to such fine, any license issued pursuant to this chapter may be suspended or revoked as provided herein. (Ord. O-10-
08, 3-24-2008)
Chapter 11
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
3-11-1: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens
of the village and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses within the
village. The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content or reasonable access to any
communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent or effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to
sexually oriented materials protected by the first amendment or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their
intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. (Ord. O-57-07, 11-26-2007)
3-11-2: FINDINGS:
Based on evidence of the adverse secondary effects of adult uses on communities, presented in hearings and in reports made available to the zoning
board of appeals and recommended to the village council, and on findings incorporated in the cases of Pap's A.M. v. City of Erie, 2000 U.S. Lexis 2347
(Mar. 29, 2000); City of Renton Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986), Young v. American Mini Theatres, 426 U.S. 50 (1976), and Barnes v. Glen
Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991), Schultz v. City of Cumberland, 26 F.Supp.2d 1128 (W.D. Wisc. 1998), aff'd in part, rev'd in part, 2000 U.S. App. Lexis
23773 (7th Cir. 2000); Berg v. Health & Hospital Corp., 865 F.2d 797 (1989); DiMa Corp. v. Town of Hallie, 185 F.3d 823 (1999); Entertainment Concepts v.
Maciejewski, 631 F.2d 497 (1980); Genusa v. City of Peoria, 619 F.2d 1203 (1980); Graff v. City of Chicago, 9 F.3d 1309 (1993); North Avenue Novelties,
Inc. v. City of Chicago, 88 F.3d 441 (1996); and other cases; and on reports of secondary effects occurring in and around sexually oriented businesses,
both in Cook County and in other communities including, but not limited to, Denver, Colorado - 1998; Rochester, New York - 2000; Indianapolis, Indiana -
1984; Kansas City, Missouri - 1998; Los Angeles, California - 1977; Newport News, Virginia - 1996; St. Paul, Minnesota - 1987/1988 supplemental study;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 114/416
Springfield, Missouri - 1986; New York, New York - 1994; Phoenix, Arizona - 1979; Tucson, Arizona - 1990; Garden Grove, California - 1991; Whittier,
California - 1978; Adams County, Colorado - 1988; Manatee County, Florida - 1987; Minneapolis, Minnesota - 1980; Las Vegas, Nevada - 1978;
Ellicottville, New York - 1998; Islip, New York - 1980; New York Times Square study - 1994; New Hanover County, North Carolina - 1989; Cleveland, Ohio -
1977; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma - 1986/1992; Amarillo, Texas - 1977; Austin, Texas - 1986; Beaumont, Texas - 1982; Cleburne, Texas - 1997; Dallas,
Texas - 1997; El Paso, Texas - 1986; Houston, Texas - 1983/1997; Bellevue, Washington - 1988; Des Moines, Washington - 1984; Seattle, Washington -
1989; St. Croix County, Wisconsin - 1993; and also on findings from the report of the attorney general's working group on the regulation of sexually
oriented businesses (June 6, 1989, state of Minnesota), the village council finds:
A. Sexually oriented businesses lend themselves to ancillary unlawful and unhealthy activities that are presently uncontrolled by the unlicensed operators
of these establishments. Further, there are presently insufficient mechanisms in the village to make the owners and operators of these establishments
responsible for the activities that occur on their premises.
B. Certain employees of unregulated sexually oriented businesses defined in this chapter as adult theaters and cabarets engage in higher incidents of
certain types of illicit sexual behavior than employees of other establishments.
C. Unlawful sexual acts occur at unregulated sexually oriented businesses, especially those which provide private or semiprivate booths or cubicles for
viewing films, videos or live sex shows.
D. Offering and providing such unregulated space encourages such activities, which creates unhealthy conditions.
E. Persons frequent certain adult theaters, adult arcades and other sexually oriented businesses for the purpose of engaging in sex within the premises of
such sexually oriented businesses, or for the purpose of purchasing or selling illicit drugs.
F. Numerous communicable diseases may be spread by activities occurring in sexually oriented businesses, including, but not limited to, syphilis,
gonorrhea, human immunodeficiency virus infection (HIV-AIDS), genital herpes, hepatitis salmonella, campylobacter and shigella infections, chlamydia,
myoplasmal and ureoplasmal infections, trichomoniasis and chancroid.
G. Sanitary conditions in some sexually oriented businesses are unhealthy, in part, because the activities conducted there are unhealthy and, in part,
because of the unregulated nature of the activities and the failure of the owners and the operators of the facilities to self-regulate those activities and
maintain those facilities.
H. Numerous studies and reports have determined that bodily fluids are found in the areas of sexually oriented businesses where persons view "adult"
oriented films.
I. The findings noted in subsections A through H of this section raise substantial governmental concerns.
J. Sexually oriented businesses have operational characteristics that should be reasonably regulated in order to protect those substantial governmental
concerns.
K. A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism to place the burden of that reasonable regulation on the owners and the operators of
the sexually oriented businesses. Further, such a licensing procedure will place a heretofore nonexistent incentive on the operators to see that the
sexually oriented business is run in a manner consistent with the health, safety and welfare of its patrons and employees, as well as the citizens of the
village. It is appropriate to require reasonable assurances that the licensee is the actual operator of the sexually oriented business, fully in possession
and control of the premises and activities occurring therein.
L. Removal of doors on adult booths and requiring sufficient lighting on premises with adult booths advances a substantial governmental interest in curbing
the illegal and unsanitary sexual activity occurring in adult theaters.
M. Requiring licensees of sexually oriented businesses to keep information regarding current employees and certain past employees will help reduce the
incidence of certain types of criminal behavior by facilitating the identification of potential witnesses or suspects and by preventing minors from working
in such establishments.
N. The disclosure of certain information by those persons ultimately responsible for the day to day operation and maintenance of the sexually oriented
business, where such information is substantially related to the significant governmental interest in the operation of such uses, will aid in preventing the
spread of sexually transmitted diseases.
O. It is desirable in the prevention of the spread of communicable diseases to obtain a limited amount of information regarding certain employees who may
engage in the conduct which this chapter is designed to prevent or who are likely to be witnesses to such activity.
P. The general welfare, health, morals and safety of the citizens of the village will be promoted by the enactment of this chapter. (Ord. O-57-07, 11-26-
2007)
3-11-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall be defined as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 115/416
ADULT ARCADE: Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin operated or slug operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically
controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, videos, or other image producing devices are maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer persons
per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of "specified sexual
activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
ADULT BOOKSTORE OR ADULT VIDEO STORE: A commercial establishment that, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for sale or rental for
any form of consideration any one or more of the following:
A. Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion picture, videocassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other
visual representations that are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical
areas"; or
B. Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for use in connection with "specified sexual activities".
A principal business purpose exists if materials offered for sale or rental depicting or describing "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical
areas" generate twenty percent (20%) or more of the business's income, or account for twenty percent (20%) or more of inventory, or occupy twenty
percent (20%) or more of total floor space. A commercial establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not involve the offering
for sale or rental of material depicting or describing "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" and still be categorized as adult
bookstore or adult video store. Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such commercial establishments from being categorized as an
adult bookstore or adult video store so long as one of its principal business purposes is the offering for sale or rental for consideration the specified
materials that depict or describe "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
ADULT CABARET: A nightclub, bar, restaurant, cafe, or similar commercial establishment that regularly, commonly, habitually, or consistently features:
A. Persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminudity; or
B. Live performances that are distinguished or characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities"; or
C. Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, photographic reproductions, or other image producing devices that are distinguished or characterized
by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; or
D. Persons who engage in "exotic" or erotic dancing or performances that are intended for the sexual interests or titillation of an audience or
customers.
ADULT MOTEL: A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment that:
A. Offers accommodation to the public for any form of consideration and provides patrons with closed circuit television transmissions, films, motion
pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions that are distinguished or characterized by the depiction or description of
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; and advertises the availability of such material by means of a sign visible from the public
right of way, or by means of any off premises advertising, including, but not limited to, newspapers, magazines, pamphlets or leaflets, radio or
television; or
B. Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than twenty four (24) hours; or
C. Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time that is less than twenty four (24) hours.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: A commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or
similar photographic reproductions are regularly, commonly, habitually, or consistently shown that are distinguished or characterized by the depiction or
description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
ADULT THEATER: A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment that regularly, commonly, habitually, or consistently features
persons who appear, in person, in a state of nudity and/or seminudity, and/or live performances that are distinguished or characterized by the exposure of
"specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities".
EMPLOYEE: A person who performs any service on the premises of a sexually oriented business on a full time, part time, contract basis, or independent
basis, whether or not the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent, or otherwise, and whether or not the said person is paid a
salary, wage, or other compensation by the operator of said business. "Employee" does not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or
maintenance of the premises or equipment on the premises, or for the delivery of goods to the premises, nor does "employee" include a person exclusively
on the premises as a patron or customer.
ESCORT: A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately
model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person.
ESCORT AGENCY: A person or business association that furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business
purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration.
ESTABLISHMENT: Means and includes any of the following:
A. The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 116/416
B. The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business;
C. The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business;
D. The relocation of any sexually oriented business; or
E. A sexually oriented business or premises on which the sexually oriented business is located.
LICENSEE: A person in whose name a license has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a license.
LIVE THEATRICAL PERFORMANCE: A play, skit, opera, ballet, concert, comedy, or musical drama.
NUDE MODEL STUDIO: Any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or displays "specified anatomical areas" is provided to be observed,
sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons for consideration.
NUDITY OR A STATE OF NUDITY: The appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, anal cleft or cleavage, pubic area, male genitals, female genitals, or
vulva, with less than a fully opaque covering; or a female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the areola; or human male genitals in
a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
PERSON: An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity.
PREMISES: The real property upon which the sexually oriented business is located, and all appurtenances thereto and buildings thereon, including, but
not limited to, the sexually oriented business, the grounds, private walkways, and parking lots and/or parking garages adjacent thereto, under the
ownership, control, or supervision of the licensee, as described in the application for a business license pursuant to section 3-11-5 of this chapter.
SEMINUDE OR SEMINUDITY: The appearance of the female breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest point. This definition
shall include the entire lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast exhibited by
a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel, provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part.
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER: A business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for any form of
consideration:
A. Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex; or
B. Activities between persons of the opposite sex and/or persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or seminudity.
A principal business purpose exists if the services offered are intended to generate business income.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: An adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult
theater, escort agency, nude model studio, or sexual encounter center.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: A. The human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if fully and opaquely covered;
B. Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or a female breast below a point immediately above the top of
the areola.
SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY: Any of the following offenses:
A. Prostitution or promotion of prostitution; dissemination of obscenity; sale, distribution, or display of harmful material to a minor; sexual performance
by a child; possession or distribution of child pornography; public lewdness; indecent exposure; indecency with a child; sexual assault; molestation of
a child; or any similar sex related offenses to those described above under the Illinois criminal code, the criminal or penal code of another state or
other country for which:
1. Less than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is
the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense;
2. Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is
the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense;
3. Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the last conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the convictions are for two (2) or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring
within any twenty four (24) month period;
B. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: Means and includes any of the following:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 117/416
A. The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts, whether covered or uncovered;
B. Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy;
C. Masturbation, actual or simulated; or
D. Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections A through C of this definition.
TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: Means and includes any of the following:
A. The sale, lease, or sublease of the business;
B. The transfer of securities that form a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or
C. The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal devise that transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest
or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control. (Ord. O-57-07, 11-26-2007)
3-11-4: CLASSIFICATION:
Sexually oriented business uses are classified as follows:
A. Adult arcades; or
B. Adult bookstores or adult video stores; or
C. Adult motels; or
D. Adult motion picture theaters; or
E. Adult theaters; or
F. Adult cabarets; or
G. Escort agencies; or
H. Nude model studios; or
I. Sexual encounter centers. (Ord. O-57-07, 11-26-2007)
3-11-5: LICENSE REQUIRED:
A. It shall be unlawful:
1. For any person to operate a sexually oriented business without a valid sexually oriented business operator's license ("operator's license") issued by
the village clerk pursuant to this chapter; or
2. For any person who operates a sexually oriented business to employ a person to work and/or perform services on the premises of the sexually
oriented business, if such employee is not in possession of a valid sexually oriented business employee license ("employee license") issued to such
employee by the village clerk pursuant to this chapter; or
3. For any person to obtain employment with a sexually oriented business if such person is not in possession of a valid sexually oriented business
employee license issued to such person by the village clerk pursuant to this chapter.
It shall be a defense to subsections A2 and A3 of this section if the employment is of limited duration and for the sole purpose of repair and/or
maintenance of machinery, equipment, or the premises.
B. An application for a sexually oriented business operator's license must be made on a form provided by the village. The application must be
accompanied by a sketch or a diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business.
The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of
the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches (±6").
C. An application for a sexually oriented business employee license must be made on a form provided by the village.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 118/416
D. All applicants for a license must be qualified according to the provisions of this chapter. The application may request, and the applicant shall provide,
such information reasonably necessary (including fingerprints) to enable the village to determine whether the applicant meets the qualifications
established under this chapter. The applicant has an affirmative duty to supplement an application with new information received subsequent to the
date the application was deemed completed.
E. If a person who wishes to own or operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, he must sign the application for an operator's license as
applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an individual, each individual who has a ten percent (10%) or
greater interest in the business must sign the application for an operator's license as applicant. If a corporation is listed as owner of a sexually oriented
business or as the entity that wishes to operate such a business, all corporate officers and directors must sign the application for an operator's license
as applicant.
F. Applications for an operator's license, whether original or renewal, must be made to the village clerk by the intended operator of the enterprise.
Applications must be submitted to the office of the village clerk or the village clerk's designee during regular working hours. Application forms shall be
supplied by the village clerk. The following information shall be provided on the application form:
1. The name, street address (and mailing address if different) of the applicant(s);
2. The applicant's federally issued tax identification number;
3. The name under which the establishment is to be operated and a general description of the services to be provided. If the applicant intends to
operate the sexually oriented business under a name other than that of the applicant; he or she must state:
a. The sexually oriented business's assumed name; and
b. Submit the required registration documents;
4. Whether the applicant has been convicted, or is awaiting trial on pending charges, of a "specified criminal activity" as defined in section 3-11-3 of this
chapter, and, if so, the "specified criminal activity" involved, the date, place, and jurisdiction of each;
5. Whether the applicant has had a previous license under this chapter or other similar sexually oriented business ordinance from another city or
county denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the sexually oriented business for which the business license was denied,
suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the denial, suspension or revocation, and whether the applicant is or has been a partner in a
partnership or an officer, director or principal stockholder of a corporation that is or was licensed under a sexually oriented business ordinance whose
business license has previously been denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the sexually oriented business for which the
business license was denied, suspended or revoked as well as the date of denial, suspension or revocation;
6. Whether the applicant holds any other licenses under this chapter or other similar sexually oriented business ordinance from another city or county
and, if so, the names and locations of such other licensed businesses;
7. The single classification of license, as found in section 3-11-4 of this chapter, for which the applicant is filing;
8. The telephone number of the establishment;
9. The address and legal description of the tract of land on which the establishment is to be located;
10. If the establishment is in operation, the date on which the owner(s) acquired the establishment for which the business license is sought, and the
date on which the establishment began operations as a sexually oriented business at the location for which the business license is sought;
11. If the establishment is not in operation, the expected startup date (which shall be expressed in number of days from the date of issuance of the
business license). If the expected startup date is to be more than ten (10) days following the date of issuance of the business license, then a detailed
explanation of the construction, repair or remodeling work or other cause of the expected delay and a statement of the owner's time schedule and
plan for accomplishing the same;
12. If an applicant wishes to operate a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, which shall exhibit on the premises, in a viewing room or
booth of less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor space, films, videocassettes, other video reproductions, or live entertainment which
depict specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, then the applicant shall comply with the application requirements set forth in section
3-11-19 of this chapter.
G. Each application for an operator's license shall be accompanied by the following:
1. Payment of the application fee in full;
2. If the establishment is a corporation incorporated under the laws of the state of Illinois, a certified copy of the articles of incorporation, together with
all amendments thereto;
3. If the establishment is a foreign corporation, a certified copy of the certificate of authority to transact business in this state, together with all
amendments thereto;
4. If the establishment is a general or limited partnership formed under the laws of the state of Illinois, a certified copy of the certificate of limited
partnership, together with all amendments thereto;
5. If the establishment is a foreign general or limited partnership, a certified copy of the certificate of limited partnership and the qualification
documents, together with all amendments thereto;
6. Proof of the current fee ownership of the tract of land on which the establishment is to be situated in the form of a copy of the recorded deed or a
certified copy of a title insurance policy finding the owner in title; in addition, if the property is held in trust, a certified copy of the trust agreement and
all noncollateral assignments and amendments thereto disclosing the beneficiaries of the trust;
7. If the persons identified as the fee owner(s) of the tract of land in subsection G6 of this section is not also the owner of the sexually oriented
business, then the lease, purchase contract, purchase option contract, lease option contract or other document(s) evidencing the legally enforceable
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 119/416
right of the owner(s) or proposed owner(s) of the sexually oriented business to have or obtain the use and possession of the tract or portion thereof
that is to be used for the sexually oriented business;
8. For a sexually oriented business that is an adult entertainment facility, as that phrase is defined in section 11-5-1.5 of the Illinois municipal code1, a
current surveyor certificate and straight line drawing prepared within thirty (30) days prior to application by a registered land surveyor that the
locational restrictions set forth in said section 11-5-1.5 of the Illinois municipal code2 have been satisfied. For a sexually oriented business that is not
an adult entertainment facility, as that phrase is defined in section 11-5-1.5 of the Illinois municipal code3, a current surveyor certificate and straight
line drawing prepared within thirty (30) days prior to application by a registered land surveyor depicting the property lines and the structures
containing any existing sexually oriented businesses within five hundred feet (500') of the property to be certified; and the property lines of any
school, daycare center, public park, forest preserve, public housing, place of religious worship, lot zoned for residential use and devoted to a
residential use as defined in the zoning code within five hundred feet (500') of the property to be certified. For purposes of this section, a use shall be
considered existing or established if it is in existence at the time an application is submitted;
9. Any of subsections G2 through G8 of this section shall not be required for a renewal application if the applicant states that the documents previously
furnished to the village clerk with the original application or previous renewals thereof remain correct and current.
H. Applications for an employee license to work and/or perform services in a sexually oriented business, whether original or renewal, must be made to the
village clerk by the person to whom the employee license shall issue. Each application for an employee license shall be accompanied by payment of
the application fee in full. Application forms shall be supplied by the village clerk. Applications must be submitted to the office of the village clerk or the
village clerk's designee during regular working hours. Each applicant shall be required to give the following information on the application form:
1. The applicant's given name, and any other names by which the applicant is or has been known, including "stage" names and/or aliases;
2. Age, and date and place of birth;
3. Height, weight, hair color, and eye color;
4. Present residence address and telephone number;
5. Present business address and telephone number;
6. Date, issuing state, and number of photo driver's license, or other state issued identification card information;
7. Social security number; and
8. Proof that the individual is at least eighteen (18) years old.
The personal information provided in this subsection shall be confidential, and shall not be disclosed to the public except to the extent required by
state or federal law.
I. Attached to the application form for any license under this chapter shall be the following:
1. A color photograph of the applicant clearly showing the applicant's face, and the applicant's fingerprints on a form provided by the police department.
The police department shall perform requested fingerprinting within three (3) business days of such request. Any fees for photographs and
fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant.
2. A statement detailing the license history of the applicant for the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application, including
whether such applicant, in this or any other city, county, state, or country, has ever had any license, permit, or authorization to do business denied,
revoked, or suspended, or had any professional or vocational license or permit denied, revoked, or suspended. In the event of any such denial,
revocation, or suspension, state the name(s) under which the license was sought and/or issued, the name(s) of the issuing or denying jurisdiction,
and describe in full the reason(s) for the denial, revocation, or suspension. A copy of any order of denial, revocation, or suspension shall be attached
to the application.
3. A statement whether the applicant has, within the past five (5) years, been convicted, or is awaiting trial on pending charges, of a "specified criminal
activity" as defined in section 3-11-3 of this chapter, and, if so, the "specified criminal activity" involved, the date, place and jurisdiction of each.
J. Every application for a license under this chapter shall contain a statement under oath that:
1. The applicant has personal knowledge of the information contained in the application, and that the information contained therein and furnished
therewith is true and correct; and
2. The applicant has read the provisions of this chapter.
K. A separate application and operator's license shall be required for each sexually oriented business classification as set forth in section 3-11-4 of this
chapter.
L. The fact that a person possesses other types of state or village permits and/or licenses does not exempt him/her from the requirement of obtaining a
sexually oriented business operator or employee license. (Ord. O-57-07, 11-26-2007)
3-11-6: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
A. Upon the filing of an application for a sexually oriented business employee license, the village clerk shall issue a temporary license to the applicant. The
application shall then be referred to the appropriate village departments for investigation to be made on the information contained in the application.
The application process shall be completed within thirty (30) days from the date of the completed application. After the investigation, the village clerk
shall issue an employee license, unless it is determined by a preponderance of the evidence that one or more of the following findings is true:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 120/416
1. The applicant has failed to provide the information reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request
for information on the application form;
2. The applicant is under the age of eighteen (18) years;
3. The applicant has been convicted of a "specified criminal activity" as defined in section 3-11-3 of this chapter;
4. The sexually oriented business employee license is to be used for employment in a business prohibited by local or state law, statute, rule, or
regulation, or prohibited by a particular provision of this chapter; or
5. The applicant has had a sexually oriented business employee license revoked by the village within two (2) years of the date of the current
application.
If the sexually oriented business employee license is denied, the temporary license previously issued is immediately rendered null and void. Denial,
suspension, or revocation of a license issued pursuant to this subsection shall be subject to appeal as set forth in subsection I of this section.
B. A license issued pursuant to subsection A of this section, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person to whom it is granted, the expiration
date, and the address of the sexually oriented business. While engaged in employment or performing services on the sexually oriented business
premises, an employee shall, at all times, possess the license in such manner as to be available for immediate inspection upon lawful request.
C. A license issued pursuant to subsection A of this section shall be subject to annual renewal upon the written application of the applicant and a finding by
the village clerk that the applicant has not been convicted of any "specified criminal activity" as defined in this chapter, or committed any act during the
existence of the previous license which would be grounds to deny the initial license application. The decision whether to renew a license shall be made
within thirty (30) days of the completed application. The renewal of a license shall be subject to the fee as set forth in section 3-11-7 of this chapter.
Nonrenewal of a license shall be subject to appeal as set forth in subsection I of this section.
D. If application is made for a sexually oriented business operator's license, the village clerk shall approve or deny issuance of the license within thirty (30)
days of receipt of the completed application. The village clerk shall issue a license to an applicant unless it is determined by a preponderance of the
evidence that one or more of the following findings is true:
1. An applicant has failed to provide the information reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for
information on the application form;
2. An applicant is under the age of eighteen (18) years;
3. An applicant has been denied a license by the village to operate a sexually oriented business within the preceding twelve (12) months, or whose
license to operate a sexually oriented business has been revoked within the preceding twelve (12) months;
4. An applicant is overdue in payment to the village for taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against or imposed upon him/her in relation to the
sexually oriented business for which license is sought, or the property on which the sexually oriented business is located or will be located;
5. An applicant has been convicted of a "specified criminal activity" as defined in section 3-11-3 of this chapter; (Ord. O-57-07, 11-26-2007)
6. The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business have not been approved by the building department, and zoning department as being in
compliance with applicable laws and ordinances, if such approval is required under other sections of this chapter; (Ord. O-57-07, 11-26-2007; amd.
Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
7. The license fee required under this chapter has not been paid;
8. An applicant of the proposed establishment is in violation of or is not in compliance with one or more of the provisions of this chapter.
E. A license issued pursuant to subsection D of this section, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the
expiration date, the address of the sexually oriented business, and the classification in section 3-11-4 of this chapter for which the license is issued.
The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it may be easily read at any time.
(Ord. O-57-07, 11-26-2007)
F. The building department, and zoning department shall complete their certification that the premises are in compliance or not in compliance within twenty
(20) days of receipt of the completed application by the village clerk. The certification shall be promptly presented to the village clerk. Failure of an
appropriate department to timely certify its inspection shall not be grounds for refusing to issue a license within the mandatory time period prescribed in
subsection D of this section. In the event the village clerk fails to render a decision on the application within the time specified herein, the operator shall
be permitted to commence operation of the business. (Ord. O-57-07, 11-26-2007; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
G. A sexually oriented business license shall issue for only one classification, as set forth in section 3-11-4 of this chapter.
H. In the event that the village clerk determines that an applicant is not eligible for a sexually oriented operator's license, the applicant shall be given notice
in writing of the reasons for the denial within thirty (30) days of the receipt of the completed application by the village clerk, provided that the applicant
may request, in writing at any time before the notice is issued, that such period be extended for an additional period of not more than ten (10) days in
order to make modifications necessary to comply with this chapter.
I. An applicant may appeal the decision of the village clerk regarding a denial to the village council by filing a written notice of appeal with the village
administrator within ten (10) days after service of notice upon the applicant of the village clerk's decision. The notice of appeal shall be accompanied by
a memorandum or other writing setting out fully the grounds for such appeal and all arguments in support thereof. The village clerk may, within fifteen
(15) days of service upon him of the applicant's memorandum, submit a responsive memorandum to the village council. After reviewing such
memoranda, as well as the village clerk's written decision, if any, and exhibits submitted to the village clerk, the village council shall vote either to
uphold or overrule the village clerk's decision. Such vote shall be taken within twenty one (21) calendar days after the date on which the village
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 121/416
administrator receives the notice of appeal. Judicial review of a denial by the village clerk and village council may be made pursuant to section 3-11-12
of this chapter.
J. A license issued pursuant to subsection D of this section shall be subject to annual renewal upon the written application of the applicant and a finding by
the village clerk that the applicant has not been convicted of any "specified criminal activity" as defined in this chapter, or committed any act during the
existence of the previous license which would be grounds to deny the initial license application. The decision whether to renew a license shall be made
within thirty (30) days of the completed application. The renewal of a license shall be subject to the fee as set forth in section 3-11-7 of this chapter.
K. A business existing and operating as a sexually oriented business at the time of the adoption hereof shall have seventy five (75) days in which to
comply with the licensing provisions required herein. Employees of an existing sexually oriented business shall have sixty (60) days in which to comply
with the licensing provisions required herein. (Ord. O-57-07, 11-26-2007)
3-11-7: FEES:
The annual fee for a sexually oriented business operator's license, whether new or renewal, is five hundred dollars ($500.00). The annual fee for a
sexually oriented business employee license, whether new or renewal, is fifty dollars ($50.00). These fees are to be used to pay for the cost of the
administration and enforcement of this chapter. (Ord. O-57-07, 11-26-2007)
3-11-8: INSPECTION:
A. The village shall regularly inspect the premises of the sexually oriented business in order to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. An
applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the police department and/or fire department to inspect the premises at any time the establishment
is open for business. Such inspection shall be limited to visual assessment of the activities conducted in areas to which patrons have access or are
allowed access; to requests for inspection of the licenses required under this chapter; and to requests for identification of those individuals who
reasonably appear to be under the age of eighteen (18). (Ord. O-57-07, 11-26-2007; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
B. A person who operates a sexually oriented business or his agent or employee commits a misdemeanor if he/she refuses to promptly permit such lawful
inspection of the premises. (Ord. O-57-07, 11-26-2007)
3-11-9: EXPIRATION OF LICENSE; DENIAL OF RENEWAL:
A. Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by making application as provided in section 3-11-5 of this
chapter. Application for renewal should be made at least thirty (30) days before the expiration date. When application is made less than thirty (30) days
before the expiration date, the expiration of the license will not be affected.
B. When the village clerk denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall not be issued a license for one year from the date of denial. (Ord. O-57-07, 11-26-
2007)
3-11-10: SUSPENSION:
A. The village administrator shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days if he determines that licensee or an employee of licensee
has:
1. Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this chapter;
2. Operated or performed services in a sexually oriented business while intoxicated by the use of alcoholic beverages or controlled substances;
3. Refused to allow prompt inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by this chapter;
4. With knowledge, permitted gambling by any person on the sexually oriented business premises.
B. A licensee may appeal the suspension of a license to the village council in accordance with the procedure set forth in subsection 3-11-6I of this chapter,
or may seek direct judicial review pursuant to section 3-11-12 of this chapter. (Ord. O-57-07, 11-26-2007)
3-11-11: REVOCATION:
A. The village administrator shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension in section 3-11-10 of this chapter occurs and the license has been suspended
within the preceding twelve (12) months.
B. The village administrator shall revoke a license if he determines that:
1. A licensee gave materially false or misleading information in the material submitted during the application process;
2. A licensee was convicted of a "specified criminal activity" on a charge that was pending prior to the issuance of the license;
3. A licensee has, with knowledge, permitted the possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 122/416
4. A licensee has, with knowledge, permitted the sale, use, or consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises without a validly issued liquor
license;
5. A licensee has, with knowledge, permitted prostitution on the premises;
6. A licensee has, with knowledge, operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended;
7. A licensee has, with knowledge, permitted any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or other sexual conduct to occur in
or on the licensed premises;
8. A licensee is delinquent in payment to the village or state for any taxes, fees, fines, or penalties relating to the sexually oriented business or the
premises thereon;
9. A licensee has, with knowledge, permitted a person under eighteen (18) years of age to enter or remain in the establishment;
10. A licensee has attempted to sell his business license, or has sold, assigned, or transferred ownership or control of the sexually oriented business to
a nonlicensee of the establishment; or
11. A licensee has, with knowledge, permitted a person or persons to engage in specified sexual activities on the premises of the sexually oriented
business. This subsection shall not apply to the erotic touching of one's own genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or breasts, whether covered or
uncovered, by an employee entertainer during the course of a live performance.
C. When the village administrator revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one year, and the licensee shall not be issued a license for one year
from the date revocation became effective. A licensee may appeal the revocation of a license to the village council in accordance with the procedure
set forth in subsection 3-11-6I of this chapter, or may seek direct judicial review pursuant to section 3-11-12 of this chapter. (Ord. O-57-07, 11-26-2007)
3-11-12: JUDICIAL REVIEW:
Within thirty five (35) days of a denial of an initial or renewal application by the village clerk and village council, or suspension or revocation of a license by
the village administrator or his designee, the applicant or licensee may seek judicial review of such administrative action in any court of competent
jurisdiction, state or federal. The administrative action shall then be reviewed by the court for a prompt judicial determination. (Ord. O-57-07, 11-26-2007)
3-11-13: NO TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
A. A licensee shall not transfer his/her license to another, nor shall a licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any
place other than the address designated in the application and set forth in the operator's license.
B. An operator's license shall not be transferable from one location to another. (Ord. O-57-07, 11-26-2007)
3-11-14: LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
Sexually oriented businesses shall be permitted only in the sexually oriented business overlay district, as described in section 9-5C-5 of this code provided
that:
A. A sexually oriented business that is an adult entertainment facility, as that phrase is defined in section 11-5-1.5 of the Illinois municipal code4, shall not
be located in violation of the locational restrictions set forth in said section 11-5-1.5 of the Illinois municipal code5, as amended, provided that if any
locational restriction of said section, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held to be invalid, a sexually oriented business that is
an adult entertainment facility shall be located in compliance with subsection B of this section.
B. A sexually oriented business that is not an adult entertainment facility, as that phrase is defined in section 11-5-1.5 of the Illinois municipal code6, shall
not be located within:
1. Five hundred feet (500') of a school, daycare center, public park, forest preserve, public housing, place of religious worship; or
2. Five hundred feet (500') of the property line of a lot zoned for residential use and devoted to a residential use as defined in the zoning code.
C. A sexually oriented business may not be operated in the same building, structure, or portion thereof, containing another sexually oriented business that
is classified in accordance with section 3-11-4 of this chapter.
D. For purposes of subsections A and B of this section, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects,
from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as a part of the premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest
property line of the school, daycare center, public park, forest preserve, public housing, place of religious worship or residential lot. (Ord. O-57-07, 11-
26-2007)
3-11-15: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR ADULT MOTELS:
A. Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or a similar commercial enterprise has been rented and vacated two (2) or more times in a period of
time that is less than ten (10) hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the enterprise is an "adult motel" as that term is defined in this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 123/416
B. It is unlawful if a person, as the person in control of a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial enterprise that does not have a sexually
oriented business license, rents or subrents a sleeping room to a person and, within ten (10) hours from the time the room is rented, he rents or
subrents the same sleeping room again.
C. For purposes of subsection B of this section, the terms "rent" or "subrent" mean the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of
consideration. (Ord. O-57-07, 11-26-2007)
3-11-16: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR ESCORT AGENCIES:
A. An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
B. A person commits an offense if the person acts as an escort or agrees to act as an escort for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years. (Ord. O-
57-07, 11-26-2007)
3-11-17: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR NUDE MODEL STUDIOS:
A. A nude model studio shall not employ any person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
B. It is unlawful if a person under the age of eighteen (18) years appears seminude or in a state of nudity in or on the premises of a nude model studio. It is
a defense to prosecution under this subsection if the person under eighteen (18) years was in a restroom not open to the public view or visible by any
other person.
C. It is unlawful if a person appears in a state of nudity, or with knowledge, allows another to appear in a state of nudity in an area of a nude model studio
premises which can be viewed from the public right of way.
D. A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa, or mattress in any room on the premises, except that a sofa may be placed in a reception
room open to the public. (Ord. O-57-07, 11-26-2007)
3-11-18: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS CONCERNING LIVE PUBLIC NUDITY:
A. It is unlawful if a person who, with knowledge and intent, appears in person in a state of nudity in a sexually oriented business that holds a village liquor
license. It is a defense to prosecution under this subsection if the person was in a restroom not open to the public view or visible by any other person,
or if the person was an employee in a dressing room not open to the public or within the public view.
B. It is unlawful if a person who, with knowledge and intent, appears in person in a seminude condition on the sexually oriented business premises, unless
the person is an employee who, while seminude, is at least six feet (6') from any patron or customer and on a stage at least two feet (2') from the floor.
C. It is unlawful for an employee, while seminude on the sexually oriented business premises, to solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron or customer, or
for any patron or customer to pay or give any gratuity to any employee, while said employee is seminude.
D. It is unlawful for an employee, while seminude, to touch a patron or the clothing of a patron, or for a patron to touch a seminude employee or the
clothing of a seminude employee, while said employee is on the premises of the sexually oriented business. (Ord. O-57-07, 11-26-2007)
3-11-19: REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO EXHIBITION OF SEXUALLY EXPLICIT FILMS AND VIDEOS:
A. A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing
room of less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor space, a film, videocassette, or other video reproduction, that depicts specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements:
1. Upon application for a sexually oriented business license, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof
specifying the location of one or more manager's stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the
premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed thirty two (32) square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also
designate the place at which the business license will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an
engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object
and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of
the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches (±6"). The village clerk may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the
applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since said diagram
was prepared.
2. The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant.
3. No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without the prior approval of the village clerk or his designee.
4. It is the duty of the owners and operator of the premises to ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated in each manager's station at all
times that any patron is present inside the premises.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 124/416
5. The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of the entire area of
the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction
equipment. If the premises has two (2) or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner
that there is an unobstructed view of the entire area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the
manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station.
6. It shall be the duty of the operator, and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises, to ensure that the view area
specified in subsection A5 of this section remains unobstructed at all times. No doors, walls, partitions, curtains, merchandise, display racks, or other
object(s) shall obstruct from view of the manager's station any portion of the premises to which patrons have access. It shall be the duty of the
operator, and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises, to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area
of the premises that has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted, as designated in the application filed pursuant to
subsection A1 of this section.
7. The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access
at an illumination of not less than five (5.0) foot-candles as measured at the floor level.
8. It shall be the duty of the operator, and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises, to ensure that the illumination
described above is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises.
9. No viewing room or booth may be occupied by more than one person at any time.
10. No opening of any kind shall exist between viewing rooms or booths.
11. It shall be the duty of the operator, and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises, to ensure that no more than
one person at a time occupies viewing booths or rooms, and to ensure that no person attempts to make an opening of any kind between the viewing
booths or rooms.
12. The operator of the sexually oriented business shall, each business day, inspect the walls between the viewing booths to determine if any openings
or holes exist.
13. The operator of the sexually oriented business shall cause all floor coverings in viewing booths to be nonporous, easily cleanable surfaces, with no
rugs or carpeting.
14. The operator of the sexually oriented business shall cause all wall surfaces and ceiling surfaces in viewing booths to be constructed of, or
permanently covered by, nonporous, easily cleanable material. No wood, plywood, composition board or other porous material shall be used within
forty eight inches (48") of the floor.
B. A person having a duty under subsections A1 through A14 of this section commits a misdemeanor if he/she, with knowledge, fails to fulfill that duty.
(Ord. O-57-07, 11-26-2007)
3-11-20: EXTERIOR PORTIONS OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES:
A. It shall be unlawful for an owner or operator of a sexually oriented business to allow the merchandise or activities of the establishment to be visible from
a point outside the establishment.
B. It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a sexually oriented business to allow the exterior portion of the sexually oriented business to have
flashing lights, or any words, lettering, photographs, silhouettes, drawings, or pictorial representations of any manner except to the extent permitted by
the provisions of this chapter.
C. It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a sexually oriented business to allow exterior portions of the establishment to be painted any color other
than a single achromatic color. This provision shall not apply to a sexually oriented business if the following conditions are met:
1. The establishment is a part of a commercial multi-unit center; and
2. The exterior portions of each individual unit in the commercial multi-unit center, including the exterior portions of the business, are painted the same
color as one another or are painted in such a way so as to be a component of the overall architectural style or pattern of the commercial multi-unit
center.
D. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to require the painting of an otherwise unpainted exterior portion of a sexually oriented business. (Ord. O-57-
07, 11-26-2007)
3-11-21: SIGNS:
A. Notwithstanding any other village ordinance, code, or regulation to the contrary, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any sexually oriented business or
any other person to erect, construct, or maintain any sign for the sexually oriented business other than the one primary sign and one secondary sign,
as provided herein.
B. Primary signs shall have no more than two (2) display surfaces. Each such display surface shall:
1. Not contain any flashing lights;
2. Be a flat plane, rectangular in shape;
3. Not exceed seventy five (75) square feet in area; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 125/416
4. Not exceed ten feet (10') in height or ten feet (10') in length.
C. Primary signs shall contain no photographs, silhouettes, drawings or pictorial representations in any manner, and may contain only the name of the
enterprise.
D. Each letter forming a word on a primary sign shall be of solid color, and each such letter shall be the same print type, size and color. The background
behind such lettering on the display surface of a primary sign shall be of a uniform and solid color.
E. Secondary signs shall have only one display surface. Such display surface shall:
1. Be a flat plane, rectangular in shape;
2. Not exceed twenty (20) square feet in area;
3. Not exceed five feet (5') in height and four feet (4') in width; and
4. Be affixed or attached to any wall or door of the enterprise.
F. The provisions of subsections B1, C and D of this section shall also apply to secondary signs. (Ord. O-57-07, 11-26-2007)
3-11-22: PERSONS YOUNGER THAN EIGHTEEN PROHIBITED FROM ENTRY; ATTENDANT REQUIRED:
A. It shall be unlawful to allow a person who is younger than eighteen (18) years of age to enter or be on the premises of a sexually oriented business at
any time the sexually oriented business is open for business.
B. It shall be the duty of the operator of each sexually oriented business to ensure that an attendant is stationed at each public entrance to the sexually
oriented business at all times during such sexually oriented business's regular business hours. It shall be the duty of the attendant to prohibit any
person under the age of eighteen (18) years from entering the sexually oriented business. It shall be presumed that an attendant knew a person was
under the age of eighteen (18) unless such attendant asked for and was furnished:
1. A valid operator's, commercial operator's, chauffeur's or driver's license; or
2. A valid personal identification certificate issued by the state of Illinois reflecting that such person is eighteen (18) years of age or older. (Ord. O-57-
07, 11-26-2007)
3-11-23: HOURS OF OPERATION:
No sexually oriented business, except for an adult motel, may remain open at any time between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and ten o'clock
(10:00) A.M. the following business day on weekdays and Saturdays. No sexually oriented business shall open for business or remain open for business
on Sunday or any legal holiday recognized by the state of Illinois. (Ord. O-57-07, 11-26-2007)
3-11-24: EXEMPTIONS:
A. It is a defense to prosecution under this chapter that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated:
1. By a proprietary school, licensed by the state of Illinois, a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation;
2. By a private college or university that maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or
university supported entirely or partly by taxation.
B. Notwithstanding any other provision in this chapter, movies rated G, PG, PG-13, or R, by the Motion Picture Association of America (MPAA), or live
theatrical performances with serious artistic, social, or political value, that depict or describe specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities,
are expressly exempted from regulation under this chapter. (Ord. O-57-07, 11-26-2007)
3-11-25: NOTICES:
A. Any notice required or permitted to be given by the village clerk or any other village office, division, department or other agency under this chapter to
any applicant, operator or owner of a sexually oriented business may be given either by personal delivery or by certified United States mail, postage
prepaid, return receipt requested, addressed to the most recent address as specified in the application for the license, or any notice of address change
that has been received by the village clerk. Notices mailed as above shall be deemed given upon their deposit in the United States mail. In the event
that any notice given by mail is returned by the postal service, the village clerk or his designee shall cause it to be posted at the principal entrance to
the establishment.
B. Any notice required or permitted to be given to the village clerk by any person under this chapter shall not be deemed given until and unless it is
received in the office of the village clerk.
C. It shall be the duty of each owner who is designated on the license application and each operator to furnish notice to the village clerk in writing of any
change of residence or mailing address. (Ord. O-57-07, 11-26-2007)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 126/416
3-11-26: VIOLATIONS:
A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business without a valid operator's license, or otherwise in violation of this chapter
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day a sexually oriented business is operated without a valid operator's license, or otherwise in violation of this
chapter is a separate offense or violation. (Ord. O-57-07, 11-26-2007)
Chapter 12
TEMPORARY USES
3-12-1: PURPOSE:
A permit may be issued for those temporary uses set forth in section 3-12-4 of this chapter upon the approval of the director of public health and safety,
subject to conditions and restrictions set forth in this chapter. (Ord. O-63-09, 11-9-2009)
3-12-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
APPLICANT: The person completing and filing the application required herein.
PERMITTEE: The person or entity that has a possessory interest in the subject property and to which the permit is issued.
PROPERTY OWNER: The person or entity who holds legal title to the subject property.
SUBJECT PROPERTY: The real property upon which a temporary use will be located.
TEMPORARY PARKING LOT: An open area of land intended to be used for the temporary parking of passenger vehicles, whether for compensation, free,
or to accommodate clients or customers. (Ord. O-63-09, 11-9-2009)
3-12-3: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to establish or operate any temporary use set forth in section 3-12-4 of this chapter without a written permit
from the department of public health and safety and complying with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. O-63-09, 11-9-2009)
3-12-4: TYPES OF TEMPORARY USES:
The following temporary uses may be permitted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter:
Parking lot. (Ord. O-63-09, 11-9-2009)
3-12-5: APPLICATION:
A. Application For Permit; Filing Fee: Every applicant for a permit to establish or operate a temporary use shall file a written application signed by the
applicant with the department of public health and safety and pay a nonrefundable application fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00).
B. Content Of The Application: Every application for a temporary use shall specify:
1. Temporary Use Applicant Information: The name, address and telephone number of the person completing and filing the application.
2. Property Ownership Information: The name, address, and telephone number of every person or entity that has an ownership interest in the subject
property.
3. Temporary Use Permittee Information: The name, address, and telephone number of every person or entity that will be listed as a permittee on the
permit.
4. Location: The location of the principal place of business of every person or entity identified as the permittee.
5. Description: A description of the temporary use and who it will serve.
6. Length Of Time: The proposed length of time the temporary use is to be used in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
7. Hours: The daily hours during which the temporary use is intended to be used.
8. Plat Of Survey: A current plat of survey.
9. Site Plan: A site plan overlaid on the current plat of survey showing all improvements to be made for the temporary use.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 127/416
C. Inspection; Approval Or Disapproval: Within forty five (45) days, the director of public health and safety shall inspect the subject property upon which
the proposed temporary use is to be located to determine if the site plan complies with the requirements herein and otherwise accommodates the
proposed temporary use in a safe manner. The director shall advise the applicant in writing whether the application has been approved, approved with
conditions and/or required changes to the site plan, or denied. At any time during the application review process, the director may require additional
information from the applicant.
The failure or refusal of the applicant to promptly give any information relevant to the investigation of the application, or the refusal or failure of
applicant to appear at any reasonable time and place for examination under oath regarding said application, or the refusal of applicant to submit to or
cooperate with any inspection required by this section, shall be grounds for denial of the application. (Ord. O-63-09, 11-9-2009)
3-12-6: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT:
Upon approval of a site plan and acceptance by the applicant of any conditions for operating the temporary use, and compliance with all provisions of this
chapter, the director of public health and safety shall issue a written permit. The term of the temporary use shall begin the day the permit is issued and
shall be valid for the time period specified for each temporary use defined in section 3-12-9 of this chapter.
A request for an extension permitted by this chapter for a temporary use shall be made no less than sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of the term of the
original temporary use permit and shall be filed in accordance with the requirements of this chapter as a new application. The granting of any extension is
at the sole discretion of the director of public health and safety who may deny such permit without cause or reason. (Ord. O-63-09, 11-9-2009)
3-12-7: TEMPORARY USE REQUIREMENTS:
No temporary use shall receive a permit or be operated, established or maintained unless it complies with each of the minimum regulations provided
herein.
A. Temporary Parking Lots:
1. The parking lot surface shall be reasonably surfaced and/or maintained in a manner that will not cause the distribution of snow, dirt and mud onto
adjoining properties or rights of way, or disperse dust into the air.
2. Handicapped accessible parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the Illinois accessibility code.
3. Circulation patterns, drive aisle widths and parking space dimension shall be in substantial conformance with the requirements of the Forest Park
zoning ordinance subject to the approval by the director of public health and safety.
4. Wheel stops, barriers, planters or other temporary improvements of any kind, if used, may not be damaged, cracked, or have chipped paint, and
must be securely attached to the ground.
5. The temporary parking lot shall include signage indicating who the lot may be used by, and who to call for information or assistance. The location
and size of such sign(s) shall be approved by the director of public health and safety.
6. If used at night, the temporary parking lot must have and/or provide adequate lighting.
7. Any traffic circulation or safety signage recommended by the director of public health and safety must be installed and maintained at all times.
8. Upon oral or written notice by the director of public health and safety that the temporary use requires maintenance of any kind, permittee shall
perform said maintenance within twenty four (24) hours.
9. A vehicle shall not be parked for more than twenty four (24) consecutive hours.
10. Such other conditions as may be required by the director of public health and safety. (Ord. O-63-09, 11-9-2009)
3-12-8: BOND:
A. The applicant, prior to the issuance of any permit hereunder, shall deposit with the village a surety bond in the sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00)
to ensure that no damage will be done to the adjoining streets, sewers, trees or adjoining properties and that the subject property is properly
maintained in accordance with any conditions required by the director of public health and safety. Such bond shall be returned to the applicant upon
certification by the director of public health and safety that all conditions of this chapter have been complied with upon the termination of the temporary
use. (Ord. O-63-09, 11-9-2009)
3-12-9: TERM AND EXTENSION:
The terms and extensions of specific temporary uses are as follows:
A. Temporary Parking Lot: An initial term of up to one year with one extension not to exceed one year. Once expired or discounted, a temporary parking lot
may not be permitted for the same subject property for a period of four (4) years. (Ord. O-63-09, 11-9-2009)
3-12-10: FEES:
The applicant, after being notified in writing by the director of public health and safety of the approval of the application, shall pay the following permit fee
prior to the issuance of the permit.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 128/416
A. Temporary parking lot: One hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). (Ord. O-63-09, 11-9-2009)
3-12-11: INSPECTION:
The director of public health and safety, or his designee, may reasonably inspect the subject property and the temporary use to determine if the following
conditions are satisfied:
A. Temporary parking lots:
1. The area is maintained in a manner consistent with the approved site plan and conditions.
2. The temporary use is not unduly interfering with traffic circulation on adjoining rights of way.
3. The temporary use has adequate security and is maintained clear of snow, dust and debris.
4. Additional conditions set forth in the permit are satisfied.
Each permit issued hereunder shall contain the provision that village personnel and officials shall have the right to free access to the subject property
and temporary use to inspect and enforce compliance with the provisions of the permit and this chapter. (Ord. O-63-09, 11-9-2009)
3-12-12: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
A. Any permit issued hereunder may be revoked by the director of public health and safety upon any finding that any provision of this chapter has been
violated or that any other ordinance of the village or statute of the state of Illinois has been violated. Upon the finding of any such violation, the director
of public health and safety shall cause written notice of the revocation stating the reason therefor to be served upon any of the owner or applicant
names listed on the application. Immediately upon receipt of a written notice of revocation, the permittee shall cease operation of the temporary use.
B. Any permittee whose permit has been revoked may, within ten (10) days of the receipt of notice thereof, appeal to the council for a hearing thereon. If
no such appeal is taken within ten (10) days as provided herein, the action of the director of public health and safety is final. (Ord. O-63-09, 11-9-2009)
3-12-13: VIOLATION AND PENALTY:
Any person or entity who violates any section of this chapter shall be subject to the general penalty provision set forth in title 1, chapter 3 of this code.
(Ord. O-63-09, 11-9-2009)
Chapter 13
IMMOBILIZATION OF VEHICLES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY
3-13-1: DEFINITIONS:
AUTHORIZED BOOTING COMPANY: A company engaged in the business of booting or otherwise immobilizing vehicles, which is currently and properly
licensed to do business in the village in accordance with section 3-1-1 of this title.
IMMOBILIZATION: The attachment of a lockable road wheel clamp or similar device (oftentimes referred to as a "boot") to a vehicle that renders the
vehicle immovable until the device is unlocked or removed. The act of immobilization is oftentimes referred to as "booting".
IMMOBILIZE: The act of placing a lockable road wheel clamp or similar device (oftentimes referred to as a "boot") on a parked vehicle until the device is
unlocked or removed. This term includes any installation, adjustment or removal of the immobilization device.
PARKING LOT OWNER OR OPERATOR: The owner of the parking lot or area or the authorized operator of the parking lot or area, and any person having
a financial or other beneficial interest in:
A. The property on which the parking lot or area is located;
B. The business of the owner of the parking lot or area; or
C. The business of the operator of the parking lot or area.
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway except devices moving by human
power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (See section 6-1-2 of this code.) (Ord. O-16-12, 4-23-2012)
3-13-2: CONDITIONS REQUIRED FOR IMMOBILIZATION:
No vehicle parked in a privately owned parking lot or area may be immobilized without the permission of the vehicle's owner, except only if all of the
following conditions are present:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 129/416
A. The vehicle is parked illegally, or otherwise is not authorized to park in the place it is located, at the time of being immobilized;
B. Immobilization is undertaken by an authorized booting company;
C. The parking lot or area has been posted with warning signs complying with the requirements set forth in section 3-13-6 of this chapter;
D. Immobilization has been authorized in writing by the parking lot owner or operator, or by a duly authorized agent of the parking lot owner or operator;
and
E. The vehicle owner or authorized user is not present, and has not been present, at any time during the immobilization activity. (Ord. O-16-12, 4-23-2012)
3-13-3: NOTIFICATION:
Notice of the immobilization must be given to the police department at least fifteen (15) minutes after immobilization is undertaken. Such notice must
include all of the following information: the time the immobilization occurred, the location of the parking lot where the immobilization took place and the
description of the immobilized vehicle, including the license plate number. (Ord. O-16-12, 4-23-2012)
3-13-4: VEHICLE IMMOBILIZATION LICENSE; APPLICATION; FEE:
No person or entity may immobilize a vehicle on private property without first securing a vehicle immobilization license issued by the village's chief of
police, or his designee.
A. Application: All applicants for a vehicle immobilization license must complete a license application in a form provided by the village. The application
must include all of the following information:
1. The name, business address and permanent telephone number of the applicant.
2. A list of the names, home address and telephone numbers of each owner and employee of the applicant and, for each such person, a list of each
conviction for any crime or ordinance violation within the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of the application, including for each
conviction the specific charge, the date of conviction, the place of conviction and the sentence.
3. A list of each privately owned parking lot and area at which the applicant intends to undertake immobilization and the name of each parking lot owner
and operator and of each person authorized to order the immobilization.
4. Proof of liability insurance in the amount not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) per person for injury or death and not less than
twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) per property damage incident, issued by an insurer authorized to underwrite risks in Illinois.
5. A sample of the window immobilization notice complying with the requirements set forth in section 3-13-7 of this chapter.
B. Fee: The annual fee for a vehicle immobilization license is one hundred dollars ($100.00). This fee is nonrefundable and must be paid at the time an
application is submitted.
C. License Term; Renewal Fee; Termination: A vehicle immobilization license is for a term not exceeding one year. Every vehicle immobilization license will
expire on April 30 of each year. The annual fee for renewal of a vehicle immobilization license is one hundred dollars ($100.00), which must be paid
prior to the date of expiration of the license. A vehicle immobilization license is terminated automatically and without further action of the village if the
renewal fee is not paid within fifteen (15) days after the time required by this subsection. In the event of such termination, the vehicle immobilization
license cannot be reissued by the village except after payment by the licensee of the full annual fee. (Ord. O-16-12, 4-23-2012)
3-13-5: SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION REQUIRED:
When any information required on the vehicle immobilization license application has changed, or is supplemented with new information, the authorized
booting company must submit that changed or supplemental information to the village within fifteen (15) days after the change or supplement on a form
provided by the village. (Ord. O-16-12, 4-23-2012)
3-13-6: WARNING SIGN REQUIREMENTS:
A. Every private parking lot or area on which immobilization may be undertaken at any time must be posted with no fewer than two (2) warning signs
complying with the requirements of this section for not less than fourteen (14) days before the first immobilization occurs.
B. Every required warning sign must be approved by the village's building department prior to its installation. All warning signs are subject to the
application permit and fees provided in section 8-6-4 of this code. The building department may specify the locations within the parking lot or area
where the warning signs must be posted. The building department may also require the installation of more than two (2) warning signs if the
department determines that the size or configuration of the parking lot or area warrants more than two (2) signs to properly alert vehicle drivers.
C. All required warning signs must meet all of the following standards:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 130/416
1. Each sign must be posted in a location within the parking lot or area that is clearly visible at all times by vehicle operators. Each posted location must
be free from obstruction by any natural or manmade objects.
2. Each sign must include a warning that unauthorized vehicles will be immobilized.
3. Each sign must be not less than twenty four inches (24") in height and thirty six inches (36") in width.
4. Each sign must be posted with the bottom of the sign not less than four feet (4') above the ground nor more than eight feet (8') above the ground.
5. The lettering on each sign must be painted with reflective material that provides a dramatic contrast from the color of the sign background.
6. Each sign must state the maximum total cost to be paid for release of the immobilized vehicle. That amount may not exceed one hundred dollars
($100.00). (See section 3-13-9 of this chapter.) (Ord. O-16-12, 4-23-2012)
3-13-7: WINDOW NOTICES:
The authorized booting company must place a notice on the window of the driver's door of every vehicle that has been immobilized. The notice must be
easily removable and must include all of the following information:
A. The name and telephone number of the authorized booting company.
B. The name and telephone number of a person to contact for vehicle release.
C. The total cost of release of the vehicle.
D. All acceptable forms of payment of the release cost.
E. The time/date of, and reason for, immobilization of the vehicle. (Ord. O-16-12, 4-23-2012)
3-13-8: PROMPT DEVICE REMOVAL REQUIRED:
An authorized booting company must remove an immobilization device within sixty (60) minutes after receiving a request for that removal, except only if
the authorized booting company cannot meet that time requirement because it is currently actively engaged in another immobilization device removal.
Under those, and all other circumstances, the authorized booting company must respond to the removal request and remove the device as quickly as
possible. (Ord. O-16-12, 4-23-2012)
3-13-9: MAXIMUM CHARGE FOR IMMOBILIZATION; PAYMENT OPTIONS:
The total charge for a complete release of a vehicle that has been immobilized on a private parking lot or area may never exceed one hundred dollars
($100.00). The authorized booting company must accept payment of the charge in cash or by credit or debit card. (Ord. O-16-12, 4-23-2012)
3-13-10: BUSINESS HOURS; TELEPHONE CONTACT:
The authorized booting company must maintain a telephone number at which a company representative can be reached twenty four (24) hours per day,
every day. (Ord. O-16-12, 4-23-2012)
3-13-11: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation who or which violates the provisions of this chapter may, in addition to any penalty provided in the general penalty
provisions set forth in section 1-3-1 of this code, suffer the penalty of having his, her or its vehicle immobilization license revoked for any such violation.
Revocation shall be in writing signed by the chief of police. Each incident of violation shall be a separate offense and punishable as described. (Ord. O-16-
12, 4-23-2012)
3-13-12: NO APPLICABILITY TO VILLAGE, LAW ENFORCEMENT, FIRE RESCUE, OR OTHER GOVERNMENT ENTITY:
This chapter does not apply to immobilization activities conducted by or on behalf of the village, the police department, the fire department or any other
governmental entity or official engaged in his or her official duties, when such immobilization is authorized by any provision of law or any rule or regulation
promulgated pursuant thereto. (Ord. O-16-12, 4-23-2012)
Chapter 14
CABLE/VIDEO
ARTICLE A. SERVICE PROVIDER FEE
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 131/416
3-14A-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
CABLE SERVICE: That term as defined in 47 USC section 522(6).
COMMISSION: The Illinois commerce commission.
GROSS REVENUES: All consideration of any kind or nature, including, without limitation, cash, credits, property, and in-kind contributions received by the
holder for the operation of a cable or video system to provide cable service or video service within the holder's cable service or video service area within
the village.
A. Gross revenues shall include the following:
1. Recurring charges for cable or video service.
2. Event based charges for cable service or video service, including, but not limited to, pay per view and video on demand charges.
3. Rental of set top boxes and other cable service or video service equipment.
4. Service charges related to the provision of cable service or video service, including, but not limited to, activation, installation, and repair charges.
5. Administrative charges related to the provision of cable service or video service, including, but not limited to, service order and service termination
charges.
6. Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds check charges, and other charges assessed to recover the costs of collecting delinquent
payments.
7. A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the holder or its affiliates pursuant to compensation arrangements for advertising or for promotion or
exhibition of any products or services derived from the operation of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service within the village.
The allocation shall be based on the number of subscribers in the village divided by the total number of subscribers in relation to the relevant
regional or national compensation arrangement.
8. Compensation received by the holder that is derived from the operation of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service with
respect to commissions that are received by the holder as compensation for promotion or exhibition of any products or services on the holder's
network, such as a "home shopping" or similar channel, subject to subsection A9 of this definition.
9. In the case of a cable service or video service that is bundled or integrated functionally with other services, capabilities, or applications, the portion
of the holder's revenue attributable to the other services, capabilities, or applications shall be included in the gross revenue unless the holder can
reasonably identify the division or exclusion of the revenue from its books and records that are kept in the regular course of business.
10. The service provider fee permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b).
B. Gross revenues do not include any of the following:
1. Revenues not actually received, even if billed, such as bad debt, subject to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(c)(1)(vi).
2. Refunds, discounts, or other price adjustments that reduce the amount of gross revenues received by the holder of the state issued authorization
to the extent the refund, rebate, credit, or discount is attributable to cable service or video service.
3. Regardless of whether the services are bundled, packaged, or functionally integrated with cable service or video service, any revenues received
from services not classified as cable service or video service, including, without limitation, revenue received from telecommunication services,
information services, or the provision of directory or internet advertising, including yellow pages, white pages, banner advertisement, and electronic
publishing or any other revenues attributed by the holder to noncable service or nonvideo service in accordance with the holder's books and
records and records kept in the regular course of business and any applicable laws, rules, regulations, standards, or orders.
4. The sale of cable services or video services for resale in which the purchaser is required to collect the service provider fee from the purchaser's
subscribers to the extent the purchaser certifies in writing that it will resell the service within the village and pay the fee permitted by 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b) with respect to the service.
5. Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed upon the subscribers or the transaction by a city, state, federal, or any other governmental entity
and collected by the holder of the state issued authorization and required to be remitted to the taxing entity, including sales and use taxes.
6. Security deposits collected from subscribers.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 132/416
7. Amounts paid by subscribers to "home shopping" or similar vendors for merchandise sold through any home shopping channel offered as part of
the cable service or video service.
C. Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be included in the calculation of gross revenues to the extent the treatment of the revenue as revenue of the
affiliate rather than the holder has the effect of evading the payment of the fee permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b) which would
otherwise be paid by the cable service or video service.
HOLDER: A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the commission pursuant to 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
PEG: Public, education and governmental.
PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE: The amount paid under this chapter and 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(d) by the holder to the village for the
service areas within its territorial jurisdiction.
SERVICE: The provision of "cable service" or "video service" to subscribers and the interaction of subscribers with the person or entity that has received
authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the commission pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
SERVICE PROVIDER FEE: The amount paid under this chapter and 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801 by the holder to a village for the service
areas within its territorial jurisdiction.
VIDEO SERVICE: Video programming and subscriber interaction, if any, that is required for the selection or use of such video programming services, and
which is provided through wireline facilities located at least in part in the public right of way without regard to delivery technology, including internet protocol
technology. This definition does not include any video programming provided by a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47 USC section 332(d) or
any video programming provided solely as part of, and via, service that enables users to access content, information, electronic mail, or other services
offered over the public internet. (Ord. O-32-16, 12-19-2016)
3-14A-2: CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE IMPOSED:
A. Fee Imposed: A fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable service or video service in the village.
B. Amount Of Fee: The amount of the fee imposed hereby shall be five percent (5%) of the holder's gross revenues.
C. Notice To The Village: The holder shall notify the village at least ten (10) days prior to the date on which the holder begins to offer cable service or video
service in the village.
D. Holder's Liability: The holder shall be liable for and pay the service provider fee to the village. The holder's liability for the fee shall commence on the
first day of the calendar month following thirty (30) days after receipt of the ordinance adopting this chapter by the holder. The ordinance adopting this
chapter shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the address listed on the holder's application notice sent pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/21-401(b)(6) to the village.
E. Payment Date: The payment of the service provider fee shall be due on a quarterly basis, forty five (45) days after the close of the calendar quarter. If
mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the
fee.
F. Exemption: The fee hereby imposed does not apply to existing cable service or video service providers that have an existing franchise agreement with
the village in which a fee is paid.
G. Credit For Other Payments: An incumbent cable operator that elects to terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/21-301(c) with credit for prepaid franchise fees under that agreement may deduct the amount of such credit from the fees that operator owes under
subsection B of this section. (Ord. O-32-16, 12-19-2016)
3-14A-3: PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE IMPOSED:
A. PEG Fee Imposed: A PEG access support fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable service or video service in the village in addition to the
fee imposed pursuant to section 3-14A-2 of this article.
B. Amount Of Fee: The amount of the PEG access support fee imposed hereby shall be one percent (1%) of the holder's gross revenues or, if greater, the
percentage of gross revenues that incumbent cable operators pay to the village or its designee for PEG access support in the village.
C. Payment: The holder shall pay the PEG access support fee to the village or to the entity designated by the village to manage PEG access. The holder's
liability for the PEG access support fee shall commence on the date set forth in subsection 3-14A-2D of this article.
D. Payment Due: The payment of the PEG access support fee shall be due on a quarterly basis, forty five (45) days after the close of the calendar quarter.
If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the
fee.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 133/416
E. Credit For Other Payments: An incumbent cable operator that elects to terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-
301(c) shall pay, at the time they would have been due, all monetary payments for PEG access that would have been due during the remaining term of
the agreement had it not been terminated pursuant to that section. All payments made by an incumbent cable operator pursuant to the previous
sentence may be credited against the fees that that operator owes under subsection B of this section. (Ord. O-32-16, 12-19-2016)
3-14A-4: APPLICABLE PRINCIPLES:
All determinations and calculations under this chapter shall be made pursuant to generally accepted accounting principles. (Ord. O-32-16, 12-19-2016)
3-14A-5: NO IMPACT ON OTHER TAXES DUE FROM HOLDER:
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to exempt a holder from any tax that is or may later be imposed by the village, including any tax that is
or may later be required to be paid by or through the holder with respect to cable service or video service. A state issued authorization shall not affect any
requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the village's simplified municipal telecommunications tax or any other tax as it applies to any
telephone service provided by the holder. A state issued authorization shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the local
unit of government's 911 or E911 fees, taxes or charges. (Ord. O-32-16, 12-19-2016)
3-14A-6: AUDITS OF CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER:
A. Audit Requirement: The village will notify the holder of the requirements it imposes on other cable service or video service providers to submit to an
audit of its books and records. The holder shall comply with the same requirements the village imposes on other cable service or video service
providers in its jurisdiction to audit the holder's books and records and to recompute any amounts determined to be payable under the requirements of
the village. If all local franchises between the village and cable operator terminate, the audit requirements shall be those adopted by the village
pursuant to the local government taxpayers' bill of rights act, 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 45/1 et seq. No acceptance of amounts remitted should be
construed as an accord that the amounts are correct.
B. Additional Payments: Any additional amount due after an audit shall be paid within thirty (30) days after the municipality's submission of an invoice for
the sum. (Ord. O-32-16, 12-19-2016)
3-14A-7: LATE FEES/PAYMENTS:
All fees due and payments which are past due shall be governed by ordinances adopted by this municipality pursuant to the local government taxpayers'
bill of rights act, 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 45/1 et seq. (Ord. O-32-16, 12-19-2016)
ARTICLE B. CUSTOMER PROTECTION LAW
3-14B-1: CUSTOMER SERVICE AND PRIVACY PROTECTION LAW:
A. Adoption: The regulations of 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/22-501 are hereby adopted by reference and made applicable to the cable or video
providers offering services within the village's boundaries.
B. Amendments: Any amendment to the cable and video customer protection law that becomes effective after the effective date of this chapter shall be
incorporated into this chapter by reference and shall be applicable to cable or video providers offering services within the municipality's boundaries.
However, any amendment that makes its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be incorporated into this chapter by reference
without formal action by the corporate authorities of the village. (Ord. O-32-16, 12-19-2016)
3-14B-2: ENFORCEMENT:
The village does hereby pursuant to law declare its intent to enforce all of the customer service and privacy protection standards of the cable and video
protection law with respect to complaints received from residents within the village. (Ord. O-32-16, 12-19-2016)
3-14B-3: PENALTIES:
The village, pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/22-501(r)(1), does hereby provide for a schedule of penalties for any material breach of the cable
and video protection law by cable or video providers in addition to the penalties provided in the law. The monetary penalties shall apply on a competitively
neutral basis and shall not exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each day of the material breach, and shall not exceed twenty five thousand
dollars ($25,000.00) for each occurrence of a material breach per customer.
A. "Material breach" means any substantial failure of a cable or video provider to comply with service quality and other standards specified in any provision
of the law.
B. The village shall give the cable or video provider written notice of any alleged material breaches of the law and allow such provider at least thirty (30)
days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 134/416
C. A material breach, for the purposes of assessing penalties, shall be deemed to occur for each day that a material breach has not been remedied by the
cable or video service provider after the notice in subsection B of this section. (Ord. O-32-16, 12-19-2016)
3-14B-4: CUSTOMER CREDITS:
The village hereby adopts the schedule of customer credits for violations. Those credits shall be as provided for in the provisions of 220 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/22-501(s) and applied on the statement issued to the customer for the next billing cycle following the violation or following the discovery of the
violation. The cable or video provider is responsible for providing the credits and the customer is under no obligation to request the credit. (Ord. O-32-16,
12-19-2016)
Chapter 15
VIDEO GAMING
3-15-1: DEFINITIONS:
All words and phrases used in this chapter and not otherwise defined herein, which are defined in the video gaming act1, effective July 13, 2009, shall
have the meanings accorded to such words and phrases in said act. Unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms as used in this chapter
shall be construed according to the following definitions:
LICENSED ESTABLISHMENT: Any class A, A1, A2, A3, or A7 licensed retail establishment where alcoholic liquor is sold, drawn, poured, mixed or
otherwise served for consumption on the premises. The term licensed establishment includes any licensed fraternal establishment and/or licensed
veterans' establishment as those terms are defined in the video gaming act, 230 Illinois Compiled Statutes 40/1 et seq., as amended.
VIDEO GAMING: The ownership, placement, maintenance, operation or use of a "video gaming terminal" (as defined herein) in a "licensed establishment"
(as defined herein) within the village.
VIDEO GAMING TERMINAL: Any electronic video game machine, that upon insertion of cash, electronic cards or vouchers, or any combination thereof, is
available to play or simulate the play of a video game, including, but not limited to, video poker, line up and blackjack, as authorized by the Illinois gaming
board, utilizing a video display and microprocessors in which the player may receive free games or credits that can be redeemed for cash. The term does
not include a machine that directly dispenses coins, cash or tokens or is for amusement purposes only.
VILLAGE: Village of Forest Park, Illinois. (Ord. O-26-16, 10-24-2016)
3-15-2: VIDEO GAMING ALLOWED:
Video gaming is hereby permitted in certain licensed establishments within the village only in accordance with this chapter. Subject to all other provisions
of this chapter and the video gaming act2, video gaming shall only be permitted and a video gaming license issued to a licensed establishment that is the
holder of a class A, A1, A2, A3, or A7 local liquor license, fraternal establishments and veterans' establishments that have operated in good standing for a
continuous period of not less than one year prior to applying for a class V supplemental liquor license. Further, subject to all other provisions of this
chapter, video gaming shall only be permitted and a video gaming license issued only to a licensed establishment that, in addition to being the holder of a
class A, A1, A2, A3 or A7 liquor license, fraternal establishments and veterans' establishments, that has been issued a supplemental class V (video
gaming) local liquor license. (Ord. O-26-16, 10-24-2016)
3-15-3: ANNUAL VIDEO GAMING LICENSE REQUIRED:
No establishment licensed by the Illinois gaming board shall be permitted to operate any video gaming terminal pursuant to the Illinois video gaming act
unless the establishment has first obtained a video gaming license and a class V liquor license from the village and paid an annual license fee to the
village as hereafter provided. No license may issue where the license applicant owes a debt, fine, fee or penalty to the village. (Ord. O-26-16, 10-24-2016)
3-15-4: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
Application to the village for a video gaming license shall be made to the local liquor control commissioner on forms furnished by the village clerk. The
application shall contain the following information:
A. The name, address, age and date of birth of the owner of the video gaming terminal and of the owner of the establishment where the video gaming
terminal shall be located;
B. Prior convictions of the owner of the video gaming terminal and the owner of the establishment, if any;
C. The location within the licensed establishment where the video gaming terminal is to be displayed or operated and the business conducted at that
location;
D. A description of the video gaming terminal to be covered by the license;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 135/416
E. A copy of the applicant's complete license application and all supporting documents, to the Illinois video gaming board;
F. Evidence that licenses have been issued by the Illinois gaming board to the owner of the video gaming terminal and the owner of the establishment;
G. Attach a responsible gaming policy, which outlines all employee education and training programs, policies and procedures to promote responsible
gaming. If standardized training for responsible gaming becomes available at a future date, it shall be required as part of the video gaming license
application;
H. Such other information as the village may determine is necessary as set forth in the application form. (Ord. O-26-16, 10-24-2016)
3-15-5: TERM OF LICENSE:
All video gaming licenses shall be valid for a period not to exceed one year after issuance, unless sooner terminated, revoked or suspended as provided
by law; and all video gaming licenses shall terminate on April 30 next following their issuance. (Ord. O-26-16, 10-24-2016)
3-15-6: ANNUAL LICENSE FEE; PRORATION:
A. The annual license fee for a video gaming license shall be as follows:
1. Twenty five dollars ($25.00) for each video gaming terminal.
B. License fees are payable at the time of application and are not subject to proration. License fees are not refundable. (Ord. O-26-16, 10-24-2016)
3-15-7: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
All such video gaming terminals shall at all times be kept, placed, operated and monitored in accordance with the video gaming act and all applicable
regulations, as well as all applicable provisions of this code, including, but not limited to:
A. Prohibiting persons under the age of twenty one (21) years and persons who are visibly intoxicated from entering or remaining in the gaming area, and
posting signage thereof.
B. Video gaming terminals shall be placed in an area restricted to individuals age twenty one (21) years or over.
C. Video gaming terminals shall only be operational during the legal hours of operation allowed for the consumption of alcoholic beverages at the licensed
establishment, as provided by section 3-3-9 of this title. Upon the suspension or revocation of a licensee's liquor license, the licensee's video gaming
license shall automatically be suspended (or revoked in the event of a liquor license revocation) without the requirement of any further action on the
part of the village.
D. The video gaming area shall be physically monitored at all times during the legal hours of operation by an employee over twenty one (21) years of age.
(Ord. O-26-16, 10-24-2016)
3-15-8: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this chapter. Any person found to be in violation by a court or administrative hearing of any
provision of this chapter shall be subject to a fine not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each such offense. In addition, any and all video
gaming licenses issued to a licensee shall be subject to suspension or revocation as provided by this code or by law. (Ord. O-26-16, 10-24-2016)
Chapter 16
RAFFLES
3-16-1: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever used in this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
BUSINESS: A voluntary organization composed of individuals and businesses who have joined together to advance the commercial, financial, industrial
and civic interests of a community.
CHARITABLE: An organization or institution organized and operated to benefit an indefinite number of the public. The service rendered to those eligible for
benefits must also confer some benefit on the public.
EDUCATIONAL: An organization or institution organized and operated to provide systematic instruction in useful branches of learning by methods
common to schools and institutions of learning which compare favorably in their scope and intensity with the course of study presented in tax supported
schools.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 136/416
FRATERNAL: An organization of persons having a common interest, the primary interest of which is to both promote the welfare of its members and to
provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to lessen the burdens of government by caring for those that otherwise would be cared for by the
government.
LABOR: An organization composed of workers organized with the objective of betterment of the conditions of those engaged in each pursuit and the
development of a higher degree of efficiency in their respective occupations.
NET PROCEEDS: The gross receipts from the conduct of raffles, less reasonable sums expended for prizes, local license fees and other reasonable
operating expenses incurred as a result of operating a raffle.
NONPROFIT: An organization or institution organized and conducted on a not for profit basis with no personal profit inuring to anyone as a result of the
operation. The term nonprofit shall also include the village of Forest Park and other units of local government.
ORGANIZATION: Shall include an auxiliary or affiliate of a licensee.
POLITICAL COMMITTEE: An organization composed of individuals who act on behalf of or in opposition to a political candidate or candidates as more
fully defined by section 5/9-1.9 of the election code1.
RAFFLE: A form of lottery, as defined in section 28-2(b) of the criminal code of 19612 conducted by an organization licensed under this chapter in which:
A. The player pays or agrees to pay something of value for a chance, represented and differentiated by a number or by a combination of numbers or by
some other medium, one or more of which chances is to be designated the winning chance.
B. The winning chance is to be determined through a drawing or by some other method based on an element of chance by an act or set of acts on the
part of persons conducting or connected with the lottery; except, that the winning chance shall not be determined by the outcome of a publicly
exhibited sporting contest.
C. "Raffle" does not include a savings promotion raffle authorized under section 5g of the Illinois banking act, section 78008 of the savings bank act,
section 42.7 of the Illinois credit union act, section 5136B of the national bank act (12 USC 25a), or section 4 of the home owners' loan act (12 USC
1463).
RELIGIOUS: Any church, congregation, society or organization founded for the purpose of religious worship.
VETERANS: An organization or association comprised of members of which substantially all are individuals who are veterans or spouses, widows, or
widowers of veterans, the primary purpose of which is to promote the welfare of its members and to provide assistance to the general public in such a way
as to confer a public benefit.
VILLAGE: The village of Forest Park, Cook County, Illinois. (Ord. O-07-17, 3-13-2017)
3-16-2: LICENSE AND COMPLIANCE REQUIRED; AUTHORITY TO ISSUE; JURISDICTION:
A. License And Compliance Required: No person, firm or corporation shall conduct a raffle without having first obtained a license pursuant to this chapter.
Each raffle shall be authorized by a license issued pursuant to this chapter, and shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
The foregoing notwithstanding, the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to political committees for which a raffle license has been issued by the
Illinois state board of elections pursuant to section 8.1 of the raffles act3.
B. Authority To Issue: The village clerk, or his/her designee(s), shall have the authority to issue licenses for raffles subject to the limitations set forth in this
chapter.
C. Jurisdiction: A license issued by the village shall authorize the sale of raffle chances only within the boundaries of the village. (Ord. O-07-17, 3-13-2017)
3-16-3: QUALIFICATIONS OF LICENSEE; INELIGIBILITY FOR LICENSE:
A. Eligible Organizations: Licenses for raffles shall be issued only to bona fide charitable, educational, religious, fraternal, veterans, labor, and business
organizations which have been in existence continuously for a period of five (5) years next preceding making application for a license, and have had,
during that entire five (5) year period, a bona fide membership engaged in carrying out its objects, or to a nonprofit fundraising organization that the
village determines is organized for the sole purpose of providing financial assistance to an identified individual or group of individuals suffering extreme
hardship as the result of an illness, disability, accident or disaster.
B. No raffle license shall be issued to:
1. Any person who has been convicted of a felony.
2. Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or gambling promoter.
3. Any person who is not of good moral character.
4. Any firm or corporation in which a person defined in subsection B1, B2 or B3 of this section has a proprietary, equitable or credit interest, or in which
such person is active or employed.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 137/416
5. Any organization in which a person defined in subsection B1, B2 or B3 of this section is an officer, director or employee, whether for compensation or
not.
6. Any organization in which a person defined in subsection B1, B2 or B3 of this section is to participate in the management or operation of a "raffle" as
defined in section 3-16-1 of this chapter. (Ord. O-07-17, 3-13-2017)
3-16-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
A. Application for a license shall be made in writing and, unless waived by the village clerk or his/her designee, must be made no less than thirty (30) days
before the intended commencement date of sale of raffle chances, on forms provided by the village. Applications for licenses that are less than thirty
(30) days before the intended sale of raffle chances may be made upon a showing of good cause and submittal of a written request for a waiver on
forms provided by the village. The village clerk or his/her designee(s) maintains the exclusive authority to grant such waivers and issue said licenses.
Each license and application for a license shall contain the following information:
1. The name and address of the applicant;
2. The location within the village in which the raffle chances will be sold and issued;
3. The area within the location in which the raffle chances will be sold and issued;
4. The time period or periods during which raffle chances will be sold or issued;
5. The date(s), time(s), manner, and locations of determining the winning chances;
6. A sworn statement attesting to the qualifying nature of the applicant signed by its presiding officer and secretary;
7. A copy of the applicant's articles of incorporation and/or charter if so required by the village administrator or his designee(s); and
8. Such other information as the village may, from time to time, require.
B. The village clerk, or his/her designee(s), shall act on a license application within thirty (30) days from the date of application. (Ord. O-07-17, 3-13-2017)
3-16-5: CLASSES OF LICENSES; FEE:
A. The classification for each raffle shall be as set forth in the following schedule:
1. Class A: Where the aggregate value of all prizes awarded in any raffle does not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00).
2. Class B: Where the aggregate value of all prizes awarded in any raffle is greater than five hundred dollars ($500.00), but does not exceed five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00).
3. Class C: Where the aggregate value of all prizes awarded in any raffle is greater than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), but does not exceed fifty
thousand dollars ($50,000.00).
4. Class D: Where the aggregate value of all prizes awarded in any raffle is greater than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00).
B. A fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) shall be required for the issuance of a license under this chapter unless waived by the village administrator or his
designee(s). (Ord. O-07-17, 3-13-2017)
3-16-6: EFFECT OF LICENSE:
Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid for one raffle or for a specified number of raffles to be conducted during a specified period, not to
exceed one year. (Ord. O-07-17, 3-13-2017)
3-16-7: CONDUCT OF RAFFLES:
The conducting of raffles in the village is subject to the following:
A. The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be exclusively devoted to the lawful purposes of the organization permitted to conduct that game.
B. No person except a bona fide member of the sponsoring organization may participate in the management or operation of the raffle.
C. No person may receive any remuneration or profit for participating in the management or operation of the raffle.
D. The maximum fee which may be charged for each raffle chance sold or issued shall not exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00). All such fees shall be
paid in currency or by check.
E. A licensee may rent a premises on which to determine the winning chance or chances in a raffle only from an organization or committee which is also
licensed under this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 138/416
F. Raffle chances may be sold or issued only within the area specified on the license, and winning chances may be determined only at those locations
specified on the license.
G. A person under the age of eighteen (18) years may participate in the conducting of raffles or chances only with the permission of a parent or guardian.
A person under the age of eighteen (18) years may be within the area where winning chances are being determined only when accompanied by a
parent or guardian.
H. If a lessor rents premises where a winning chance or chances on a raffle is determined, the lessor shall not be criminally liable if the person who uses
the premises for the determining of winning chances does not hold a license issued by the village under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. O-07-17,
3-13-2017)
3-16-8: TICKETS AND PRIZES:
A. Tickets:
1. Each raffle ticket, chance or other raffle token shall state on its face the name and address of the licensee, the date or dates of the drawings and the
prize or prizes to be awarded; provided, however, that this requirement shall not apply to any raffle in which prizes in aggregate value under fifty
dollars ($50.00) are awarded, or to any raffle in which raffle chances are sold only on the date of the drawing during the event at which the drawing is
to be conducted. No such ticket, chance or token shall be sold or issued more than one year before the determination of the winning chance or
chances.
2. If any raffle for which a license is issued under this chapter is canceled, or if any such raffle is not conducted on the date contained in the application
for license, the licensee shall refund all monies paid for any raffle chances issued or sold to the persons to whom such raffle chances were issued or
sold within forty five (45) days after the date on which the raffle was to be conducted or within forty five (45) days after cancellation of the raffle,
whichever is sooner.
B. Prizes: The maximum cash prize awarded in any raffle shall be one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00); the maximum retail value of a noncash
prize awarded in any raffle shall be one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). The aggregate value of all prizes awarded in any raffle shall not
exceed two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00). (Ord. O-07-17, 3-13-2017)
3-16-9: GAMBLING PROHIBITED:
Unless otherwise expressly authorized elsewhere in this code, nothing in this chapter shall be construed to authorize the conducting or operating of any
gambling scheme, enterprise, activity or device other than a raffle provided for herein. (Ord. O-07-17, 3-13-2017)
3-16-10: RAFFLES MANAGER:
All operation of and the conduct of raffles shall be under the supervision of a single raffles manager designated by the organization. The raffles manager
shall give a fidelity bond in the sum of an amount determined by the village in favor of the organization conditioned upon the manager's honesty in the
performance of his duties. Terms of the bond shall provide that notice shall be given in writing to the village not less than thirty (30) days prior to its
cancellation. The village clerk, or his/her designee(s), may waive this bond requirement by including a waiver provision in the license. (Ord. O-07-17, 3-13-
2017)
3-16-11: RECORDS AND REPORTS:
A. Records Kept:
1. Each organization licensed to conduct raffles and chances shall keep records of its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds for each single
gathering or occasion at which winning chances are determined. All deductions from gross receipts for each single gathering or occasion shall be
documented with receipts or other records indicating the count, a description of the purchased item or service or other reason for the deduction and
the recipient. The distribution of net proceeds shall be itemized as to the payee, amount and date of payment.
2. Gross receipts from the operation of raffle programs shall be segregated from other revenues of the organization, including bingo gross receipts if
bingo games are also conducted by the same nonprofit organization pursuant to license therefor issued by the department of revenue of the state of
Illinois and placed in a separate account. Each organization shall have separate records of its raffles. The person who accounts for gross receipts,
expenses and net proceeds from the operation of raffles shall not be the same person who accounts for other revenues of the organization.
B. Reports Required: Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall report promptly after the conclusion of each raffle to its membership and to the
village its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds from raffles and the distribution of net proceeds itemized as required in this chapter. Such reports
shall be filed in writing with the village on the fifteenth day of the month following the conclusion of the individual raffle. Subsequent raffles or requests
for raffle licenses may be denied by the village administrator or his designee(s) should the raffle holder fail to file the required report.
C. Preservation Of Records; Open Records: Records required by this chapter shall be preserved for three (3) years, and organizations shall make
available their records relating to the operation of raffles for public inspection at reasonable times and places. (Ord. O-07-17, 3-13-2017)
3-16-12: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 139/416
Raffle licenses may be suspended or revoked by the mayor or his designee(s) for any violation of this chapter. No license shall be suspended or revoked
without first affording the licensee an opportunity to contest the suspension or revocation at a hearing conducted by the mayor or his designee(s). Notice of
such hearing shall be in writing and served upon the licensee no less than three (3) days before. (Ord. O-07-17, 3-13-2017)
3-16-13: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense. (Ord. O-07-17, 3-13-2017)
3-16-14: PUBLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
The mayor, or his designee(s), may publish rules and regulations consistent with this chapter or Illinois law governing the conduct of raffles licensed
hereunder. (Ord. O-07-17, 3-13-2017)
Chapter 17
CONFLICTS WITH CERTAIN HOME RULE COUNTY ORDINANCES
3-17-1: PAYMENT OF MINIMUM HOURLY WAGES AND PAID SICK LEAVE:
A. Employers located within the Village shall comply with all applicable Federal and/or State laws and regulations as such laws and regulations may exist
from time to time with regard to both the payment of minimum hourly wages and paid sick leave. Employee eligibility for paid sick leave and minimum
hourly wages shall be in compliance with all applicable Federal and/or State laws and regulations as such laws and regulations may exist from time to
time.
B. No additional obligations with regard to the sick leave ordinance or the minimum wage ordinance imposed by the County of Cook Board of
Commissioners now, or hereafter, shall apply to any employer located within the Village, the Village opts out of any such ordinance(s) adopted by the
County of Cook Board of Commissioners, and this chapter conflicts with any such ordinance(s), as now or may be adopted by the County of Cook
Board of Commissioners that imposes additional obligations with regard to paid sick leave or minimum hourly wages.
C. For the purposes of this chapter, the term "employee" means an individual permitted to work by an employer regardless of the number of persons the
employer employs, but excluding employees of the Village, and the term "employer" means any person employing one or more employees, or seeking
to employ one or more employees, if the person has its principal place of business within the Village or does business within the Village.
D. For the purposes of this chapter, the term "employer" does not mean:
1. The government of the United States or a corporation wholly owned by the government of the United States;
2. An Indian tribe or a corporation wholly owned by an Indian tribe;
3. A government of the State or any agency or department thereof; or
4. Any unit of government, including the Village. (Ord. O-14-17, 6-12-2017)
Title 4
HEALTH AND SANITATION
Chapter 1
HEALTH REGULATIONS
4-1-1: CONTAGIOUS DISEASES:
A. Duty To Report: Every physician, nurse, owner, lessee or keeper of any hotel or lodging house, and every person who has knowledge of any person in
or upon any premises who may be suffering from, or expected to be suffering from, or afflicted with acute infectious poliomyelitis, cholera, cerebrospinal
fever, scarlet fever, smallpox, typhus fever, diphtheria, whooping cough, yellow fever, venereal disease or any other reportable disease, specified by the
state department of health, must immediately report the same, to the director of public health and safety. (Village code § 18-9; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-
2010)
B. Premises: The director of public health and safety shall, immediately upon receipt of a reportable disease, visit, or cause to be visited, the premises and
shall affix, in a conspicuous place at the outside entrance of the premises, the warning placard required by the state department of health. Interference
with or defacement of such placards or their removal by other than the proper authorized person is prohibited. (Village code § 18-10; amd. Ord. O-7-10,
2-8-2010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 140/416
C. Quarantine: Quarantine must be strictly enforced and observed according to the requirements of the state department of public health for the control of
such diseases. Quarantine shall not be terminated without the permission of the director of public health and safety, or the state department of public
health. (Village code § 18-11; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
D. Disinfecting Required: After the removal or death of any person infected with any such disease, the infected premises, contents and inmates must be
thoroughly disinfected in a manner prescribed by the state department of public health, by or under the direction of the director of public health and
safety. (Village code § 18-12; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
E. Removal Of Diseased Persons: No person having any of the diseases enumerated in this section, shall be removed from premises on which he is
found, except by permission of the director of public health and safety or the state department of public health. (Village code § 18-13; amd. Ord. O-7-
10, 2-8-2010)
Chapter 2
GARBAGE, REFUSE AND WASTE
4-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions will apply:
COMPOST: A mixture of decomposing materials including yard waste materials which produce humus for fertilizing and conditioning the soil. Garbage and
excretion of any kind shall be excluded from compost materials.
GARBAGE: Putrescible animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
HAZARDOUS WASTE: A waste or combination of wastes which, because of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics,
may cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious, irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness; or pose a
substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported or disposed of, or otherwise
managed or which has been identified, by characteristics or listing, as hazardous pursuant to section 3001 of the resource conservation and recovery act
of 1976 (PL 94-580), or which is designated as special, hazardous or toxic pursuant to other applicable law, ordinance or regulation.
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE: Refuse, garbage or other discarded material generated by those residing in residential structures within the village containing
four (4) units or less. This term does not include hazardous waste or waste which any of the facilities to which it is sent is not permitted to receive.
PLACED FOR COLLECTION: Placed in the alley adjacent to the building or the usual and customary place utilized for collection by the village.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS: Aluminum cans, three (3) colors of glass, steel, tin and bimetal cans (including empty latex paint and aerosol spray cans),
corrugated cardboard, newspaper, telephone books, chipboard, magazines and catalogs, junk mail, high grade paper, PET (#1) and HDPE (#2),
miscellaneous ferrous and nonferrous scrap metals and any other materials designated by the village for collection and processing through the village
recycling program.
REFUSE: Organic leavings and all other nonputrescible solid waste including paper, rags, cardboard, metal cans, bottles, glass, wood, bedding, crockery,
ashes, metals and similar materials, except those defined to be recyclable materials in this section.
SENIOR CITIZEN CUSTOMER: Any customer residing in a location who has been granted a senior citizen's homestead exemption pursuant to section
15-170 of the property tax code1.
YARD WASTE: Includes grass clippings, leaves, trimmings from shrubs, hedges and trees and other vegetation. (Village Code § 17-1; amd. Ord. O-2-97,
2-10-1997; Ord. O-34-07, 7-23-2007)
4-2-2: UNLAWFUL DEPOSITS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit any garbage, refuse or waste on any street, alley or public ground within the limits of the village
unless the same shall be deposited in a proper receptacle or receptacles provided for that purpose as provided in this chapter. (Village Code § 17-2)
4-2-3: RECEPTACLES REQUIRED:
A. Garbage And Refuse:
1. For all residential dwellings containing four (4) dwelling units or less, garbage and refuse shall be stored in garbage receptacles provided by the
village and/or its contractor. Such receptacles must have the lids closed at all times except for the deposit of materials.
2. All garbage and refuse containers, whether provided by the village, its contractor or a private scavenger service, must have the attached lids or lids
tightly closed at all times except for the deposit of materials. (Ord. O-15-00, 5-8-2000)
B. Recyclable Materials: It shall be the duty of every owner, occupant or manager of any dwelling unit in the village to separate and place in separate
containers from the garbage and refuse emanating from the unit all recyclable materials described as aluminum cans, three (3) colors of glass, steel,
tin and bimetal cans (including empty latex paint and aerosol spray cans), corrugated cardboard, newspaper, telephone books, chipboard, magazines
and catalogs, junk mail, high grade paper, PET (#1) and HDPE (#2), miscellaneous ferrous and nonferrous scrap metals and any other materials
described or approved as recyclable materials by the village. The recyclable materials shall be rinsed clean and placed in special containers furnished
by the village to each unit in residential buildings containing not more than four (4) dwelling units and residential condominium buildings as defined and
operating pursuant to the condominium act of the state of Illinois2. (Village Code § 17-4)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 141/416
4-2-4: REMOVAL OF MATERIALS:
A. Garbage, Refuse And Yard Waste:
1. Village Service: The village shall provide for removal of "garbage", "refuse" and "yard waste", as defined in section 4-2-1 of this chapter, from
residential buildings containing not more than four (4) dwelling units and residential condominium buildings as defined by and operating pursuant to
the condominium act of the state of Illinois. (Village Code § 17-5)
2. Yard Wastes: Yard waste from dwellings in residential structures not exceeding four (4) units shall be placed in either yard waste bags or cans not to
exceed thirty (30) gallon capacity and which shall be labeled "yard waste". Such cans or bags shall be placed at the rear portion of the lot nearest the
alley and be collected by the village and/or its contractor, or shall be composted in a composting process approved by the village. (Ord. O-8-99, 6-14-
1999)
3. Private Scavenger Service:
a. Garbage and refuse containers belonging to private scavengers must be emptied by that person who holds the scavenger service contract for that
container within the same day as the scheduled day of pick up. Any loose garbage and/or other refuse lying within an area of a radius of ten feet
(10') around such containers must also be picked up and removed as part of the same service. It is the responsibility of the property owner or the
tenant who contracted for the scavenger service to assure that there are enough containers and frequent enough pick ups to contain all garbage
and refuse within the containers. Overflowing containers shall be prima facie evidence that the service is inadequate.
b. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner or the tenant who has contracted for the private scavenger service to remove, prior to the
scheduled pick up date, any ice and/or snow which might impede the removal of the container by the private scavenger. (Ord. O-8-01, 1-22-2001)
B. Recyclable Materials: On the day designated for the collection of recyclable materials for the dwelling unit or units, the recycling container and contents
shall be placed in the alley adjacent to the building or the usual and customary place utilized for the collection of its garbage and refuse if an alley
collection is not possible. No person other than the village or its authorized agent shall collect, procure, remove or obtain any recycling container or
materials placed in recycling containers in collection areas. (Village code § 17-6)
C. Removal From Other Premises: Garbage, refuse, yard waste and recyclables from all other premises or buildings shall be removed by a scavenger
licensed and qualified to operate in the village at the expense of the owners, agent, management or person in charge of the premises or building when
receptacles required therefor are at capacity, but in no case less than once each week. (Village code § 17-8)
4-2-5: CHARGES:
A. Village Services: In all cases where the Village provides for removal, the following charges per unit per bimonthly period shall be charged to all dwelling
units in the Village for removal of garbage, rubbish and recycling materials:
Residential Fee Senior Citizen Residential Fee
Effective January 1, 2018 $28.23 $18.21
Effective January 1, 2019 29.08 18.57
Effective January 1, 2020 29.95 18.94
B. Yard Wastes: The charge for removal of yard waste per collection site per bimonthly period shall be as follows:
Residential Fee Senior Citizen Residential Fee
Effective January 1, 2018 $3.85 $3.44
Effective January 1, 2019 3.97 3.51
Effective January 1, 2020 4.09 3.58
(Ord. O-34-17, 12-18-2017)
C. Billing And Payment:
1. Service charges shall be billed bimonthly and are due and payable twenty one (21) days after a bill is submitted. After twenty one (21) days, a
penalty of one and one-half percent (1.5%) per month will be added to the bill.
2. Failure to pay the service charge and penalty will subject the property serviced to the lien rights granted to the Village in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/11-20-13. (Ord. O-34-07, 7-23-2007)
4-2-6: COMPOST AREAS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 142/416
All compost piles shall be aerated on a regular basis to avoid anaerobic conditions conducive to rodent and insect infestation and noxious or offensive
odors. Any compost pile created in a manner not consistent with the Village regulations shall be declared to be a public nuisance under the provisions of
this Code and the subject of abatement or prosecution in the manner provided by this Code or State Statute3. (Village Code § 17-9)
4-2-7: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS AND PROHIBITIONS:
A. Title To Waste: Title to Municipal solid waste which is placed for collection shall pass to the Village when it is collected by the Village or by a contractor
retained by the Village for the purpose of collecting Municipal solid waste. (Ord. O-2-97, 2-10-1997)
B. Burning Prohibited: No person shall hereafter burn, or cause to be burned, any garbage, refuse or other material within the corporate limits of the
Village. (Village Code § 17-10)
4-2-8: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
A. Penalty: Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined as provided in the general penalty in section 1-3-
1 of this Code for each offense. (Village Code § 17-11; amd. 2004 Code)
B. Prosecution Of Violations: Any person charged with a violation of this chapter in a citation issued by an employee of the Department of Public Health
and Safety, detailing the nature of the violation, may avoid prosecution by exhibiting proof of correction of the condition or compliance with the
ordinance stated to have been violated and the payment of twenty five dollars ($25.00) within ten (10) days of issuance, or fifty dollars ($50.00) after
ten (10) days but within thirty (30) days before the hearing date, to the Village Clerk or his designee.
Absent the failure to satisfy citation, the person charged shall appear at the place, time and date designated on the citation and the superintendent of
the department shall thereupon conduct a hearing. After the hearing by the superintendent of the department, the superintendent shall take the
following action:
1. Dismiss the citation; or
2. Find that there was probable cause for the issuance of the citation and that the original amount for the commission of such violation shall remain the
same; or
3. In the event the violator has not corrected the violation and/or paid the penalty within the time established by the superintendent, proceed to institute
appropriate proceedings against the person cited in the circuit court of Cook County, Illinois. (Ord. O-12-96, 4-22-1996)
Chapter 3
FOOD AND FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
4-3-1: REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
A. Adoption By Reference:
1. Permits, Licenses And Certificates: The issuance, suspension and revocation of permits, licenses or certificates to operate food establishments, the
prohibiting or sale of unsound or mislabeled food or drink and the enforcement of this chapter shall be regulated in accordance with section 4-3-2 of
this chapter concerning the compliance procedures;
2. Inspection Of Food Service Establishments: The inspection of food service establishments shall be regulated in accordance with the 1999 and all
subsequent editions or amendments to the Illinois department of public health's publication currently titled food service sanitation code;
3. Inspection Of Retail Food Stores: The inspection of retail food stores shall be regulated in accordance with the 1989 and all subsequent editions or
amendments to the Illinois department of public health's publication currently titled retail food store sanitation code.
B. Copies On File: Three (3) copies of each of the Illinois department of public health's publications currently titled food service sanitation code and retail
food store sanitation code, shall be on file at the village clerk's office. (Ord. O-27-92, 10-26-1992; amd. 2004 Code)
4-3-2: COMPLIANCE PROCEDURES:
A. No person shall operate a food establishment who does not have a valid permit, license or certificate issued to him by the village. Only a person who
complies with the requirements of this chapter shall be entitled to receive or retain such a permit, license or certificate. Permits, licenses or certificates
are nontransferable. A valid permit, license or certificate shall be posted in every establishment in a prominent location.
B. No person shall operate a food establishment and allow the sale and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages within the premises without first having
obtained a liquor license from the village. (Ord. O-5-03, 3-10-2003)
4-3-3: PERMITS, LICENSES AND CERTIFICATES:
A. Issuance:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 143/416
1. Any person desiring to operate a food establishment shall make written application for a permit, license or certificate on forms provided by the
village. Such application shall include the name and address of each applicant, the location and type of the proposed food establishment and the
signature of each applicant.
2. Prior to approval of an application for a permit, license or certificate, the village and the Cook County department of public health shall inspect the
proposed food establishment to determine compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
3. The village shall issue a permit, license or certificate to the applicant if its inspection reveals that the proposed food establishment complies with the
requirements of this chapter.
B. Suspension Or Revocation:
1. The village may, without warning, notice or hearing, suspend or revoke any permit, license or certificate to operate a food establishment if the holder
of the permit, license or certificate does not comply with the requirements of this chapter, or if the operation of the food establishment otherwise
constitutes a substantial hazard to public health. Suspension or revocation is effective upon service of the notice required by section 4-3-4 of this
chapter. When a permit, license or certificate is suspended or revoked, food operations shall immediately cease. Whenever a permit, license or
certificate is suspended or revoked, the holder of the permit, license or certificate shall be afforded an opportunity for hearing within twenty (20) days
of receipt of a request for hearing.
2. Whenever a permit, license or certificate is suspended or revoked, the holder of the permit, license or certificate, or the person in charge shall be
notified in writing that the permit, license or certificate is, upon service of the notice, immediately suspended or revoked and that an opportunity for
hearing will be provided if a written request for hearing is filed with the village by the holder of the permit, license or certificate within ten (10) days. If
no written request for hearing is filed within ten (10) days, the suspension or revocation is sustained. The village may end the action at any time if
reasons for suspension or revocation no longer exist.
3. The village may, after providing opportunity for hearing, suspend or revoke the permit, license or certificate for serious or repeated violations of any
of the requirements of this chapter or for interference with the village or the Cook County department of public health in the performance of duty.
Prior to suspension or revocation, the village shall notify, in writing, the holder of the permit, license or certificate, or the person in charge, of the
specific reason(s) for which the permit, license or certificate is suspended or revoked and that the permit, license or certificate shall be suspended or
revoked upon service of such notice unless a written request for hearing is filed with the village by the holder of the permit, license or certificate
within ten (10) days. If no request for hearing is filed within the ten (10) day period, the suspension or revocation of the permit, license or certificate
becomes effective and final. (Ord. O-27-92, 10-26-1992)
4-3-4: NOTICES AND HEARINGS:
A. Service Of Notices: A notice provided for in this chapter is properly served when it is delivered to the holder of the permit, license or certificate, or the
person in charge, or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the holder of the permit,
license or certificate. A copy of the notice shall be filed in the records of the village.
B. Hearings: The hearings provided for in this chapter shall be conducted by the village at a time and place designated by the village. Any oral testimony
given at a hearing shall be reported verbatim, and the presiding officer shall make provision for sufficient copies of the transcript. The village shall make
a final finding based upon the complete hearing record and shall sustain, modify or rescind any notice or order considered in the hearing. A written
report of the hearing decision shall be furnished to the holder of the permit, license or certificate by the village.
C. Application After Revocation: Whenever a revocation of a permit, license or certificate has become final, the holder of the revoked permit, license or
certificate may make written application for a new permit, license or certificate. (Ord. O-27-92, 10-26-1992)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 07-19 - FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS INSPECTIONS. Go to new ordinance.
4-3-5: INSPECTIONS:
A. Frequency: An inspection of a food establishment shall be performed at least once every six (6) months. Additional inspections of the food
establishment shall be performed as often as necessary for the enforcement of this chapter.
B. Right Of Access: Duly authorized representatives of the village or the Cook County department of public health, after proper identification, shall be
permitted to enter any food establishment at any reasonable time for the purpose of making inspections to determine compliance with this chapter. The
representatives shall be permitted to examine the records of the establishment to obtain information pertaining to food and supplies purchased,
received or used.
C. Reports: Whenever an inspection of a food establishment or commissary is made, the findings shall be recorded on the inspection report form provided
by the village. The inspection report form shall summarize the requirements of this chapter and shall set forth a weighted point value for each
requirement. Inspection remarks should be written to reference by item number, the item violated and state the correction to be made. The rating score
of the establishment shall be the total of the weighted point values for all violations, subtracted from one hundred (100). A copy of the completed
inspection report form shall be furnished to the person in charge of the establishment at the conclusion of the inspection. The completed inspection
report form is a public document that shall be made available for public disclosure to any person who requests it according to law. (Ord. O-27-92, 10-
26-1992)
D. Costs: Except as provided below, each food service and/or food establishment shall pay an inspection fee of one hundred twenty five dollars ($125.00)
for each inspection. Except as provided below, in the event a reinspection is necessary, a fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) shall be charged for
the first reinspection and two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each additional reinspection. Except as provided below, this fee shall be billed to the
establishment on a quarterly basis and shall be due upon receipt of the invoice. Notwithstanding the foregoing to the contrary, the American
Legion/VFW Hall shall be exempt from the application and imposition of the provisions and costs under this subsection. (Ord. O-24-15, 10-13-2015)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 144/416
4-3-6: CORRECTION OF VIOLATIONS:
A. The completed inspection report form shall specify a reasonable period of time for the correction of the violations found; and correction of the violations
shall be accomplished within the period specified, in accordance with the following provisions:
1. If an imminent health hazard exists, such as complete lack of refrigeration or sewage backup into the establishment, the establishment shall
immediately cease food operations upon oral or written order of the inspector of the village or the Cook County department of public health.
Operations shall not be resumed until authorized by the Cook County department of public health.
2. All violations of four (4) or five (5) point weighted items shall be corrected as soon as possible, but in any event, within ten (10) days following
inspection. A follow up inspection shall be conducted to confirm correction at the discretion of the Cook County department of public health.
3. All one or two (2) point weighted items shall be corrected as soon as possible, but in any event, by the time of the next routine inspection.
4. When the rating score of the establishment is less than sixty (60), the establishment shall initiate corrective action on all identified violations within
forty eight (48) hours. One or more reinspections will be conducted at reasonable time intervals to assure correction.
5. In the case of temporary food establishments, all violations shall be corrected within twenty four (24) hours. If violations are not corrected within
twenty four (24) hours, the establishment shall immediately cease food operations until authorized to resume by the Cook County department of
public health.
B. The inspection report shall state that failure to comply with any time limits for corrections may result in cessation of food operations. An opportunity for
hearing on any order to cease operations, the inspection findings, or the time limits, or any such matters will be provided if a written request is filed with
the village within ten (10) days following cessation of operations. If a request for hearing is received, a hearing shall be held within twenty (20) days of
receipt of the request.
C. Whenever a food establishment is required under the provisions of this chapter to cease operations, it shall not resume operations until it is shown on
reinspection that conditions responsible for the order to cease operations no longer exist. Opportunity for reinspection shall be offered within a
reasonable time. (Ord. O-27-92, 10-26-1992)
4-3-7: EXAMINATION AND CONDEMNATION OF FOOD:
Food may be examined or sampled by the Cook County department of public health as often as necessary for enforcement of this chapter. The Cook
County department of public health may, upon written notice to the owner or person in charge, specifying with particularity the reasons therefor, place a
hold order on any food which it believes is in violation of sections 750.100, 750.110, 760.100, 760.110 of the Illinois department of public health's
publications currently titled food service sanitation code or retail food store sanitation code, respectively, or any other section of this chapter. The Cook
County department of public health shall tag, label, or otherwise identify any food subject to the hold order. No food subject to a hold order shall be used,
served or moved from the establishment.
The Cook County department of public health shall permit storage of the food under conditions specified in the hold order, unless storage is not possible
without risk to the public health, in which case immediate destruction shall be ordered and accomplished. The hold order shall state that a request for
hearing may be filed within ten (10) days and that if a hearing is not requested, the food shall be destroyed. If a request for hearing is received, the hearing
shall be held within twenty (20) days after receipt of the request. On the basis of evidence produced at that hearing, the hold order may be vacated, or the
owner or person in charge of the food may be directed by written order to denature or destroy such food or to bring it into compliance with the provisions of
this chapter. (Ord. O-27-92, 10-26-1992)
4-3-8: PROCEDURE WHEN INFECTION SUSPECTED:
When the Cook County department of public health has reasonable cause to suspect possible transmission of a disease or infection by an employee of a
food establishment, it may secure a morbidity history of the suspected employee or make any other investigations as indicated and shall take appropriate
action. The Cook County department of public health may require any or all of the following measures: (Ord. O-27-92, 10-26-1992; amd. 2004 Code)
A. The immediate exclusion of the employee from employment in food establishments;
B. The immediate closing of the food establishment concerned until, in the opinion of the Cook County department of public health, no further danger of
disease outbreak exists;
C. Restriction of the employee's services to some area of the establishment where there would be no danger of transmitting disease;
D. Adequate medical and laboratory examination of the employee and of other employees and of his and their body discharges. (Ord. O-27-92, 10-26-
1992)
4-3-9: CONDITIONAL LICENSE OR PERMIT:
When structural, plumbing, electrical, ventilation or similar such defects exist in an established food facility that may require significant expenditures to
correct, but are not considered to be imminent health hazards, a conditional license or permit may be granted at the discretion of the village or the Cook
County department of public health. Under no circumstances will a conditional license or permit be issued for more than two (2) consecutive twelve (12)
month periods. The purpose of the conditional license or permit is to allow a reasonable period of time for correction of existing defects. (Ord. O-27-92, 10-
26-1992)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 145/416
4-3-10: PLANS REQUIRED:
A. Submission: Whenever a food establishment is constructed or extensively remodeled and whenever an existing structure is converted to use as a food
establishment, properly prepared plans and specifications for such construction, remodeling or conversion indicating the proposed layout, arrangement,
mechanical plans and construction materials of work areas and the type and model of proposed fixed equipment and facilities must be approved by the
village and the Cook County department of public health. No food establishment shall be constructed, extensively remodeled or converted except in
accordance with plans and specifications approved by the village and Cook County department of public health.
B. Preoperational Inspection: Whenever plans and specifications are required by subsection A of this section to be submitted to the village and the Cook
County department of public health, the village and the Cook County department of public health shall inspect the food establishment prior to the start
of operations, to determine compliance with the approved plans and specifications and with the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. O-27-92, 10-26-
1992)
4-3-11: FOOD VENDING MACHINES:
A. Definition:
FOOD VENDING MACHINE: Any mechanical container or device used for the sale, or offering for sale, of any article of food, the operation of which is
governed or controlled by the deposit of a coin or token. (Village code § 15-16)
B. License Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of installing, keeping or maintaining food vending machines within the
village without first having obtained a license therefor.
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, use or permit to be used upon his premises any food vending machine, owned and operated by a person
who has not obtained a license, as herein provided. Further, nothing contained in this section shall require a duly licensed purveyor or food dispenser
to procure a license to operate a food vending machine. (Village code § 15-17)
C. Application Inspection: The village clerk shall require the execution of an application form with all of the information to be required included thereon,
including the name and home address of the applicant together with the business and business address and the type of machine and place where said
machine is to be installed.
The health officer shall cause an inspection to be made of the premises where said machine is to be placed and shall also inspect the food vending
machines. (Village code § 15-18)
D. License Fee: The license fee for each food vending machine operated in the village shall be as set out in section 3-5-1 of this code. (Village code § 15-
19)
E. Requirements: No food vending machine shall be installed or kept in any toilet or wash room. The health officer shall make periodic inspections of the
place of business of the food vending machines and the articles of food purveyed therefrom. The health officer shall also see that all such equipment
and food products are in a clean, sanitary and wholesome condition. (Village code § 15-20)
4-3-12: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
A. Penalties: Any person violating the provision of this chapter shall be fined as provided in the general penalty in section 1-3-1 of this code for each
offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation continues. (Ord. 27-92, 10-26-1992; amd. 2004
Code)
B. Injunctions: The village shall have the right to enjoin any person or establishment in the event violations occur on a continuing basis. (Ord. O-27-92, 10-
26-1992)
ARTICLE A. OUTDOOR RESTAURANT DINING
4-3A-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
A. The use of public sidewalks/bumpouts for restaurant tables, chairs and/or umbrellas shall only be permitted incidental to the operation of a restaurant on
private contiguous property, provided that the service of food for consumption on the premises constitutes fifty percent (50%) of the business activity
under the restaurant license and where such use is permitted by the zoning ordinance of the village1.
B. Notwithstanding any other provision in this code, it is unlawful for any person to use the public sidewalks for outdoor seating without obtaining a license
from the village clerk. A license will be issued for outdoor seating on public sidewalks/bumpouts only to public restaurants which have obtained a
business license under this chapter2. A license may be purchased at any time once approved, but shall expire on April 30 following the date of
issuance unless renewed. An annual fee as provided in section 3-5-1 of this code shall be charged. Application for annual renewal must be made prior
to the expiration date and must be accompanied by the renewal fee. Outdoor fixtures may only be placed on the public sidewalk/bumpout between
April 1 and November 15 of each year.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 146/416
C. An applicant for an outdoor seating restaurant license must complete an application in a form approved by the village and submit same to the village
clerk with the nonrefundable fee provided for in section 3-5-1 of this code. All applications shall include the following information:
1. A detailed site plan depicting all existing objects on the property and on the public sidewalk/bumpout adjacent to the restaurant including a depiction
of on street parking adjacent to the restaurant, and the proposed location of each item or items to be placed on the public sidewalk/bumpout.
2. A certificate of insurance in the following amounts:
a. One million dollars ($1,000,000.00), comprehensive general liability; and
b. Workers' compensation with statutory limits showing the village, its officers, employees and agents as additional insureds and containing a
statement that said policies shall not be altered or canceled without thirty (30) days' written notice to the village.
c. A signed indemnification statement on form provided by the village. (Ord. O-12-00, 5-8-2000)
D. The director of public works and the director of public health and safety shall review the application and submit a report regarding whether the proposed
use will unreasonably interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic and whether the proposed use complies with applicable municipal code requirements.
(Ord. O-36-04, 9-13-2004; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
4-3A-2: REGULATIONS AND RESTRICTIONS:
All licenses shall be subject to the following regulations:
A. Tables, chairs and umbrellas shall be removed from the sidewalk/bumpout at the end of each business day, unless licensee has received express
written permission from the village clerk to the contrary and all outdoor furniture has been properly stored and secured.
B. All public improvements on the sidewalk/bumpout shown on the site plan submitted by the licensee, including, but not limited to, pavers, benches, light
poles and trees shall be maintained in the condition in which they existed immediately prior to the issuance of the license excluding normal wear and
tear. License holders shall immediately report any damage to such improvements to the village clerk. The village shall repair or replace such
improvements at its discretion and shall charge the cost of repair and/or replacement to the licensee unless the damage can be clearly shown to have
resulted from a cause not related to the issuance of the outdoor restaurant sidewalk/bumpout seating license. (Ord. O-12-00, 5-8-2000)
C. Hours of outdoor restaurant seating operations shall be from eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M. to twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight, Sunday through Saturday.
(Ord. O-16-13, 6-10-2013)
D. Tables, chairs and umbrellas on the sidewalk/bumpout shall:
1. Be located so that a four foot (4') wide unobstructed walkway is maintained at all times;
2. Not obstruct normal ingress and egress from the restaurant;
3. Be located so that clearances required will be maintained when the chair is pulled out from the table, particularly where chair backs face the street or
pedestrian walkway;
4. Not be of a design and/or weight that will create a windblown hazard, and must be approved by the village clerk;
5. Have located nearby, and for the cleanup thereof, trash containers which shall be removed daily when operations are completed.
E. Umbrellas, individually or in a group, shall not exceed four feet (4') in diameter and may be placed on tables in the area abutting the restaurant to which
the license is issued.
F. The village shall retain the right to remove tables, chairs and/or umbrellas from the public sidewalk/bumpout at any time when, in its sole discretion, it
determines that the placement of said items violates the standards set forth herein, obstructs or creates a hazard on the public sidewalk/bumpout or
otherwise threatens the public health, safety or welfare. The village may also restrict the operation of outdoor dining areas during certain events which
may be sponsored by the village or other community organizations so as not to hamper pedestrian traffic or endanger the public health, safety or
welfare, i.e., parades and streetfests. Licensees will be notified by the village of the dates of these events.
G. The following items or actions are prohibited in the outdoor sidewalk/bumpout seating area:
1. Tables, chairs and umbrellas on locations not approved by the village clerk;
2. Electrical appliances.
H. No service or consumption of alcoholic beverages shall be permitted unless same is served as a complement to the sale of food.
I. Licensees shall be required to comply with all other applicable sanitary requirements for the operation of a restaurant. (Ord. O-12-00, 5-8-2000)
4-3A-3: LICENSE DENIAL AND REVOCATION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 147/416
A. License Denial, Appeal And Hearing: Should any license be denied, the village clerk shall set forth the reasons for denial, such as a finding that
placement of said tables, chairs and/or umbrellas would obstruct the public sidewalk/bumpout, or creates a hazard, or would otherwise be detrimental
to the public health, safety and welfare, and shall thereafter mail the same to the applicant at the applicant's last known address, after which the
applicant shall have ten (10) days from the mailing of the village clerk's letter to appeal the decision in writing to the village council, who shall hear such
appeal at a time approved by the village council. The village council shall deny or approve the license, or approve the license with conditions after
hearing the appeal and direct the village clerk to forward to the appellant the findings of the village council.
B. Revocation Of License: A license may be revoked or denied for any violation of any provision of this article, for any fraud or misrepresentation in the
license application, and for any reason which would have been grounds for denial of the license. (Ord. O-12-00, 5-8-2000)
ARTICLE B. FOOD VEHICLES
4-3B-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No license shall be issued unless the person or persons operating a motorized vehicle carrying food and dispensing the food from the vehicle to persons
on the streets of the village was issued a driver's license or permit to operate the vehicle issued by the state of Illinois. (Ord. O-4-93, 4-26-1993)
4-3B-2: INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
No license shall be issued for the operation of a vehicle or vehicles carrying food and dispensing the food to persons on the streets of the village unless
the vehicle or vehicles is insured by an insurance company or surety authorized to do business in the state of Illinois and insuring the vehicle or vehicles, if
involved in a motor vehicle accident to a limit of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) because of bodily injury or death to any one person, a limit of
one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) because of bodily injury or death to two (2) or more persons, and destruction of property to a limit of forty thousand
dollars ($40,000.00). (Ord. O-4-93, 4-26-1993)
4-3B-3: PROHIBITED CONDITIONS:
No vehicle or vehicles carrying food and dispensing food from the vehicles to persons on the streets of the village shall be equipped nor shall the operator
of such vehicle or vehicles use any siren, whistle, bell or other audible device while using the streets of the village. (Ord. O-4-93, 4-26-1993)
Title 5
POLICE AND PUBLIC SAFETY
Chapter 1
ANIMAL CONTROL
5-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
ANIMAL: Any living vertebrate, domestic or wild, not including man.
AT LARGE: A dog, cat or other animal not on the premises of the owner, or not confined or under control by leash or other recognized methods.
BITE: Seizure with the teeth or jaws of a warm blooded animal so that the human being or animal so seized has been nipped, gripped, wounded or pierced
and further includes contact of the saliva of a warm blooded animal with any break or abrasion of the skin of another warm blooded animal or human
being.
CAT: Any live male or female cat (Felis catus).
COOK COUNTY ADMINISTRATOR: The licensed veterinarian appointed by the board of commissioners of Cook County, pursuant to the Illinois animal
control act, or his authorized representative.
DOG: Any live male or female dog (Canis familiaris).
DOG PARK: An enclosed area of land where dogs are permitted to be off leash.
HOUSEHOLD PET: Any species of animals customarily regarded and generally represented as suited to live in the abode intended and used for human
occupancy, unless such species shall be prohibited by any ordinance of the village, statute of the state or federal law.
IMPOUNDED: Having been taken into custody by the village and placed in an impoundment facility so designated and approved by the village.
KENNEL: An establishment wherein any person engages in the business of boarding, breeding, buying, letting for hire, training for a fee or selling dogs
and/or cats.
LEASH: A cord, rope, strap, or chain which shall be securely fastened to the collar or harness of a dog or other animal and shall be of sufficient strength to
keep such dog or other animal under control.
LICENSED ANIMAL: Any dog or cat four (4) months of age or older for which the owner can produce proof of having paid the license fee for the current
year and on which the tag issued by the village shall be affixed to a collar or harness.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 148/416
OPERATOR: Any person who owns, operates or provides for use by patrons, a dog park.
OWNER: Any person having a right of property in an animal who provides care, or acts as custodian for an animal, or who knowingly permits an animal to
remain on or about any premises that is occupied by said person.
PATRON: An individual who has a dog within a dog park.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, society, association or other legal entity, any public or private institution, municipal corporation,
unit of local government or any other business unit.
PET SHOP: Any person, partnership or corporation, whether operated separately or in connection with another business enterprise, except for a licensed
kennel, that buys, sells or boards any species of animal.
RABIES VACCINATION: The injection, as approved by the department of agriculture, state of Illinois, of antirabies vaccine approved by said department,
with verification thereof consisting of a current certificate and current tag issued in accord with the statutes of the state of Illinois.
VETERINARY HOSPITAL: Any establishment maintained and operated by a licensed veterinarian for diagnosis, treatment and/or surgery of diseases and
injuries of animals.
VICIOUS ANIMAL: Any animal that constitutes, or has repeatedly demonstrated, a physical threat to human beings or other animals. (Ord. O-48-01, 11-
19-2001; amd. Ord. O-33-06, 5-22-2006, eff. 6-1-2006)
5-1-2: PROHIBITED ANIMALS:
No person shall keep or allow to be kept anywhere within the village any cattle, horses, swine, sheep, goats, ducks, geese, chickens or any other poultry
except birds or pigeons used for exhibition or sporting purposes. (Ord. O-48-01, 11-19-2001)
5-1-3: LICENSE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Required: Each "owner", as defined in this chapter, of each dog and cat four (4) months of age or older, shall obtain a license for each dog or cat within
ten (10) days of acquiring such animal or becoming a resident of the village.
B. Application: The village clerk shall provide a license application form which shall include complete information as to the name, address, telephone
number, if any, of each applicant along with full information and description, including rabies tag number, of the animal to be licensed. No license tag
shall be transferred from one animal to another.
C. Rabies Vaccination A Prerequisite: Issuance of each such license shall be contingent upon the presentation by the applicant of a certificate evidencing
current vaccination against rabies, as provided under section 5-1-6 of this chapter. No license shall be issued without such certificate.
D. Exceptions: The foregoing shall not apply to dogs or cats belonging to nonresidents of the village keeping said dogs or cats within the corporate limits of
the village for periods of time not exceeding thirty (30) days.
E. Term; Fees: The license shall be obtained for each dog or cat annually, irrespective of ownership duration of less than one license year and shall be due
on May 1 each year or at such later date as the dog or cat may be acquired or attains four (4) months of age, and shall expire on April 30, and the
charge for such license shall be ten dollars ($10.00). Licenses obtained after May 1 will reflect a ten dollar ($10.00) surcharge.
F. Tags Attached To Collars: All dogs and cats must wear a collar or harness to which is attached its current license tag when the dog or cat is off the
premises of the owner. (Ord. O-48-01, 11-19-2001)
5-1-4: NUMBER OF ANIMALS RESTRICTED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep more than a total of three (3) dogs and/or cats on his property within the village, with the exception that a litter
may be kept for a period of time not exceeding five (5) months from birth. The provisions of this section shall not apply to persons who are licensed to
engage in the businesses of pet shop operator, kennel operator or animal shelter. (Ord. O-48-01, 11-19-2001)
5-1-5: RESTRAINT OF ANIMALS:
A. Every owner of an animal shall keep the animal exclusively on the owner's premises, except that any animal may be removed from the premises if
restrained by a substantial leash, chain or other appropriate instrument or device and under direct supervision and immediate control of a competent
person.
B. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any owner to allow an animal to be unattended, unrestrained, staked out or out of doors in such a manner that
such animal may be or go beyond the owner's premises. (Ord. O-48-01, 11-19-2001)
5-1-6: VACCINATION REQUIRED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 149/416
Each owner of any dog or cat four (4) months of age or older, shall have such animal vaccinated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian. Evidence of
vaccination shall consist of a certificate signed by the veterinarian. The type and brand of vaccine used shall be as approved by the department of
agriculture, state of Illinois. A current certificate of vaccination issued by a veterinarian licensed to practice in any other jurisdiction establishing vaccination
with a vaccine approved by the department of agriculture, state of Illinois, may be accepted. (Ord. O-48-01, 11-19-2001)
5-1-7: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
A. Disturbances1: It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, controls or is in possession of a dog or cat on public or private property to permit said dog
or cat to bark, howl, yowl, growl, cry or make other loud or unusual noises so as to disturb the peace and quiet of persons present or residing on
abutting, adjoining or neighboring property.
B. Removal Of Excreta: It shall be unlawful and is hereby declared a nuisance for any person having control of any dog or cat to allow such dog or cat to
urinate or defecate on or upon any public street, sidewalk, parkway, playground, park area or any other property not owned by the owner or custodian
thereof. The owner of every animal shall be responsible for removal and sanitary disposition of any excreta deposited by such animal in the village.
C. Poisoning: No person shall place, leave or expose, in any place accessible to animals whether domestic or wild, with the intent to kill or harm such
animals, any poisonous substances or ingredient, unless same shall have been approved by the board of health as proper for pest control and safe for
all animals other than the pests to be controlled.
D. Animal Fights: No person shall promote, stage, hold, manage, conduct or carry on, or be a spectator at, any animal fight or any other type of contest,
game or fight of similar nature, nor any simulated version of the same that involves baiting and/or inciting an animal toward the intent to fight.
E. Indecent Exhibition: No person shall indecently exhibit any animal within the village.
F. Exhibition Of Dangerous Animals: No person shall permit any dangerous animal to be out of his control, or lead any such animal with a chain, rope or
any other appliance, whether such animal be muzzled or unmuzzled, in any public way or public place within the village or upon any premises other
than such person's private property.
G. Wild Animals:
1. Keeping: No person shall have, keep or maintain any wild, exotic, dangerous or nondomestic animal or reptile without first applying for and receiving
from the village a permit so to do.
2. Disposition: All nondomesticated or wild animals which are native to the state of Illinois are the property of and under the control of the Illinois
department of conservation. The Illinois department of conservation may issue permits for the keeping of wild animals or reptiles as long as such
conform to the zoning requirements as set forth by the village, to the statutes of the state of Illinois and to federal law.
H. Cruelty To Animals: No person shall:
1. Have, keep or harbor any animal which is known, or believed by a licensed veterinarian to be, infected with any disease transmittable to other
animals or humans, or which is afflicted with any painful disease or injury, including sever parasitism, unless such animal shall be under the care of a
licensed veterinarian and so confirmed when demanded of the owner by the police department.
2. Overload, overdrive, overwork, beat, torture, torment, bait, mutilate or cruelly kill any animal, or cause or knowingly allow the same to be done.
3. Unnecessarily fail to provide any animal in his charge or custody with proper food, water, air and sanitary shelter, such shelter to be sufficient to
provide natural light or artificial illumination during reasonable hours and protection from the weather, and space within sufficient limits for the animal
to stand in an upright position and lie down stretched out so that no part of its body need touch any part of the structure.
4. Work or cruelly force into undue physical exertion any old, maimed, infirm, sick or disabled animal.
5. Abandon any old, maimed, infirm, sick or disabled animal or abandon any animal on any public way or in any place where it may suffer or become a
public charge.
6. Carry, keep, drive, or cause to be carried, driven or kept, any animal in a cruel manner.
7. Leave for any length of time, any animal unattended in a motor vehicle or enclosed trailer when the outside temperature shall exceed seventy
degrees Fahrenheit (70°F) or contain any animal in such a manner that said animal does not have proper air circulation while confined in a motor
vehicle, trailer, kennel, dog house or other type of container or structure in which an animal may be confined.
8. Wilfully or maliciously threaten, torment, beat, kick, strike, maim, disable or kill any dog utilized by the police department of the village in the
performance or function of the department; nor interfere with any such dog while being used by the police department. (Ord. O-48-01, 11-19-2001)
5-1-8: BITER ANIMALS:
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the owner of any animal which has bitten any human being or warm blooded animal to notify the police department
of such bite, and to surrender such animal to the police department, or its authorized representative, or a licensed veterinary hospital of the owner's
choice, within twenty four (24) hours after the animal has bitten any person or any other animal. If, however, the police department, its authorized
representative or a licensed veterinarian is presented with evidence that such animal has been inoculated against rabies within a time prescribed by law
prior to the biting, the police department may order that such animal be confined in the house of its owner or in a manner which shall prohibit such animal
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 150/416
from biting any other person or animal for a period of ten (10) days. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the owner to have such animal examined by a
duly licensed veterinarian on the first, fifth and tenth day of home impoundment. (Ord. O-48-01, 11-19-2001)
5-1-9: DISEASED OR INJURED ANIMALS ON PUBLIC WAYS:
Any animal which is at large within the village and which appears to be injured or severely diseased, and for which care is not being provided on the scene
by the owner or the owner's agent or representative, or any injured or severely diseased animal that has strayed onto private property, shall be removed, if
possible, to the nearest veterinarian or veterinary hospital willing to accept the same. If immediate removal shall not appear practical or possible, such
animal may be deprived of life by the most humane method available on the scene, provided that the owner, if known, has been notified and given the
opportunity to come forward and assume responsibility for immediate removal and care.
Handling of any such case shall be the responsibility of the police department, its duly authorized representative or any duly licensed and registered and
properly equipped humane society. (Ord. O-48-01, 11-19-2001)
5-1-10: IMPOUNDMENT OF ANIMALS:
A. At Large: It shall be the duty of the police department or its authorized representative, to take up and impound any animal that is not restrained as
provided in this chapter. Any animal taken up and impounded as above provided shall be considered to have been at large in violation of this chapter
and designated a stray on records of the village.
B. Nuisance Animals: It shall also be the duty of the police department or its authorized representative, to take up and impound any animal present on
private property, including the private property of the owner of that animal, if such animal is molesting, injuring, damaging or threatening to injure or
damage persons or property.
C. Holding Periods:
1. The police department, or any agency designated by the village to take possession of animals for the purpose of impounding, shall hold impounded
animals, other than biter animals as provided by section 5-1-8 of this chapter, for the following periods of time:
Unidentified dogs and cats 7 days, unless sooner redeemed by owner
Identified dogs and cats 10 days, unless sooner redeemed by owner
2. The owner, if known, shall be given written notice of the impoundment of such animal within forty eight (48) hours of said impoundment. Such notice
shall be mailed to the last known address of the owner and it shall state the place of impoundment and the date after which the animal may be
disposed of.
3. Holding periods shall not apply to animals received for impounding in critical physical condition or for which immediate euthanasia shall be
prescribed for humane reasons by a licensed veterinarian.
4. Animals other than dogs and cats shall be held for a minimum of twenty four (24) hours or for such other length of time as the police department or
its authorized representative may deem necessary to permit tracing to and redemption by the rightful owner, unless same be a biter animal, as
covered in section 5-1-8 of this chapter.
5. Each animal remaining unredeemed after the prescribed holding period shall at once become the property of the village and may be disposed of in a
humane manner by a licensed veterinarian, or such disposition as decided upon by the shelter manager or his designated representative.
D. Forest Park Animal Shelter: The Forest Park animal shelter will be maintained in the building located at 7233 Madison Street, Forest Park, Illinois.
Any and all stray domestic animals will be accepted for care and storage at that facility.
E. Submission Of Animals:
1. By Residents: Any resident of the village may, upon approval of shelter staff, submit any domestic animal to the shelter at no charge. The submitting
party must complete an animal turn-in form and must provide a recent certificate of health completed by a licensed veterinarian. Animals not
accompanied by a certificate of health, may also be submitted, provided that the person submitting the animal pay the costs of intake protocol for that
animal. In the case of that person's inability to pay, the shelter manager or assistant manager may waive the fee.
2. By Municipalities: Municipalities, which subscribe to the village's consortium for stray animal care, may submit their prescribed limit of animals
according to the shelter's intake procedures for that municipality.
3. By Nonresidents: Nonresident persons wishing to submit an animal to the shelter for care, may do so, provided they also provide a health certificate
for that animal or pay the costs of the intake protocol.
F. Adoption Fees And Charges:
1. Upon completion of an adoption form and survey and approval, person(s) may adopt animals from the shelter. Shelter staff members will ascertain
which animals are fit for adoption according to the shelter's operating policy.
2. A minimum charge of thirty five dollars ($35.00) for one cat or kitten or one dog or puppy will be charged. Additional charges for intake protocol tests,
spaying or neutering of the animal and required shots such as rabies, distemper and feline leukemia will be levied along with the adoption fee. (Ord.
O-48-01, 11-19-2001)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 151/416
3. Adoption and submission fees may be waived at the discretion of the shelter management with the approval of the director of public works. (Ord. O-
36-04, 9-13-2004)
G. Impoundment And Redemption Fees: Charges for impounded animals are as follows:
1. Redemption fee for a dog or cat impounded as an unlicensed stray shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00) plus a charge to the owner of fifteen dollars
($15.00) for each day of impoundment. In addition, the animal must be licensed within ten (10) days of said impoundment.
2. Redemption fee for a dog or cat impounded as a licensed stray shall be ten dollars ($10.00) plus a ten dollar ($10.00) charge to the owner for each
day of impoundment.
H. Disposition Of Unredeemed Animals: Any impounded animal not redeemed as provided herein, shall in the sole discretion of the Forest Park animal
shelter or its authorized representative: 1) be disposed of in a humane manner; 2) be immediately placed for adoption; 3) be immediately placed with a
humane society licensed under the animal welfare act of the state of Illinois; or 4) be immediately placed for adoption in cooperation with the program
of the animal control act of the state of Illinois. (Ord. O-48-01, 11-19-2001)
5-1-11: DOG PARK AREA REGULATIONS:
A. Operator Compliance: No person, including the village of Forest Park, shall be an operator of a dog park unless such dog park is in compliance with this
section.
B. Fencing: A dog park must be completely enclosed by a contiguous fence with each entrance designed in such a manner as to secure against accidental
opening.
C. Signage: There must be prominently displayed at each entrance to a dog park, a sign that sets forth the operator's rules for use of the dog park by
patrons, which rules shall not be inconsistent with the requirements set forth in this section, including, without limitation, subsections D, E1, E2 and E3
of this section.
D. Leashes: Dogs must be on a leash when entering into and leaving a dog park. Dogs may be taken off a leash while within the dog park, except as
necessary for the safety of the dog or patrons.
E. Dogs Only: The operator must institute a plan (e.g., licensing/permitting and/or use of a key or keycard system) satisfactory to the Cook County
administrator for each dog park that reasonably ensures that access to the dog park is limited to dogs:
1. For whom there is written proof of an examination within the past year for any communicable diseases, including an examination of a stool specimen
for internal parasites, and current vaccinations or titers if possible for distemper, hepatitis, parainfluenza, parvovirus and bordetella (kennel cough),
unless an exemption to this requirement has been granted by the Cook County administrator upon the written recommendation from the owner's
veterinarian; and
2. Who are in compliance with rabies vaccination requirements of the Illinois animal control act2; and
3. Who are currently licensed by the local government where the dog's owner lives.
F. Plan: The plan required by subsection E of this section shall be filed in writing with and must be approved by the Cook County administrator prior to the
operator permitting patrons to use a dog park after the effective date hereof. Once approved by the Cook County administrator, any proposed change
in the plan must be approved by the Cook County administrator prior to such change becoming effective.
G. Surveillance: The operator must institute a system of periodic surveillance to monitor compliance by dog park patrons with the operator's dog park plan
and rules. The operator shall have a policy for those instances in which a patron does not observe the operator's rules. The operator shall permit the
Cook County administrator to monitor and enforce compliance by dog park patrons with the operator's dog park plans and rules.
H. Waste Containers: The dog park must have covered leakproof containers available for storage of waste materials before disposal to control vermin and
insects, which containers shall be periodically emptied and maintained in a sanitary condition. (Ord. O-33-06, 5-22-2006, eff. 6-1-2006)
I. Dog Park License Required:
1. No dog shall be permitted to enter a dog park unless a current dog park license issued by the village of Forest Park has been obtained. Each dog
entering a dog park shall require a separate dog park license. Such license shall be valid for the period commencing on May 1 of each year and
expiring on April 30 of each year. Fees for dog park licenses shall be as follows:
Residents of Forest Park: Ten dollars ($10.00) for the first dog; two dollars ($2.00) for each additional dog.
Nonresidents: Fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first dog; five dollars ($5.00) for each additional dog.
Such license fees shall not be prorated for periods which may be less than twelve (12) months. (Ord. O-32-08, 7-14-2008)
2. Upon payment of the required dog park license fee and proof that such dog complies with the requirements of subsection E of this section, a dog
park license tag will be issued by the village to the owner, and such tag must be worn on the collar of the licensed dog upon entry into the dog park
and at all times while such dog is in the dog park. Upon payment of the required dog park license fee, the village will also issue a badge to the owner
of such dog(s), which badge shall be worn by the owner upon entry into the dog park and at all times while present in the dog park.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 152/416
J. Patron Compliance: Patrons shall comply with the operator's rules and regulations. It shall be unlawful for patrons to fail to comply with the operator's
rules and regulations when using a dog park of which the village of Forest Park is the operator and any violation of the rules and regulations shall
subject the patron to a fine pursuant to subsection K of this section. Each day on which such patron violates the rules and regulations shall constitute a
separate offense.
K. Violation: All patrons shall comply with the operator's rules and regulations. Any violation of the operator's rules and regulations will result in a fine of
fifteen dollars ($15.00). Upon proof that the patron complied with the dog licensing requirements of subsection I of this section by obtaining such dog
park license within fourteen (14) days of the issuance of a citation for any such violation, such fine shall be voided. (Ord. O-33-06, 5-22-2006, eff. 6-1-
2006)
5-1-12: PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate, or fail to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter, where no other penalty is prescribed, shall, on conviction, be fined
as provided in the general penalty of section 1-3-1 of this code for each offense. (Ord. O-33-06, 5-22-2006, eff. 6-1-2006)
ARTICLE A. VICIOUS DOGS
5-1A-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article, except as otherwise indicated, the following definitions shall apply:
ANIMAL ADMINISTRATOR: Any designee of the chief of police of the village who may be assigned, from time to time, to perform duties related to animal
control in the village, including a veterinarian.
DANGEROUS DOG: A. Any individual dog anywhere other than upon the property of the owner or custodian of the dog and unmuzzled, unleashed, or
unattended by its owner or custodian that behaves in a manner that a reasonable person would believe poses a serious and unjustified imminent threat of
serious physical injury or death to a person or a companion animal; or
B. A dog that, without justification, bites a person and does not cause serious physical injury.
ENCLOSURE: A fence or structure of at least six feet (6') in height, forming or causing an enclosure suitable to prevent the entry of young children, and
suitable to confine a vicious dog in conjunction with other measures that may be taken by the owner or keeper, such as tethering of the vicious dog within
the enclosure. The enclosure shall be securely enclosed and locked and designed to prevent the animal from escaping from the enclosure. If the
enclosure is a room within a residence, it cannot have direct ingress from or egress to the outdoors unless it leads directly to an enclosed pen and the door
must be locked. A vicious dog may be allowed to move about freely within the entire residence if it is muzzled at all times.
VICIOUS DOG: A dog that, without justification, attacks a person and causes serious physical injury or death or any individual dog that has been found to
be a "dangerous dog" upon three (3) separate occasions. (Ord. O-59-06, 10-10-2006)
5-1A-2: DOGS DEEMED VICIOUS:
A. In order to have a dog deemed "vicious", the animal administrator must give notice of the infraction that is the basis of the investigation to the owner,
conduct a thorough investigation, interview any witnesses, including the owner, gather any existing medical records, veterinary medical records or
behavioral evidence, and make a detailed report recommending a finding that the dog is a vicious dog and give the report to the states attorney's office
and the owner. The animal administrator, state's attorney, or any citizen of the county in which the dog exists may file a complaint in the circuit court in
the name of the people of the state of Illinois to deem a dog to be a vicious dog. Testimony of a certified applied behaviorist, a board certified veterinary
behaviorist, or another recognized expert may be relevant to the court's determination of whether the dog's behavior was justified. The petitioner must
prove the dog is a vicious dog by clear and convincing evidence. The animal administrator shall determine where the animal shall be confined during
the pendency of the case.
A dog may not be declared vicious if the court determines the conduct of the dog was justified because:
1. The threat, injury, or death was sustained by a person who at the time was committing a crime or offense upon the owner or custodian of the dog, or
was committing a wilful trespass or other tort upon the premises or property owned or occupied by the owner of the animal;
2. The injured, threatened, or killed person was abusing, assaulting, or physically threatening the dog or its offspring, or has in the past abused,
assaulted, or physically threatened the dog or its offspring; or
3. The dog was responding to pain or injury, or was protecting itself, its owner, custodian, or member of its household, kennel, or offspring.
B. If a dog is found to be a vicious dog, such dog shall at all times be kept in an enclosure. The dog shall be spayed or neutered within ten (10) days of
said determination at the expense of its owner and microchipped, if not already spayed, neutered or microchipped. It shall be unlawful for any person to
keep or harbor a vicious dog on a porch or patio or in any part of a house or building that would allow the dog to exit such structure on its own volition.
The only times that a vicious dog may be allowed out of the enclosure are:
1. If it is necessary for the owner or keeper to obtain veterinary care for the vicious dog;
2. In the case of an emergency or natural disaster where the dog's life is threatened; or
3. To comply with the order of a court of competent jurisdiction, provided that said vicious dog is securely muzzled and restrained with a leash not
exceeding six feet (6') in length, and shall be under the direct control and supervision of the owner or keeper of the dog or muzzled in its residence.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 153/416
C. In addition, the owner of a vicious dog must comply with the following conditions:
1. The owner, at his/her own expense, shall acquire a special license tag from the village designating the animal as vicious, and shall post signage at
the front and rear property lines of the premises on which said animal is kept, which signage reads as follows:
BEWARE OF VICIOUS DOG.
2. The owner shall notify the village within twenty four (24) hours if the dog is loose, unconfined, has attacked another animal, or has attacked a human
being, or has been removed from the village, or has died.
3. The owner must provide proof that the dog has been neutered.
4. The owner of a vicious dog shall present to the village proof that the owner has procured liability insurance in the amount of at least one hundred
thousand dollars ($100,000.00), covering the twelve (12) month period during which licensing is sought. The insurance policy shall contain a
provision that the village will be notified by the insurance company of any cancellation, termination or expiration of the policy.
5. The owner, at his/her expense, shall attend classes in dog obedience and care offered through any approved institution, park district or licensed
trainer.
6. The owner shall allow inspection by the animal administrator without prior notification, on a regular basis, but not more than three (3) times a year, of
the premises in which the vicious animal is kept. The animal administrator shall determine whether or not the enclosure is secure, that facilities exist
to adequately feed, house and maintain the animal, that the location of the enclosure is not likely to endanger the peace, quiet, health, safety or
comfort of persons in the vicinity of the location, and that maintenance of the dog in the location has not resulted in or is not likely to result in the
animal being subjected to neglect, suffering, cruelty or abuse.
D. Any dog that has been found to be a vicious dog and is not confined to an enclosure shall be impounded by the animal administrator.
If the owner of the vicious dog has not appealed the impoundment order to the circuit court within fifteen (15) working days, the animal may be
euthanized.
Upon filing a notice of appeal, the order of euthanasia shall be automatically stayed pending the outcome of the appeal. The owner shall bear all
costs associated with the impoundment and the burden of timely notification to the animal administrator in writing.
E. No owner or keeper of a vicious dog shall sell or give away any vicious dog without approval from the animal administrator or court.
F. If the owner of a vicious dog is unwilling or unable to comply with the foregoing regulations, then the owner shall have the animal humanely euthanized
by an animal shelter, animal control agency, or licensed veterinarian. (Ord. O-59-06, 10-10-2006)
5-1A-3: DANGEROUS DOGS:
A. The animal administrator may find a dog to be a dangerous dog after a thorough investigation including sending, within ten (10) business days of the
animal administrator becoming aware of the alleged infraction, notifications to the owner of the alleged infractions, the fact of the initiation of an
investigation, and affording the owner an opportunity to meet with the animal administrator prior to the making of a determination; gathering of any
medical or veterinary evidence; interviewing witnesses, and making a detailed written report. No dog shall be deemed a dangerous dog unless shown
to be a dangerous dog by a preponderance of the evidence. The owner shall be sent immediate notification of the determination by registered or
certified mail that includes a complete description of the appeal process.
A dog shall not be declared dangerous if the animal administrator determines the conduct of the dog was justified because:
1. The threat was sustained by a person who at the time was committing a crime or offense upon the owner or custodian of the dog or was committing
a wilful trespass or other tort upon the premises or property occupied by the owner of the animal;
2. The threatened person was abusing, assaulting, or physically threatening the dog or its offspring;
3. The injured, threatened or killed companion animal was attacking or threatening to attack the dog or its offspring; or
4. The dog was responding to pain or injury or was protecting itself, its owner, custodian, or a member of its household, kennel, or offspring.
B. If a dog is found to be a dangerous dog, the dog shall be spayed or neutered within ten (10) days of the finding at the expense of the owner and
microchipped, if not already, and one or more of the following as deemed appropriate by the animal administrator or his appointee:
1. Evaluation of the dog by a board certified veterinary behaviorist or other recognized expert in the field and completion of training or other treatment
as deemed appropriate by the expert. The owner of the dog shall be responsible for all costs associated with the evaluation and training ordered
under this section.
2. Direct supervision and leash control by an adult eighteen (18) years of age or older when the animal is on public or private property other than the
property of the owner.
3. The dog shall be muzzled when the animal is on public or private property other than the property of the owner in a manner that will prevent it from
biting any person or other animal.
C. The owner, at his/her own expense, shall acquire a special license tag from the village designating the animal as dangerous, and shall post signage at
the front and rear property lines of the premises on which said animal is kept, which signage reads as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 154/416
BEWARE OF DANGEROUS DOG.
D. It is unlawful for any person to knowingly or recklessly permit any dangerous dog to leave the premises of its owner when not under the control by a
leash or other recognized control methods.
E. The owner of a dog found to be a dangerous dog by the animal administrator or his appointee may file a complaint against the animal administrator or
his appointee in the circuit court within thirty (30) days of receipt of the notification of the determination. (Ord. O-59-06, 10-10-2006)
5-1A-4: EXEMPTED DOGS:
Guide dogs for the blind or hearing impaired, support dogs for the physically handicapped, and sentry, guard or police owned dogs are exempt from this
article; provided an attack or injury to a person occurs while the dog is performing duties as expected. To qualify for exemption under this section, each
such dog shall be currently inoculated against rabies and registered with the village for its specific duties. It shall be the duty of the owner of such
exempted dog to notify the animal administrator of changes of address. In the case of a sentry or guard dog, the owner shall keep the animal administrator
advised of the location where such dog will be stationed. The animal administrator shall provide police and fire departments with a categorized list of such
exempted dogs, and shall promptly notify such departments of any address changes reported to him. (Ord. O-59-06, 10-10-2006)
5-1A-5: PENALTIES:
The penalty for violation of this article shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), and each day that such violation shall occur or continue shall constitute
a separate offense, except that, if an owner of an animal that has been found to be vicious does not comply with the provisions hereinabove set forth, the
penalty for violation shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00), and each day that such violation shall occur or continue shall constitute a separate offense. If
a second offense occurs, such owner will be subject to a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), and if a third offense occurs, the animal will be
confiscated by the animal administrator. (Ord. O-59-06, 10-10-2006)
ARTICLE B. MANAGED CARE OF FERAL CATS
5-1B-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall have the meaning set forth in this section. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in
the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular, words in the singular number include the plural, and words in the
male gender include the female gender.
ABANDONED CAT: A domesticated cat that an owner has forsaken entirely or neglected or refused to provide care and support.
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER AND ACO: Any person employed or appointed by the village of Forest Park who is authorized to investigate violations of
laws and regulations concerning animals, and to issue citations in accordance with Illinois law and this code.
DEPARTMENT: The Cook County department of animal and rabies control.
DOMESTICATED CAT: A cat that is socialized to humans and is appropriate as a companion for humans.
EAID: An electronic animal identification device.
EAR TIPPING: Straight line cutting of the tip of the left ear of a cat while the cat is anesthetized.
FERAL CAT: A cat that: a) is born in the wild or is the offspring of an owned or feral cat and is not socialized; b) is a formerly owned cat that has been
abandoned and is no longer socialized; or c) lives on a farm.
FERAL CAT CARETAKER: Any person other than an owner who provides food, water or shelter to, or otherwise cares for, a feral cat.
FERAL CAT COLONY: A group of cats that congregates, more or less, together as a unit. Although not every cat in colony may be feral, any nonferal cats
that congregate with a colony shall be deemed to be a part of it.
FERAL CAT COLONY CARETAKER: Any feral cat caretaker who is approved by a sponsor to care for a feral cat colony.
MICROCHIP: To implant an EAID (electronic animal identification device) in an animal.
NUISANCE: Conduct by stray or feral cats that disturb the peace. Stray or feral cats may create a nuisance by: a) habitually or continually howling, crying
or screaming, or b) habitually and significantly destroying, desecrating or soiling property against the wishes of the owner of the property.
OWNER: Any person having a right of property in an animal, or who has it in his care, or acts as its custodian, or who knowingly permits an animal to
remain on any premises occupied by him or her. "Owner" does not include a feral cat colony caretaker.
SPONSOR: The animal care league that agrees to comply with the requirements of this article for sponsors and provides written notice to the department
that it will serve as a sponsor.
STRAY CAT: A cat that is regularly off the property of the owner, is not under the physical control and restraint of the owner, and is not regularly provided
with food by its owner.
TNR: Trap, neuter and return.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 155/416
TNR PROGRAM: A program pursuant to which feral and stray cats are trapped, neutered or spayed, microchipped, vaccinated against rabies, and
returned to the location where they congregate, in accordance with this article.
VILLAGE: Village of Forest Park. (Ord. O-69-09, 11-23-2009)
5-1B-2: RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS OF DOMESTICATED CATS:
A. Owners of domesticated cats shall provide appropriate and adequate food, water and shelter for their cats.
B. The owner of a domesticated cat shall exercise reasonable care to guard against the cat creating a nuisance.
C. Owners of domesticated cats shall not permit their cats to roam unsupervised off their property.
D. An owner shall not abandon a domesticated cat. (Ord. O-69-09, 11-23-2009)
5-1B-3: FERAL CAT COLONIES:
A. Permitted With Sponsor: Feral cat colonies shall be permitted and feral cat colony caretakers shall be entitled to maintain and care for feral cats by
providing food, water, shelter and other forms of sustenance, provided that the feral cat colonies are registered with a department approved sponsor, as
defined in subsection B of this section, and that the feral cat colony caretaker takes all appropriate and available steps to meet the terms and
conditions of this article.
B. Sponsorship Of Colony TNR Programs: The animal care league that agrees to comply with the requirements of this article for sponsors. The animal
care league shall so advise the department in writing and provide its address and telephone number, and electronic mail address if applicable.
C. Sponsorship Requirements: It shall be the duty of the sponsor to:
1. Review and, in its discretion, approve of feral cat colony caretakers.
2. Help to resolve any complaints over the conduct of a feral cat colony caretaker or of cats within a colony.
3. Maintain records provided by feral cat colony caretakers on the size and location of the colonies as well as the vaccination, microchipping, and spay
and neuter records of cats in the sponsor's colonies.
4. Provide, at a minimum, written education training for all caretakers addressing uniform standards and procedures for colony maintenance.
5. Report annually to the department on the following:
a. Number and location by zip code of colonies for which it acts as a sponsor in the county;
b. Total number of cats in each of its colonies;
c. Number of cats from its colonies microchipped, vaccinated, and spayed and neutered pursuant to the TNR program and number of cats and
kittens from its colonies placed in permanent homes.
6. Use due consideration to prevent feral cat colonies from being maintained on lands managed for wildlife or other natural resources, such as, but not
limited to, nature preserves, where the presence of feral cat colony is a proven threat, and to avoid the taking of rare, threatened or endangered
species under the Illinois endangered species protection act.
7. Provide any forms or other documentation necessary to allow feral cats to receive any public or private subsidies, medical care or other forms of
assistance for their feral cat colonies which may be available to them.
8. Provide to the department the location, by address, of feral cat colonies where feral cat colony caretakers have regularly failed to comply with this
article or where the sponsor has been unable to resolve a nuisance behavior situation.
D. Feral Cat Colony Caretaker Responsibilities: In order to be an approved managed feral cat colony caretaker, said caretakers shall be responsible for
the following:
1. Registering the colony with the sponsor.
2. Taking all appropriate and available steps to vaccinate the colony population for rabies, preferably with a three (3) year vaccine and to update the
vaccinations as warranted and mandated by law.
3. Taking all appropriate and available steps to have the colony population spayed or neutered by a licensed veterinarian.
4. Ear tipping the left ear of a colony cat that has been vaccinated and spayed or neutered so that colony cats can be readily identified.
5. Having an EAID inserted into each colony cat by a veterinarian in accordance with professional medical standards. The sponsor and the feral cat
colony caretaker shall be the named contacts for purposes of the EAID.
6. Providing the sponsor with descriptions of each cat in the colony and copies of documents demonstrating that the cats have been vaccinated,
microchipped, and spayed or neutered.
7. Providing food, water and, if feasible, shelter for colony cats.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 156/416
8. Obtaining proper medical attention for any colony cat that appears to require it.
9. Observing the colony cats at least twice per week and keeping a record of any illness or unusual behavior noticed in any colony cat.
10. Obtaining the written approval of the owner of any property, or any authorized representative of the owner, to which the caretaker requires access
to provide colony care.
11. Taking all reasonable steps to: a) remove kittens from the colony after they have been weaned, b) place the kittens in homes or foster homes for
the purpose of subsequent permanent placement, and c) capture and spay the mother cat.
12. Reporting semiannually in writing to the sponsor on: a) the location of the colony, b) the number and gender of all cats in the colony, c) the number
of cats that died or otherwise ceased being a part of the colony, d) the number of kittens born to colony cats and their disposition, e) the number of
cats placed in animal shelters or in permanent homes as companion cats, f) the number of cats vaccinated, g) the number of cats microchipped, and
h) the number of cats spayed or neutered.
E. Withdrawal Of Feral Cat Colony Caretaker Or Sponsor: In the event that a feral cat colony caretaker is unable or unwilling to continue in that role, he or
she shall notify his or her sponsor. In the event a sponsor is unable or unwilling to continue to perform its role, it shall so advise the department. The
sponsor shall work with the department to obtain a replacement sponsor. If no new sponsor is found within thirty (30) days, the sponsor shall notify the
department.
F. Disposition Of Feral Cat Colony Cats:
1. An animal control officer who has trapped a cat whose left ear has been tipped or which bears some other distinguishing mark, such as, but not
limited to, a tattoo, indicating that it belongs to a feral cat colony, shall scan the cat for an EAID. If an EAID is found, the officer shall take reasonable
steps to notify a sponsor of the description and sex of the cat, and if available, the address or location where the cat was trapped. The sponsor shall
then take all appropriate available steps to identify the feral cat colony caretaker of this cat or a feral cat colony caretaker who will take responsibility
for managing this cat.
2. If the feral cat colony caretaker is not able to immediately take custody of the cat, the officer shall transport the cat to the sponsoring animal care
league's shelter or nearest animal shelter. The feral cat colony caretaker shall be responsible for retrieving the cat from the shelter within three (3)
business days or advising the shelter if he or she does not intend to retrieve the cat.
3. The department, its designee, or a licensed veterinarian, in accordance with section 5-1B-4, "Enforcement", of this article, shall be the only persons
permitted to destroy a feral cat. No person may knowingly poison or cause to be poisoned, or cause the destruction by any other means, of a feral
cat. The only exception will be written permit from the Illinois department of agriculture for the purpose of controlling diseases transmissible to
humans or other animals and only when all other methods and means have been exhausted. Such a permit shall name a person or persons
conducting the poisoning, specify the products to be used, give the boundaries of the area involved and specify the precautionary measures to be
employed to ensure the safety of humans and other animals. Any drugs used for the euthanasia shall be by or under the direction of a licensed
veterinarian. (Ord. O-69-09, 11-23-2009)
5-1B-4: ENFORCEMENT:
A. The department or its designee, in order to encourage the stabilization and eventual reduction of the feral cat population in Cook County, shall have the
following rights:
1. The right to trap in a humane manner and remove any cats that: a) have not been vaccinated against rabies or which are demonstrating signs of the
disease, b) are not spayed or neutered, c) are not identifiable through an EAID as belonging to a feral cat colony that has a sponsor and a feral cat
colony caretaker, or d) for public health or public safety concerns.
a. If no issue of public health or safety exists, or if any issues of public health and safety can be addressed by the removal and relocation of the cat to
another area, a sponsor can arrange to have the cat spayed or neutered, ear tipped, and vaccinated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian, and
have an EAID inserted. The sponsor may then arrange for the cat to be adopted or placed in a feral cat colony.
b. If a feral cat is demonstrating signs of having rabies, or has an illness or injury that presents an imminent danger to the public health or safety, or
to its own person, that cat shall be humanely destroyed.
2. The right to direct that sponsor to remove a feral cat that is creating a nuisance if the sponsor has failed to adequately resolve the nuisance within
thirty (30) days after being given written notice thereof. In the event that the department directs the sponsor to remove the cat, the sponsor shall have
thirty (30) days to do so. Failure of the sponsor to remove the cat within said time period (or such longer time as the department may specify) shall
constitute grounds for the department to remove the cat.
B. Animal control officers ("ACO") or police officers shall investigate any nuisance complaint allegedly caused by a feral cat.
1. In the event that an ACO or police officer finds that a feral cat or feral cat colony has created a nuisance, the ACO or police officer shall advise the
department and sponsor in writing of the nuisance.
2. The sponsor shall have the right to review the matter with the administrator of the department. If the sponsor is not able to satisfy the administrator
that a nuisance is not occurring, the sponsor shall have thirty (30) days to comply with the administrator's direction with respect to correcting the
nuisance. If the sponsor fails to correct the nuisance, the department shall have the right to remove the cat.
C. If a sponsor fails to perform its responsibilities as defined in subsection 5-1B-3C of this article, the department may notify the sponsor that it must
comply with the requirement of this article within thirty (30) days. If the sponsor fails to do so, the department may remove this sponsor from the list of
department approved sponsors, and may reassign the feral cat colonies from this sponsor to another sponsor.
D. If a feral cat colony caretaker regularly fails to comply with this article, the sponsor may notify the feral cat colony caretaker that he or she has thirty (30)
days to make all reasonable efforts to fulfill the responsibilities defined in subsection 5-1B-3D of this article. If the feral cat colony caretaker fails to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 157/416
comply within that time period, the sponsor may identify and obtain replacement feral cat colony caretakers for the feral cat colonies of the
noncompliant feral cat colony caretaker. If no other feral cat colony caretaker can be found within thirty (30) days, the sponsor shall notify the
department, and the department may humanely remove all, or parts of, the feral cat colonies and dispose of them in accordance with this section.
E. Feral cats who were spayed or neutered and vaccinated for rabies prior to the date on which this article became effective, but did not have an EAID
inserted or were marked as feral by some indication other than a left ear tip, such as, but not limited to, a tattoo, shall be deemed to be in compliance
with this article, if all other requirements in subsection 5-1B-3D of this article are being met by their feral cat colony caretaker. Feral cat colony
caretakers shall take all appropriate and available steps to bring these cats into compliance with the provisions of this article within three (3) years of its
enactment, or upon revaccination of the cats for rabies, whichever comes first. (Ord. O-69-09, 11-23-2009)
Chapter 2
GENERAL OFFENSES
5-2-1: OFFENSES INVOLVING PERSONS:
A. Assault And Battery: No person shall commit an assault or assault and battery within the village. (Village code § 20-1)
B. Fighting: No person shall instigate, cause or procure or be concerned with any dogfight, prizefight, cockfight or public or private fighting. (Village code
§ 20-5)
C. Intoxication: No person shall be in an intoxicated condition in or upon any street, alley or other public place in the village. (Village code § 20-16)
5-2-2: OFFENSES AGAINST AUTHORITY:
A. False Alarms: No person shall wilfully make or send in any call or alarm for the fire or police department without sufficient and bona fide cause therefor.
(Village code § 20-4)
B. Resisting Arrest: It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly resist or obstruct the performance by one known to the person to be a peace officer of
any authorized act within his official capacity or to knowingly interfere or prevent a peace officer from discharging his duty as such officer, and to, in any
manner, knowingly assist any person in the custody of any member of the police department to escape or attempt to escape from such custody. For the
purposes of this section, "resist" shall mean passive as well as active resistance. (Ord. O-24-68, 5-13-1968)
5-2-3: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
A. Prohibited Acts: A person commits disorderly conduct when he knowingly:
1. Does any act in such unreasonable manner as to provoke, make or aid in making a breach of peace; or
2. Does or makes any unreasonable or offensive act, utterance, gesture or display which, under the circumstances, creates a clear and present danger
of a breach of peace or imminent threat of violence; or
3. Refuses or fails to cease and desist any peaceful conduct or activity likely to produce a breach of peace where there is an imminent threat of
violence and where the police have made all reasonable efforts to protect the otherwise peaceful conduct and activity, and have requested that said
conduct and activity be stopped and explained the request if there be time; or
4. Fails to obey a lawful order of dispersal by a person known to him to be a peace officer under circumstances where three (3) or more persons are
committing acts of disorderly conduct in the immediate vicinity, which acts are likely to cause substantial harm or serious inconvenience, annoyance
or alarm; or
5. Assembles with three (3) or more persons for the purpose of using force or violence to disturb the public peace; or
6. Goes about begging or soliciting funds on any public way except where a permit has been issued by the village; or
7. Appears in any public place manifestly under the influence of alcohol, narcotics or other drug, not therapeutically administered, to the degree that he
may endanger himself or other persons or property, or annoy persons in his vicinity; or
8. Carries in a threatening or menacing manner, without authority of law, any pistol, revolver, dagger, razor, dangerous knife, stiletto, knuckles,
slingshot, an object containing noxious or deleterious liquid, gas or substance or other dangerous weapon or conceals said weapon on or about the
person or vehicle; or
9. Pickets or demonstrates on a public way when such picketing or demonstration interferes with the flow of pedestrians or vehicular traffic; or (Ord. O-
27-68, 5-13-1968)
10. Consumes alcoholic liquor in a public place or transports or carries alcoholic liquor in any public place except in the original package with the seal
unbroken. (Ord. O-11-75, 9-13-1975)
B. Excessive Noise: The creation of excessive noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of
others within the village. The following acts or conduct are declared to constitute the creation of excessive noise and are hereby declared to be a
nuisance and are unlawful and prohibited:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 158/416
1. The loud playing, operating or permitting to be played or operated any phonograph, radio, television set, compact disk player, any music machine,
musical instrument, loudspeaker or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is cast upon the public streets of the
village between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
2. The loud playing, operating or permitting to be played or operated any phonograph, radio, television set, compact disk player, any music machine,
musical instrument, loudspeaker or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is cast upon the public streets of the
village which can be heard at a distance of one hundred feet (100') from the point of its origin between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and
nine o'clock (9:00) P.M.
3. The unrestrained and prolonged barking, howling or sounds from any animal1.
4. The sounding of any horn or audible signaling device on any motor vehicle except in the event of an emergency to warn of the danger of a collision
between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
5. The sounding of any horn or audible signaling device on any motor vehicle except in the event of an emergency to warn of the danger of a collision
which can be heard at a distance of one hundred feet (100') from the point of its origin between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and nine
o'clock (9:00) P.M.
6. The discharge of the exhaust of any internal combustion engine except through a muffler or other similar device which effectively prevents loud or
explosive noises from being emitted between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
7. The discharge of the exhaust of any internal combustion engine except through a muffler or other similar device which effectively prevents loud or
explosive noises from being emitted which can be heard at a distance of one hundred feet (100') from the point of its origin between the hours of
seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) P.M.
8. Operating or permitting to operate any sound amplification system within a motor vehicle which can be heard from outside the vehicle at a distance
of fifty feet (50') or more. (Ord. O-36-00, 8-14-2000)
5-2-4: OFFENSIVE NUISANCES:
A. Depositing Refuse: No person shall deposit or place any refuse in or upon any sidewalk, street, alley, parkway or public place in the village. This section
shall not apply to the temporary storage of such material undertaken pursuant to a permit issued in accordance with any ordinance of the village. (Ord.
O-12-75, 10-25-1975)
B. Smoke Nuisance: No person shall emit or cause to be emitted dense smoke in the village from the smoke stack of any locomotive, steam roller, steam
derrick, steam pile driver, tar kettle or other similar machine or contrivance or from the smokestack or chimney of any building, structure or premises,
excepting for a period of six (6) minutes in any one hour during which the firebox is being cleaned out or a new fire being built therein, is hereby
declared to be a nuisance, and may be summarily abated by the director of public health and safety or anyone who he may duly authorize for such
purpose. Such abatement may be in addition to the fine provided in section 5-2-17 of this chapter. (Ord. O-5-62, 10-20-1962; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-
2010)
C. Occupational Regulations:
1. It will be unlawful for any person to engage in a business or occupation which is not conducted within a building or structure that causes noise to
disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
2. It will be unlawful for any person to engage in a business or occupation in any building or structure with open or partially open service doors,
overhead doors, windows or transoms while using any tools that emit noise that can be heard at a distance of fifty feet (50') from the building or
structure.
3. It will be unlawful for any person, while engaged in a business or occupation, to block, hinder or obstruct the passage of vehicles or pedestrians
upon any public right of way, sidewalk, alley or public property.
Nothing in this section will prohibit a person from engaging in emergency repair work within the village. (Ord. O-36-00, 8-14-2000)
D. Public Urination And Defecation Prohibited:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate on private property open to public view or on any street, alley, sidewalk, parkway, public
parking lot, or other public place other than in a facility designed for that purpose.
2. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to persons of any age who are unable to adequately control bodily functions due to a verified
medical condition. (Ord. O-53-07, 11-13-2007)
5-2-5: INDECENT CONDUCT:
A. Obscenity:
1. Elements Of The Offense: It shall be unlawful for a person when, with knowledge of the nature or content thereof, or recklessly failing to exercise
reasonable inspection which would have disclosed the nature or content thereof, such person:
a. Sells, delivers or provides, or offers or agrees to sell, deliver or provide, any obscene writing, picture, record or other representation or
embodiment of the obscene; or
b. Presents or directs an obscene play, dance or other performance or participates directly in that portion thereof which makes it obscene; or
c. Publishes, exhibits or otherwise makes available anything obscene; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 159/416
d. Performs an obscene act or otherwise presents an obscene exhibition of his body; or
e. Creates, buys, procures or possesses obscene matter or material with intent to disseminate it in violation of this section, or of the penal laws or
regulations of any other jurisdiction; or
f. Advertises or otherwise promotes the sale of material represented or held out to be obscene, whether or not it is obscene.
2. Definition: Any material or performance is obscene if:
a. The average person, applying contemporary adult community standards, would find that, taken as a whole, it appeals to the prurient interest; and
b. The average person, applying contemporary adult community standards, would find that it depicts or describes, in a patently offensive way,
ultimate sexual acts or sadomasochistic sexual acts, whether normal or perverted, actual or simulated, or masturbation, excretory functions or
lewd exhibition of the genitals; and
c. Taken as a whole, it lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value.
3. Interpretation Of Evidence:
a. Obscenity shall be judged with reference to ordinary adults, except that it shall be judged with reference to children or other specially susceptible
audiences if it appears from the character of the material or the circumstances of its dissemination to be specially designed for or directed to such
an audience.
b. Where circumstances of production, presentation, sale, dissemination, distribution or publicity indicate that material is being commercially
exploited for the sake of its prurient appeal, such evidence is probative with respect to the nature of the matter and can justify the conclusion that
the matter is lacking in serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value.
c. In any prosecution for an offense under this section, evidence shall be admissible to show:
(1) The character of the audience for which the material was designed or to which it was directed;
(2) What the predominant appeal of the material would be for ordinary adults or a special audience, and what effect, if any, it would probably have
on the behavior of such people;
(3) The artistic, literary, scientific, educational or other merits of the material or absence thereof;
(4) The degree, if any, of public acceptance of the material in this state;
(5) Appeal to prurient interest, or absence thereof, in advertising or other promotion of the material;
(6) Purpose of the author, creator, publisher or disseminator.
4. Prima Facie Evidence: The creation, purchase, procurement or possession of a mold, engraved plate or other embodiment of obscenity specially
adapted for reproducing multiple copies, or the possession of more than three (3) copies of obscene material, shall be prima facie evidence of an
intent to disseminate.
5. Affirmative Defenses: It shall be an affirmative defense to obscenity that the dissemination:
a. Was not for gain and was made to personal associates other than children under eighteen (18) years of age.
b. Was to institutions or individuals having scientific or other special justification for possession of such material.
B. Harmful Material:
1. Elements Of The Offense: It shall be unlawful for a person who, with knowledge that a person is a child; that is, a child under eighteen (18) years of
age, or who fails to exercise reasonable care in ascertaining the true age of a child, knowingly distributes to or sends or causes to be sent to, or
exhibits to, or offers to distribute or exhibit any harmful material to such child. Such material includes, but is not limited to, the depiction of the
following:
a. "Nudity", meaning the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a full opaque covering, or the showing
of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any portion thereof below the top of the areola, or the depiction of covered male
genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
b. "Sadomasochistic abuse", meaning flagellation or torture by or upon a person clad in undergarments, a mask or bizarre costume, or the condition
of being fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained on the part of one so clothed.
c. "Sexual conduct", meaning acts of masturbation, excretory functions, homosexuality, sexual intercourse or physical contact with a person's clothed
or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks or, if such person be a female, breast, normal or perverted, actual or simulated.
d. "Sexual excitement", meaning the condition of human male or female genitals when in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
2. Definitions:
DISTRIBUTE: To transfer possession of, whether with or without consideration.
HARMFUL MATERIAL: Material is harmful if, to the average person applying contemporary standards, its predominant appeal, taken as a whole, is
to prurient interest, that is, a shameful or morbid interest in nudity, sex or excretion, which goes substantially beyond customary limits of candor in
description or representation of such matters and is material, the redeeming social importance of which is substantially less than its prurient appeal.
KNOWINGLY: Having knowledge of the contents of the subject matter, or recklessly failing to exercise reasonable inspection which would have
disclosed the contents thereof.
MATERIAL: Any writing, picture, record or other representation or embodiment.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 160/416
3. Interpretation Of Evidence:
a. The predominant appeal to prurient interest of the material shall be judged with reference to average children of the same general age of the child
to whom such material was offered, distributed, sent or exhibited, unless it appears from the nature of the matter or the circumstances of its
dissemination, distribution or exhibition that it is designed for specially susceptible groups, in which case the predominant appeal of the material
shall be judged with reference to its intended or probable recipient group.
b. In prosecutions under this section, where circumstances of production, presentation, sale, dissemination, distribution or publicity indicate the
material is being commercially exploited for the sake of its prurient appeal, such evidence is probative with respect to the nature of the material
and can justify the conclusion that the redeeming social importance of the material is in fact substantially less than its prurient appeal.
4. Affirmative Defenses:
a. Nothing in this section shall prohibit any public library or any library operated by an accredited institution of higher education from circulating
harmful material to any person under eighteen (18) years of age, provided such circulation is in aid of a legitimate scientific or educational purpose,
and it shall be an affirmative defense in any prosecution for a violation of this section that the act charged was committed in aid of legitimate
scientific or educational purposes.
b. Nothing in this section shall prohibit any parent from distributing to his child any harmful material.
5. Child Falsifying Age: It shall be unlawful for any person under eighteen (18) years of age to falsely state, either orally or in writing, that such person
is not under the age of eighteen (18) years, or who presents or offers to any person any evidence of age and identity which is false or not actually his
own for the purpose of ordering, obtaining, viewing, or otherwise procuring or attempting to procure or view any harmful material. (Ord. O-1-89, 4-10-
1989)
5-2-6: PROSTITUTION:
No person shall practice prostitution in the village. No person shall solicit on any street, alley or other public place in the village for the purpose of inducing
any person to engage in prostitution or any other unlawful sexual relations of any kind. (Village code § 20-20)
5-2-7: GAMBLING:
A. Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to place, make, accept, relay, deliver or pay any wager or bet on any sporting event or other competition.
B. Gambling Devices: Unless otherwise expressly permitted by the video gaming act2 and title 3, chapter 15 of this code, no person shall sell or possess
any gambling device or paraphernalia with the intent to use the same for an unlawful purpose, and any such device or paraphernalia possessed or sold
with such intent may be confiscated by the police department.
C. Advertising: It shall be unlawful for any person or licensee to post or display any advertisement which is visible to the public that advertises gaming
terminals are located at the licensed establishment. This prohibition includes temporary or permanent signage that may include a business name,
name, identification, description, display, illustration or attention getting device which is affixed to or painted or represented directly or indirectly upon a
building or other outdoor surface or lot, and which directs attention to a person, business, product, service, place, organization or entertainment. (Ord.
O-26-16, 10-24-2016)
5-2-8: CRIME FREE PROPERTY; CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY ABATEMENT:
A. Definitions: The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where
the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
CHIEF OF POLICE: The chief of police of the village of Forest Park or his/her designee.
CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY: Any property located within or upon which three (3) or more nuisance activities within a six (6) month period
have occurred as a result of any three (3) separate factual events that have been independently investigated and verified by any law enforcement
agency or code enforcement department or three (3) or more citations for offenses defined as nuisance activity within a six (6) month period, which
have been adjudicated and findings of liable or findings of guilty have been entered either by the village administrative hearing officer or a court of
competent jurisdiction.
CONTACT: Includes any communication made by a tenant, landlord, guest, neighbor, or other individual to police or other emergency services.
CONTROL: The ability to regulate, restrain, dominate, counteract, or govern conduct that occurs on that property either directly or by intervention of
any governmental authority.
DISABILITY: With respect to a person:
1. A physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more of such person's major life activities;
2. A record of having such an impairment; or
3. Being regarded as having such an impairment, but such term does not include current illegal use of, or addiction to, a controlled substance, as
defined in the federal controlled substance act, 21 USC 802.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 161/416
DOMESTIC VIOLENCE: Physical abuse, harassment, intimidation of a dependent, interference with personal liberty or wilful deprivation, but does
not include reasonable direction of a minor child by a parent or person in loco parentis.
DWELLING UNIT: A room or suite of rooms used for human habitation and for which a lessor and a lessee have a lease agreement, either written or
oral.
LANDLORD: The owner of a building or the owner's agent with regard to matters concerning landlord's leasing of a dwelling.
NUISANCE ACTIVITIES: Any of the following building code or property maintenance code violations, criminal activities, behaviors, or conduct, as
defined by federal or state law, or village of Forest Park ordinance:
1. Disorderly conduct as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/26-1 or section 5-2-3 of this chapter.
2. Unlawful use of weapons as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/24-1 et seq.
3. Mob action as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/25-1.
4. Discharge of a firearm as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/24-1.2 and 1.5 or section 5-2-13 of this chapter.
5. Gambling as defined by 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/28-1 or section 5-2-7 of this chapter.
6. Possession, manufacture, or delivery of controlled substances as defined by 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 570/401 et seq.
7. Public indecency as defined by 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-9.
8. Assault or battery or any related offense as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12-1 et seq., or any violation of section 5-2-1 of this
chapter.
9. Sexual abuse or related offense as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12-15 et seq.
10. Prostitution as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-14 et seq., or section 5-2-6 of this chapter.
11. Criminal damage to property as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-1 et seq.
12. Possession, cultivation, manufacture, or delivery of cannabis as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/1 et seq.
13. Illegal consumption or possession of alcohol as defined in 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1 et seq.
14. Criminal housing management defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12-5.1.
15. Structure unfit for human occupancy or unsafe structure as defined in the BOCA national building code or BOCA national property
maintenance code as adopted by section 8-1-1 of this code.
16. Unlawful structure as defined in the BOCA national building code or BOCA national property maintenance code as adopted by section 8-1-1 of
this code.
17. Three (3) or more separate violations of the village's property maintenance code continuing after disposition of a finding of guilty by the circuit
court of Cook County for those violations, or similar finding of liability by the village administrative hearing officer.
OWNER: Any person, partnership, land trust, or corporation having any legal or equitable interest in the property. Owner includes, but is not limited
to:
1. A mortgagee in possession in whom is vested:
a. All or part of the legal title to the property.
b. All or part of the beneficial ownership and the rights to the present use and enjoyment of the premises.
2. An occupant who can control what occurs on the property.
3. Any person acting as an agent of an owner as defined herein.
PERMIT: To suffer, allow, consent to, acquiesce by failure to prevent, or attempt to prevent, or expressly assent or agree to the doing of an act.
PERSON: Any natural person, association, partnership, corporation, or other entity capable of owning, occupying, or using property in the village.
PERSON IN CHARGE: Any person in actual or constructive possession of a property, including, but not limited to, an owner, property manager,
tenant or occupant of the property in question under his or her ownership or control.
PROPERTY: Any real property, including its land and that which is affixed, incidental, or pertinent to land, including, but not limited to, any premises,
room, house, building, or structure, or any separate part or portion thereof, whether or not occupied or leased for residential purposes, owned, leased
or used for commercial purposes, whether under written or oral agreement, whether permitted or not.
SEXUAL VIOLENCE: Has the meaning provided under section 10 of the safe homes act 765 Illinois Compiled Statutes 750/10.
TENANT: A person who has entered into an oral or written lease with a landlord whereby the person is the lessee under the lease.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 162/416
VILLAGE: The village of Forest Park, Cook County, Illinois.
VILLAGE CODE: The municipal code of ordinances of the village of Forest Park, including all codes adopted by specific reference. (Ord. O-66-09,
11-9-2009; amd. Ord. O-32-15, 11-9-2015)
B. Violation:
1. Chronic nuisance property is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
2. It shall be unlawful for any property within the village to become or remain a chronic nuisance property in violation of this section.
3. It shall be unlawful for any property owner, manager(s) or person(s) in charge, or tenant in possession to:
a. Encourage, aid, abet or permit a property to become a chronic nuisance property; or
b. Allow a property to continue as a chronic nuisance property after receipt of notice to abate the nuisance activity.
4. Each day that a violation of this section continues shall be considered a separate and distinct offense.
C. Procedure: Whenever the chief of police of the village receives one or more police reports documenting the occurrence of a nuisance activity, as herein
defined, on or within a property, the chief of police shall independently review such reports and any other relevant facts or evidence to determine
whether criminal activity, nuisance activity or other prohibited conduct as provided in this section has occurred at the property in question. Upon a
finding that the complained of activity has occurred, the chief of police may:
1. Notify the owner(s), manager(s), person(s) in charge, or tenant in possession, in the event of property leased, in writing, that the property is in
danger of becoming a chronic nuisance property. The notice shall contain the following information:
a. The street address or legal description sufficient for identification of the property.
b. A statement that the Forest Park police department has information that the property may be a chronic nuisance property, with a concise
description of the criminal or nuisance activity(ies) that may exist or that has occurred.
c. Service of notice shall be provided by either personal delivery or by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, addressed to the
owner, person(s) in charge or tenant in possession at the address of the property believed to be a chronic nuisance property, or such other place
which is likely to give the owner, person(s) in charge or tenant in possession notice of the determination by the chief of police.
d. A copy of the notice shall also be served on the taxpayer of record at such address as shown on the tax rolls of the county and/or the occupant, at
the address of the property, if these persons are different from the person in charge, and shall be made either personally or by first class mail,
postage prepaid.
e. The notice shall contain a statement that the chief of police has investigated and has cause to believe that the property constitutes a chronic
nuisance or is in danger of becoming a chronic nuisance as defined by this section.
D. Procedure For Addressing Potential Nuisance Property:
1. After independent review of any police reports, department of code enforcement or building department inspection reports or any other relevant
facts, evidence or village data, and determination by the chief of police that the activity described therein as occurring upon the property meets the
definition of nuisance activity on at least two (2) separate occasions within a twelve (12) month period, and that the owner, tenant or person(s) in
control permitted the property to become a potential chronic nuisance property, the chief of police shall require that the owner, manager(s) or other
persons in charge of the property and person(s) in charge, tenant(s) in possession thereof or other designee meet with the chief of police to discuss
the nuisance activity and steps the owner, manager(s), person(s) in charge or tenant(s) in the event of leased property can take to mitigate or abate
the activity prior to a third verified incident of nuisance activity, in accordance with the following procedure:
a. The chief of police shall notify the owner, manager(s), person(s) in charge, tenant or any local property manager, in the event the property is
leased property, in writing, that the property is a potential chronic nuisance property. Such notice shall be provided by either personal delivery or by
certified mail, return receipt requested. The notice shall contain the following information:
(1) The street address or a legal description sufficient for identification of the potential nuisance property.
(2) A statement that the chief of police has information that the property constitutes a potential "chronic nuisance property" as defined by this
section, with a concise description of the criminal activity(ies) or nuisance activity(ies) that may exist, or that have occurred that the chief of
police believes may classify the property as a potential chronic nuisance property.
(3) Demand that the owner, manager(s) or person(s) in charge or his or her or its property manager or tenant in the event the property is a leased
property or other designee respond and meet with the chief of police within twenty (20) days of receipt of the notice. Refusal of receipt of the
notice by any party to whom notice is sent shall be deemed receipt of the notice for purposes of this section.
b. At the meeting between the chief of police or his/her designee and the parties notified, the chief of police may request that the owner, manager(s),
person(s) in charge or his or her or its tenant(s) and/or property manager, in the case of residential rental property, implement a reasonable
abatement plan designed to alleviate and prevent future occurrences of criminal activity or nuisance activity upon the property. The mitigation or
abatement plan shall be reasonable under the circumstances in its objective, cost and scope, and shall be implemented within sixty (60) days of
the meeting with the chief of police or such longer period if not practically feasible to do so within sixty (60) days.
If the criminal activity or nuisance activity complained of has or is being conducted by a tenant leasing in or on the property, and such activity is a
violation of the material terms of a lease agreement, the chief of police may request that the owner evict the tenant and further request that future
tenants execute a "crime free lease addendum". If eviction is requested, the owner shall proceed with such an action in good faith. The village
shall assist in the eviction action by reasonably cooperating with the owner, manager(s) or person(s) in charge of the property, including, but not
limited to, providing law enforcement officers or other municipal employees as witnesses regarding the nuisance activity if relevant.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 163/416
2. If, after complying with the procedures of subsection D1b of this section, within six (6) months from the date of the first confirmed case of criminal
activity or nuisance activity after the meeting, the chief of police receives a report documenting the occurrence of a third instance of criminal activity
or nuisance activity upon the property, the property may be declared a chronic nuisance property.
3. It shall be a violation of this section for:
a. The owner, manager(s), person(s) in charge of the property, or tenant, if the property in question is a leased property, within sixty (60) days of the
meeting or such other reasonable amount of time under the circumstances, to fail to cause the implementation of a reasonable mitigation or
abatement plan as requested by the chief of police, or
b. Any person or persons so notified to fail to respond and meet with the chief of police within the twenty (20) day period without good cause shown.
4. When any party affected by this section responds and meets with the chief of police as required above, no statements made in connection with the
furnishing of that response or in a meeting shall constitute or be used in any judicial or quasi-judicial proceeding as an admission that any nuisance
activity has or is occurring at or on the property. This subsection D4 does not require the exclusion of any other evidence which is otherwise
admissible and offered for any other purpose than an admission by a person affected by this section.
E. Abatement; Administrative Hearing:
1. At any hearing before the village administrative hearing officer to determine whether the property in question is a chronic nuisance property, which
hearing shall be conducted pursuant to the provisions of section 1-6D-1 of this code, the village shall have the initial burden of proof to show, by a
preponderance of evidence, that the property in question is a chronic nuisance property. Notice of the hearing shall be provided to all persons or
entities that may be adversely affected by a decision declaring the property to be a chronic nuisance property.
2. The village's representative shall present evidence in support of its claim that the property is a chronic nuisance property. The property owner,
manager(s) or tenant(s) in possession if a leased property, or person(s) in charge or the person in charge's local representative or attorney on behalf
of the responding party shall be permitted to rebut such evidence.
No continuances shall be authorized by the administrative hearing officer in proceedings under this section unless for good cause shown or except
where a continuance is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of any party to the proceeding. Lack of preparedness shall not be grounds for a
continuance.
At any time prior to the hearing date, the administrative hearing officer may, at the request of either party(ies), direct witnesses to appear and give
testimony at the hearing. The formal rules of evidence will not apply at the hearing and hearsay evidence including police reports shall be admissible
only if it is the type commonly relied upon by reasonable, prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs.
3. At the conclusion of the hearing, the administrative hearing officer shall make a determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the hearing,
whether or not a violation(s) exists or existed and whether or not the property is a chronic nuisance property. The determination shall be in writing
and shall be designated as the findings, decision, and order. The administrative hearing officer's decision shall be final and binding, except that the
provisions of the Illinois administrative review law shall apply with respect to judicial review of the administrative hearing officer's findings, decision
and order. The findings, decision, and order shall include the administrative hearing officer's findings of fact, a decision whether or not a violation(s)
exists, a determination as to whether the property in question is or is not a chronic nuisance property based upon the findings of fact, and a monetary
fine or other appropriate sanction imposed against the person(s) in charge/manager(s)/owner(s)/tenant(s) or occupant(s), as specified in subsection
E4 of this section, or dismissing the case in the event a violation is not proved. A copy of the findings, decision, and order shall be served upon the
person in charge, owner, or tenant or occupant, within fourteen (14) business days of the date of the hearing.
4. If the administrative hearing officer makes a finding that a property was, or is, a chronic nuisance property, the administrative hearing officer may fine
the manager(s), person(s) in charge and/or the owner, tenant or occupant of the property if those persons are different from the manager(s) or
person(s) in charge of the property, an amount not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each violation of this section. Each day a
nuisance activity occurs or continues shall be considered a separate and distinct violation for purposes of determining a property to be a chronic
nuisance property. The administrative hearing officer may, in his or her discretion, impose such a fine for each day the nuisance activity goes
unabated. No person shall be found in violation of this section unless the village proves the violation by a preponderance of the evidence.
F. Alternative Enforcement:
1. Nuisance Abatement: The village, as an alternative to administrative adjudication, may commence an action in the circuit court of Cook County
fourth municipal district or chancery division of the circuit court of Cook County for a determination that the property is a chronic nuisance property
and/or to abate a chronic nuisance property.
Upon being satisfied by affidavits or other sworn evidence that an alleged chronic nuisance property exists, the court may, without notice or bond,
enter a temporary restraining order or a preliminary injunction or permanent injunction to enjoin any defendant from maintaining such chronic
nuisance property and may enter an order restraining any defendant named from occupying, using or interfering with all property used in connection
with the chronic nuisance property.
2. Commencement Of Action, Burden Of Proof:
a. In an action seeking closure of a chronic nuisance property, the village shall have the initial burden of showing by a preponderance of the evidence
that the property is a chronic nuisance property.
b. It shall be an affirmative defense by the property owner of rental or leased property to an action seeking the closure of a chronic nuisance property
that the owner of the property, manager(s) or person(s) in charge, at the time in question, could not, in the exercise of reasonable care or
diligence, determine that the property had become a chronic nuisance property, or could not, in spite of the exercise of reasonable care and
diligence, control the conduct of tenants or others in possession leading to the findings that the property is a chronic nuisance property.
c. In establishing the amount of any civil penalty or other relief requested, the court may consider any of the following factors if they are found
appropriate, and shall cite those found applicable:
(1) The actions or lack of action taken by the owner or person(s) in charge to mitigate or correct the nuisance activity at the property.
(2) Whether the criminal activity or nuisance activity at the property was repeated or continuous.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 164/416
(3) The magnitude or gravity of the criminal activity or nuisance activity at the property.
(4) The cooperation of the owner or person(s) in charge of the property with the village to correct the offending condition or abate the nuisance.
(5) Whether the property owner, in the event of rental or leased property, has required the tenant(s) to sign a "crime free lease addendum".
(6) The cost to the village of investigating and correcting or attempting to correct the condition.
3. Remedy:
a. In the event a court determines a property to be a chronic nuisance property, the court may order that the property be closed and secured against
all use and occupancy for a period of not less than thirty (30) days, but not more than one hundred eighty (180) days or until the nuisance
activity(ies) or violation(s) complained of is abated or the court may employ any other remedy deemed by it appropriate to abate the nuisance.
b. In addition to the remedy provided in subsection F3a of this section, the court may impose upon the owner, manager(s), person(s) in charge
and/or tenant(s) or occupant(s) of the property in question a civil penalty in an amount not to exceed the sum of seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) per day, payable to the village of Forest Park, for each day the owner, person(s) in charge and/or tenant(s) or occupant(s) had actual
knowledge that the property was a chronic nuisance property and permitted the property to remain a chronic nuisance property.
c. In determining what remedy or remedies to employ, the court may consider evidence of other conduct which has occurred on the property,
including, but not limited to:
(1) The disturbance of neighbors;
(2) The occurrence of other criminal activity or nuisances at, on or from the property;
(3) The property's general reputation and/or the reputation of persons in or frequenting the property;
(4) Physical damage to the property in question or surrounding properties;
(5) The hazard posed to any occupant of the property or adjoining property owner resulting from the physical condition of the property in question
or its structures.
d. The court may authorize the village to physically secure the property against use or occupancy in the event the owner fails to do so within the time
specified by the court. In the event that the village is authorized to secure the property, all costs reasonably incurred by the village to effect the
closure shall be made and assessed as a lien against the property and debt to the village. As used herein, "costs" mean those costs actually
incurred by the village for the physical securing of the property.
e. The village building department or code enforcement department employee effecting the closure shall prepare a statement of costs, and the
village shall thereafter submit said statement to the court for its review. If no objection of the statement is made within the period described by the
court, a lien in said amount may be recorded against said property.
f. Any person who is assessed the cost of closure and/or civil penalty by the court shall be personally liable for the payment thereof to the village.
G. Chronic Nuisance Located At Multi-Unit Rental Residential Property:
1. In the event any chronic nuisance property is a multi-unit rental residential property, any order entered by the court to abate the nuisance or
otherwise vacate the property shall, in the discretion of the court, be limited in scope as to apply only to the individual rental unit or person(s) in
charge or tenant(s) or occupants of that unit forming the basis for the finding that the property is a chronic nuisance property. (Ord. O-66-09, 11-9-
2009)
H. Affirmative Defense:
1. It shall be an affirmative defense to nuisance activities available to landlords or tenants, based solely on:
a. Contact made to police or other emergency services, if: 1) the contact was made with the intent to prevent or respond to domestic violence, or
sexual violence; 2) the intervention or emergency assistance was needed to respond to or prevent domestic violence or sexual violence; or 3) the
contact was made by, on behalf of, or otherwise concerns an individual with a disability and the purpose of the contact was related to that
individual's disability;
b. An incident or incidents of actual or threatened domestic violence or sexual violence against a tenant, household member, or guest occurring in
the dwelling unit or on the premises; or
c. Nuisance activities occurring in the dwelling unit or on the premises that is directly relating to domestic violence, dating violence, sexual violence,
engaged in by a member of a tenant's or lessee's household or any guest or other person under the tenant's, lessee's or household member's
control, and against the tenant, lessee, or household member.
d. It shall be an affirmative defense by the property owner of rental or leased property to an action seeking the closure of a chronic nuisance property
that the owner of the property, manager(s) or person(s) in charge, at the time in question, could not, in the exercise of reasonable care or
diligence, determine that the property had become a chronic nuisance property, or could not, in spite of the exercise of reasonable care and
diligence, control the conduct of tenants or others in possession leading to the findings that the property is a chronic nuisance property, or could
not, in spite of the exercise of reasonable care and diligence, obtain an order for possession of the property, pursuant to the provisions of the
forcible entry and detainer act3.
2. Nothing with respect to this section:
a. Limits enforcement pursuant to 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 750/15.2 against any person calling the number "911" for the purpose of making a
false alarm or complaint and reporting false information, from being charged with disorderly conduct as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/26-1 or a similar ordinance of this code; or
b. Prohibits claims made pursuant to 735 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/9-1 et seq., of the forcible entry and detainer statute, except where the tenant,
lessee, or household member who was the victim of domestic violence, sexual violence, stalking, or dating violence did not knowingly consent to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 165/416
the barred person entering the premises or a valid court order permitted the barred person's entry onto the premises; or
c. Prohibits the village from enacting or enforcing ordinances to impose penalties on the basis of the underlying criminal activity or local ordinance
violation not covered by subsection H1 of this section and to the extent otherwise permitted by existing state and federal law; or
d. Shall prevent the landlord or village from seeking possession solely against a tenant, household member, or lessee of the premises who
perpetrated the domestic violence, sexual violence, or other criminal activity; or
e. Shall prevent the landlord or village from seeking possession against a tenant, lessee or household member who is a victim of domestic violence,
dating violence and stalking, sexual violence, or has a disability, if that tenant, lessee, or household member has committed the nuisance activity
on which the demand for possession is based.
f. A landlord shall have the power to bar the presence of a person from the premises owned by the landlord who is not a tenant or lessee or who is
not a member of the tenant's or lessee's household. A landlord bars a person from the premises by providing written notice to the tenant or lessee
that the person is no longer allowed on the premises. That notice shall state that if the tenant invites the barred person onto any portion of the
premises, then the landlord may treat this as a breach of the lease, whether or not this provision is contained in the lease. Subject to subsection
H2b of this section, the landlord may evict the tenant.
g. Further, a landlord may give notice to a person that the person is barred from the premises owned by the landlord. A person has received notice
from the landlord within the meaning of this subsection if he has been notified personally, either orally or in writing including a valid court order of
protection, as defined by subsection (7) of 725 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/112A-3 of the code of criminal procedure of 1963, granting exclusive
possession as the remedy (2) of subsection (b) of 725 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/112A-14 of that code, or if a printed or written notice forbidding
such entry has been conspicuously posted or exhibited at the main entrance to such land or the forbidden part thereof. Any person entering the
landlord's premises after such notice has been given shall be guilty of criminal trespass to real property as set forth in 720 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/21-3 of the criminal code of 2012, or a similar ordinance of this code. After notice has been given, an invitation to the person to enter the
premises shall be void if made by a tenant, lessee, or member of the tenant's or lessee's household and shall not constitute a valid invitation to
come upon the premises or a defense to a criminal trespass to real property. (Ord. O-32-15, 11-9-2015)
5-2-9: OFFENSES RELATING TO PROPERTY:
A. Posting Bills Or Circulars: No person shall post, distribute, cast, throw, place or spread or cause to be posted, distributed, cast, thrown, placed or spread
in or upon or along any public way in the village any handbill, pamphlet, circular or advertisement of any kind. (Village code § 20-18)
B. Prohibited Uses In Public Parks:
1. South park (16th Street and Circle Avenue):
a. No bicycle riding.
b. No pets allowed.
c. No littering.
d. Playground equipment limited to children under thirteen (13) years of age.
e. No hardball playing by children over ten (10) years of age.
f. No entry or presence allowed between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M.
2. North park (Randolph Street and Circle Avenue and the tot lot on the east and west sides of Circle Avenue at Lehmer Street):
a. No bicycle riding.
b. No pets allowed.
c. Playground equipment limited to children under thirteen (13) years of age.
d. No hardball playing.
e. No entry or presence allowed between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. (Ord. O-7-76, 5-8-1976)
C. Railroads At Street Crossings: No person shall cause or allow any locomotive, engine, car or train of cars to stop in or obstruct any street crossing
within the village for more than ten (10) minutes. (Village code § 20-21)
D. Trailer Camps And House Trailers Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or operate any trailer camp or house trailer intended for
human habitation within the village. (Village code § 20-22)
E. Trespassing: A person commits trespass when he knowingly:
1. Enters the property, or any part thereof, of another, when, immediately prior to such entry, he receives notice, either oral or written, from the owner or
occupant that such entry is forbidden; or
2. Remains upon the property, or any part thereof, of another after receiving notice, either oral or written, from the owner or occupant to depart; or
3. Enters upon property open to the public, or any part thereof, and remains thereon with a malicious and mischievous intent after receiving notice,
either oral or written, from the owner or occupant to depart. (Ord. O-26-68, 5-13-1968)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 166/416
F. Damage To Village Property: No person shall negligently or wilfully damage, break, destroy or injure in any manner whatsoever any property belonging
to the village. (Village code § 20-24)
5-2-10: VANDALISM:
A. Prohibited Act: It shall be unlawful for any person to commit an act of vandalism within the village limits.
B. Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply:
ACT OF VANDALISM: Includes any of the following:
1. Wilfully, maliciously or knowingly causing destruction, injury, disfigurement or defacement of any public or private property, including, but not
limited to, placement thereon of any inscriptions, symbols, words or phrases, drawing or paintings, commonly referred to as graffiti, by means of
brushed or spray paint, tar, acid, grease, oil or other such substances, or to cutting, ripping, tearing or breaking any of said property without the
prior consent of the owner or person having custody of said property;
2. Wilfully, maliciously or knowingly causing an explosion or fire on any public or private property, without the prior consent of the owner or person
having custody of said property; and
3. Wilfully, maliciously or knowingly placing on any public or private property without the prior consent of the owner or person having custody
thereof any compound having an offensive odor or emitting smoke, thereby interfering with the use and occupancy of any building located on said
property.
LEGAL GUARDIAN: Includes a foster parent or a person appointed guardian of a person or given custody of a minor by court order, but shall not
include a person appointed guardian only of the estate of a minor, or appointed guardian or given custody of a minor under the Illinois juvenile court
act4.
MINOR: Includes a person who is not yet eighteen (18) years of age.
PARENT: Includes the lawful father and mother of a minor child, whether by birth or adoption.
PERSON: Includes any individual, partnership, corporation or organization of any kind.
PROPERTY: Includes any real estate, together with any building, fence, tree, shrub, plant or other improvements thereon, and any tangible
personalty.
C. Restitution: Any person found guilty of an act of vandalism under this section may be required, in lieu of or in addition to the payment of a fine as
provided in this section, to make full restitution for all resultant damages, to the victim or victims of such vandalism, by monetary payment or property
repairs.
D. Parental Notice And Responsibility:
1. In the case of a minor person who is accused of violating any of the provisions of this section and who is residing with a parent or guardian at the
time of such purported violation, the police department shall, within three (3) days thereof, notify such parent or guardian, in writing, either personally
or by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, that such minor has been accused of vandalism.
2. The parents or legal guardians of any unemancipated minor person who is above the age of eleven (11) years and who is found guilty of a wilful or
malicious act of vandalism under this section may be required to provide restitution of all resultant damages to the victim or victims of such act of
vandalism but only to the monetary extent otherwise provided by the parental responsibility law of the state of Illinois then in force and effect.
E. Duty To Restore Property: It shall be the duty of the owner or person having custody of property which has been subjected to an act of vandalism,
resulting in the placement thereof of any inscriptions, symbols, words or phrases, drawings or paintings, commonly referred to as graffiti, to remove the
same or otherwise restore the property to its condition prior to the act of vandalism. Failure by such owner or person to remove the graffiti or otherwise
restore the property within ten (10) days after service upon such owner or person of written notice to do so by the police department, either personally
or by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, shall be deemed a violation of this section. (Ord. O-10-93, 6-28-1993)
F. Penalty: Any person violating any provision of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined as
provided in the general penalty in section 1-3-1 of this code. (Ord. O-10-93, 6-28-1993; amd. 2004 Code)
5-2-11: FIRES; OPEN BURNING:
A. It shall be unlawful to build or light any fire on any public street, sidewalk, pavement or other public place, or so as to endanger any building or structure
within the village.
B. Use of outdoor barbecue grills, manufactured outdoor fireplaces, campfires, fire containers or other similar devices are prohibited on any porch, balcony
or deck with the following exceptions:
1. LP-gas or natural gas fueled appliances shall be allowed on freestanding or affixed decks in single-family residences where the following clearances
from the appliances are observed: thirty six inches (36") on the sides and rear and forty eight inches (48") in front in residential areas; no appliance of
any kind shall be allowed on any deck with overhanging structures such as roofs, balconies, trellises, etc.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 167/416
2. LP-gas or natural fueled LP-gas or natural gas fueled appliances shall be allowed on affixed decks in multiple-family residences (not to exceed 3
dwelling units), provided the above clearances are observed and the required means of ingress and egress is not obstructed.
C. Permits are required for the installation of outdoor natural gas fueled appliances.
D. The use of manufactured open fireplaces, campfires, fire containers or other similar devices is prohibited on any porch, balcony or deck.
1. Use of such manufactured open fireplaces, campfires or other similar devices shall be permitted in residential areas provided the following
clearances are observed: fifteen feet (15') from any combustible structure.
2. Only charcoal and/or wood may be used in manufactured fireplaces, campfires, fire containers or other similar devices.
3. A means of extinguishment must be present during the use of manufactured fireplaces, campfires, fire containers or other similar devices such as a
fire extinguisher or a garden hose connected to a reliable water source.
4. A metal lid must be available for covering the container when not in use.
5. Open fireplaces, campfires, fire containers or other similar devices must be attended by an adult at all times when they are in use.
E. Smoke produced by barbecue grills and/or open fireplaces, campfires, fire containers or other similar devices must not be a nuisance to any neighbor.
(Ord. O-32-02, 6-10-2002)
5-2-12: UNINVITED SOLICITING:
A. Uninvited Soliciting: No person shall go upon the premises of another for the purpose of soliciting orders; selling or peddling without the consent or
invitation of the owner or occupant of the premises. (Village Code § 20-19)
5-2-13: WEAPONS5:
A. Discharging Firearms: It shall be unlawful to discharge firearms or air guns in the village; provided that this section shall not be construed to prohibit any
officer of the law from discharging a firearm in the discharge of his duty, nor to any citizen from discharging a firearm when lawfully defending his
person or property. (Village Code § 20-6)
B. Concealed Classifications: It shall be unlawful for any person in the village to sell, give away, transfer or deliver any revolver, pistol, handgun or firearm
that may be concealed upon a person, to anyone who is not a:
1. U.S. marshall; or
2. Federal official required to carry firearms while engaged in the official operation of their duties; or
3. Law enforcement official of Forest Park or any other governmental jurisdiction; or
4. Licensed private detective; (Ord. O-22-77, 9-26-1977)
5. Licensed firearms distributor; (Ord. O-3-78, 2-27-1978)
6. Special agents employed by a railroad or public utility to perform police functions;
7. Watchmen employed by persons, firms or corporations to protect lives of persons and property;
8. Security guards licensed by a licensed detective agency as defined by the private detective, private alarm, private security and locksmith act6;
9. Any person regularly employed in a commercial or industrial operation for the protection of persons and property relating to such commercial and
industrial operation and who are members of a security force of thirty (30) persons or more registered with the department of professional regulation,
provided that such person has completed a course of study approved and supervised by the department of professional regulation consisting of not
less than thirty (30) hours of training in law enforcement and liability for the acts and the handling of weapons. (Ord. O-21-79, 10-22-1979)
A violation of this section shall subject the offender to be fined as provided in the general penalty in section 1-3-1 of this code. (Ord. O-21-79, 10-22-
1979; amd. 2004 Code)
5-2-14: FIREWORKS AND EXPLOSIVES:
No person shall sell, keep, expose for sale, loan, give away, be possessed of, or discharge anywhere in the village any toy pistol, toy gun, toy cannon,
blank cartridge, fireworks, firecrackers, torpedoes, bombs, squibs, rockets, spin wheels, fire balloons, Roman candles, detonating canes, ammunition, or
any substance or articles of an explosive nature designed or intended to be used as fireworks; provided, however, that the council may issue a permit for
consumer fireworks displays and for pyrotechnic displays, as such terms are defined in the fireworks use act7 and the pyrotechnic distributor and operator
licensing act8, as further designated hereinafter.
A. Pyrotechnic Displays: Pyrotechnic displays shall be permitted in the village of Forest Park only on public property owned and operated by the Forest
Park park district. No indoor pyrotechnic display shall be permitted in the village of Forest Park. No pyrotechnic displays shall be permitted unless the
park district or its agent has obtained a pyrotechnic display permit from the village of Forest Park. No such pyrotechnic display permit shall be issued
by the village of Forest Park unless the applicant meets the following minimum requirements:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 168/416
1. The applicant must submit a written application for a village permit at least fifteen (15) days in advance of the date of the pyrotechnic display.
2. The pyrotechnic display service must be provided by a licensed pyrotechnic distributor, and the display must be conducted by a licensed lead
pyrotechnic operator.
3. The applicant must provide proof of liability insurance in a sum not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) with an insurance company
authorized to do business in Illinois.
4. The fire chief of the village, or his/her designee, must inspect the display site and ensure that the display can be performed in full compliance with
the NFPA standards adopted and amended by the office of the state fire marshal, in its rules, part 235, for the type of pyrotechnic display to be
performed. The fire chief shall be required to sign the village display permit, prior to its issuance.
Such village pyrotechnic display permits shall not be transferable to another person or entity.
B. Consumer Fireworks Displays Prohibited: No consumer fireworks display shall be permitted in the village of Forest Park, unless otherwise conducted
pursuant to subsection A of this section, which regulates pyrotechnic displays. (Ord. O-31-06, 5-22-2006)
5-2-15: RETAIL THEFT:
A. A person commits the offense of retail theft, which shall be a violation of this code, when he or she knowingly:
1. Takes possession of, carries away, transfers or causes to be carried away or transferred, any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale
in a retail mercantile establishment with the intention of retaining such merchandise or with the intention of depriving the merchant permanently of the
possession, use or benefit of such merchandise without paying the full retail value of such merchandise; or
2. Alters, transfers, or removes any label, price tag, marking, indicia of value or any other markings which aid in determining value affixed any
merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale, in a retail mercantile establishment and attempts to purchase such merchandise personally
or in consort with another at less than the full retail value with the intention of depriving the merchant the full retail value of such merchandise; or
3. Transfers any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale, in a retail mercantile establishment from the container in or on which such
merchandise is displayed to any other container with the intention of depriving the merchant of the full retail value of such merchandise; or
4. Under rings with the intention of depriving the merchant of the full retail value of the merchandise; or
5. Removes a shopping cart from the premises of a retail mercantile establishment without the consent of the merchant given at the time of such
removal with the intention of depriving the merchant permanently of possession, use or benefit of such cart; or
6. Represents to a merchant that he or another is the lawful owner of property, knowing that such representation is false, and conveys or attempts to
convey that property to a merchant who is the owner of the property in exchange for money, merchandise credit or other property of the merchant; or
7. Uses or possesses any theft detection shielding device or theft detection device remover with the intention of using such device to deprive the
merchant permanently of the possession, use or benefit of any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale in a retail mercantile
establishment without paying the full retail value of such merchandise; or
8. Obtains or exerts unauthorized control over property of the owner and thereby intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or benefit of the
property when a lessee of the personal property of another fails to return it to the owner, or if the lessee fails to pay the full retail value of such
property to the lessor in satisfaction of any contractual provision requiring such, within ten (10) days after written demand from the owner for its
return. A notice in writing, given after the expiration of the leasing agreement, by registered mail, to the lessee at the address given by the lessee and
shown on the leasing agreement shall constitute proper demand.
B. If any person:
1. Conceals upon his or her person or among his or her belongings, unpurchased merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale in a retail
mercantile establishment; and
2. Removes that merchandise beyond the last known station for receiving payments for that merchandise in that retail mercantile establishment such
person shall be presumed to have possessed, carried away or transferred such merchandise with the intention of retaining it or with the intention of
depriving the merchant permanently of the possession, use or benefit of such merchandise without paying the full retail value of such merchandise.
C. The words and phrases defined in sections 16A-2.1 through 16A-2.13 of article 16A entitled "retail theft" of 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/16A et seq.,
shall be applicable to the provisions of this section. (Ord. O-36-05, 7-26-2005)
5-2-16: POSSESSION OF CANNABIS AND CANNABIS PARAPHERNALIA:
A. Cannabis Defined: "Cannabis" includes marijuana, hashish and other substances which are identified as including any part of the plant Cannabis sativa,
whether growing or not; the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of such plant; and any compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or
preparation of such plant, its seeds or resin, including tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and all other cannabinol derivatives, including its naturally occurring
or synthetically produced ingredients, whether produced directly or indirectly by extraction, or independently by means of chemical synthesis or by a
combination of extraction and chemical synthesis; but shall not include the mature stalks of such plant, fiber produced from such stalks, oil or cake
made from the seeds of such plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of such mature stalks (except the resin
extracted therefrom), fiber, oil or cake or the sterilized seed of such plant which is incapable of germination.
B. Violation: It shall be a violation of this section for any person knowingly to possess any quantity of any substance containing cannabis, except that the
effect of this section shall be limited to persons knowingly possessing less than thirty (30) grams of any substance containing cannabis.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 169/416
C. Cannabis Paraphernalia Defined: "Cannabis paraphernalia" means all equipment, products and materials of any kind which are intended to be used
unlawfully in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing,
analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body cannabis
in violation of the cannabis control act9. It includes, but is not limited to:
1. Kits intended to be used unlawfully in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing cannabis;
2. Isomerization devices intended to be used unlawfully in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is cannabis;
3. Testing intended to be used unlawfully for identifying or analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of cannabis;
4. Diluents and adulterants intended to be used unlawfully for cutting cannabis or a controlled substance by private persons;
5. Objects intended to be used unlawfully in inhaling, or otherwise introducing cannabis, hashish, or hashish oil into the human body including, where
applicable, the following items:
a. Water pipes;
b. Carburetion tubes and devices;
c. Smoking and carburetion masks;
d. Carburetor pipes;
e. Electric pipes;
f. Air driven pipes;
g. Chillums;
h. Bongs;
i. Ice pipes or chillers;
6. Any item whose purpose, as announced or described by the seller, is for use in violation of this section.
D. Possession Of Paraphernalia Related To The Use Of Cannabis:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly possess an item of cannabis paraphernalia with the intent to use it in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise
introducing cannabis into the human body, or in preparing cannabis substance for that use.
2. In determining the intent under this section, the trier of fact may take into consideration the proximity of the cannabis to the cannabis paraphernalia
or the presence of cannabis on the cannabis paraphernalia.
E. Exempt Items; Determination:
1. Items marketed for the use in the preparation, compounding, packaging, labeling, or other use of cannabis as an incident to lawful research,
teaching, or chemical analysis and not for sale; or
2. Items marketed for, or historically and customarily used in connection with the planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting,
ingesting, or inhaling of tobacco or any other lawful substance.
3. Items exempt under this subsection include, but are not limited to, garden hoes, rakes, sickles, baggies, tobacco pipes, and cigarette rolling papers.
4. Items listed in subsection C of this section which are marketed for decorative purposes, when such items have been rendered completely inoperable
or incapable of being used for any illicit purpose prohibited by this section.
5. In determining whether or not a particular item is exempt under this subsection, the trier of fact should consider, in addition to all logically relevant
factors, the following:
a. The general, usual, customary, and historical use to which the item involved has been put;
b. Expert evidence concerning the ordinary or customary use of the item and the effect of any peculiarity in the design or engineering of the device
upon its functioning;
c. Any written instructions accompanying the delivery of the item concerning the purpose or uses to which the item can or may be put;
d. Any oral instructions provided by the seller of the item at the time and place of sale or commercial delivery;
e. Any national or local advertising concerning the design, purpose or use of the item involved and the entire context in which such advertising
occurs;
f. The manner, place and circumstances in which the item was displayed for sale, as well as any item or items displayed for sale or otherwise
exhibited upon the premises where the sale was made;
g. Whether the owner or anyone in control of the object is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a licensed distributor
or dealer of tobacco products;
h. The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the community.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 170/416
F. All Cannabis Paraphernalia Subject To Forfeiture: Any cannabis paraphernalia that is subject of a violation of this section shall be subject to seizure and
subject to forfeiture upon a finding of guilty of any person for a violation of this section. Upon appropriate order of court, said cannabis paraphernalia
shall be destroyed. (Ord. O-36-05, 7-26-2005)
G. Exception: This section shall not apply to persons authorized to possess and use cannabis in those amounts permitted by the compassionate use of
medical cannabis pilot program act10. (Ord. O-23-14, 9-8-2014)
5-2-17: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, any person violating any provisions of any sections of this chapter shall be fined as provided in the general
penalty in section 1-3-1 of this code for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues. (Ord. O-10-93, 6-28-1993; amd. 2004 Code; Ord. O-36-05, 7-26-2005)
Chapter 3
MINORS
5-3-1: CURFEW:
A. Definitions: As used in this section, the following words shall be defined as follows:
BODILY INJURY: Injury that harms or creates a substantial risk of harm to one's person or that causes death, disfigurement, loss or impairment of the
function of any bodily member or organ.
CURFEW HOURS: 1. Eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday, inclusive, until six o'clock (6:00)
A.M. of the following day; and
2. One minute after twelve o'clock midnight (12:01) A.M. until six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on any Saturday or Sunday.
CUSTODIAN: A person who has attained the age of twenty one (21) years and who is authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody
of a minor.
EMERGENCY: Any unforeseen circumstance or combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for such immediate action as is
necessary to protect a person from imminent threat of bodily injury, loss of life or to protect property from substantial damage. The term includes, but
is not limited to, a fire, natural disaster, an automobile accident, medical emergency or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent bodily
injury, loss of life or loss of property.
ESTABLISHMENT: Any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited including, but not limited to, any
restaurant, retail establishment, eatery, place of amusement or entertainment.
GUARDIAN: 1. A person who, by court order, is designated guardian of the person of a minor; or
2. A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court of competent jurisdiction.
MINOR: Any person under seventeen (17) years of age.
OPERATOR: Any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation operating, managing or conducting any establishment.The term includes
the members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a corporation.
PARENT: A person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent or stepparent of a minor.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access including, but not limited to, streets, highways, public
ways and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities, shops, parks, places of entertainment or
amusement, arenas, stadiums and restaurants.
REMAIN: 1. To linger or stay; or
2. To fail to leave the premises of an establishment when requested to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator or other person in control of
the establishment.
B. Offenses: It shall be unlawful for:
1. A minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the village during curfew hours; or
2. A parent, guardian or custodian to knowingly permit, or by insufficient control allow, the minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any
establishment within the village during curfew hours; or
3. The owner, operator or any employee of an establishment to knowingly allow a minor to remain upon the premises of the establishment during
curfew hours.
C. Defenses:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 171/416
1. It shall be a defense to prosecution under subsection B of this section that the minor was:
a. Accompanied by the minor's parent, guardian or custodian;
b. In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
c. Engaged in an employment activity in which such minor may lawfully engage under the laws of the state of Illinois, or traveling to or returning
home from the employment activity, without any unnecessary detour or stop;
d. Involved in an emergency;
e. On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence, that of a guardian or custodian, or abutting the residence of a next door neighbor if the neighbor
does not object to the minor's presence;
f. Attending an official school, religious or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the village, acivic organization or another
similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school, religious or
other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the village, a civic organization or another similar entity that takes responsibility
for the minor;
g. Exercising first amendment rights protected by the United States constitution or article 1, sections 3, 4 and 5 of the constitution of the state of
Illinois, or both, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the right of assembly; or
h. Married or previously married or has been declared an emancipated minor in accordance with Illinois Compiled Statutes.
2. It is a defense to prosecution under this subsection that the owner, operator or employee of an establishment promptly notified the police department
that a minor was present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and the minor refused, when first requested, to leave the
premises.
D. Enforcement: Prior to taking any enforcement action under this section, a police officer shall inquire as to the apparent offender's age and reason for
being in the public place. No citation shall be issued and no arrest shall be made under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an
offense has occurred and that, based on any response of the minor and all other circumstances known to the officer at the time, no defense, as set
forth in subsection C of this section, exists. (Ord. O-10-04, 3-22-2004)
E. Penalties: Any person who violates a provision of this section shall be fined as provided in the general penalty in section 1-3-1 of this code. (Ord. O-10-
04, 3-22-2004; amd. 2004 Code)
Chapter 4
TOBACCO CONTROL REGULATIONS
5-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
CODE: Municipal code of ordinances of the village of Forest Park, Cook County, Illinois.
DISTRIBUTE: To give, sell, deliver, dispense or issue or offer to give, sell, deliver, dispense or issue, or cause or hire any person to give, sell, deliver,
dispense, issue or offer to give, sell, deliver, dispense or issue.
LICENSEE: Any person obtaining a license authorizing the sale at retail of tobacco products.
ORDINANCE: The Forest Park tobacco control regulations as contained in this chapter.
PERSON: An individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, estate, trust, trustee or any other group or combination acting as a unit,
excepting the United States Of America, the state of Illinois and any political subdivision thereof.
PHOTOGRAPHIC IDENTIFICATION: Any officially issued card containing the bearer's date of birth that includes a photograph of the person seeking to
purchase tobacco products and that is accepted as proof of age under Illinois law.
POINT OF SALE: A store, stand, building, vending machine or any other separate place of business maintained by a seller from which tobacco products
are made available for sale or distribution to consumers. Point of sale does not include separate cash registers or service counters within a store or other
place of business.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any area to which the public is invited or permitted.
RETAILER: Any person who sells tobacco products to individuals for personal consumption or who operates a facility containing vending machines that
dispense tobacco products or self-service displays of tobacco products.
TOBACCO PRODUCT SAMPLE: A tobacco product distributed to members of the general public at no cost or at nominal cost for purposes of promoting
the product.
TOBACCO PRODUCTS: Any substance containing tobacco leaf including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, snuff, smoking tobacco and/or smokeless
tobacco.
VENDING MACHINE: Any mechanical, electronic or self-service device which, upon insertion of money, tokens or any other form of payment,
automatically dispenses tobacco products. (Ord. O-03-14, 2-10-2014)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 172/416
5-4-2: JURISDICTION:
This chapter applies to retailers of tobacco products within the village, including any person who sells tobacco products to individuals for personal
consumption or who operates a facility containing vending machines which dispense tobacco products or self-service displays of tobacco products. (Ord.
O-03-14, 2-10-2014)
5-4-3: PROHIBITED SALES AND DISTRIBUTION:
A. Underage Tobacco Sales:
1. No retailer may sell or distribute tobacco products to any person under eighteen (18) years of age.
2. Each retailer shall request and examine the photographic identification of any person purchasing tobacco products who appears without reasonable
doubt to be under the age of twenty five (25) years.
B. Sale Of Tobacco Products Other Than In Sealed Packages: No retailer may break or otherwise open any cigarette or smokeless tobacco package to
sell or distribute individual cigarettes or a number of unpackaged cigarettes that is smaller than the minimum cigarette package size of twenty (20)
cigarettes or any quantity of cigarette tobacco or smokeless tobacco that is smaller than the smallest package distributed by the manufacturer for
individual consumer use.
C. Distribution Of Tobacco Product Samples Prohibited: No person shall give away, barter, exchange, distribute or in any way dispense free of charge or at
nominal cost any tobacco product samples or any coupon redeemable for any tobacco products, on any public street, alley, sidewalk or in any public
park, ground or playground, or in areas open to the public, in any publicly owned or operated building, or at any place located within one hundred feet
(100') of any building location used primarily as a school, childcare facility or for the education or recreation of children under eighteen (18) years of
age.
D. Prohibited Locations: No retailer shall sell or distribute tobacco products at any place located within one hundred feet (100') of any building or other
location used primarily as a school, childcare facility or for the education or recreation of children under eighteen (18) years of age. This prohibition
shall not apply to those businesses engaged in the retail sale of tobacco products at a location that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter that
were in existence prior to passage of this chapter. This exemption shall apply to any new owner at the same location providing the same services.
E. Self-Service Prohibited: It shall be unlawful to sell, offer for sale, give away or display tobacco products for sale at any location where the consumer can
acquire those products through self-service. All tobacco products will be displayed from behind a sales/service counter so that no consumer can
access tobacco products without assistance by an employee of the licensee. This restriction shall not apply to customer self-service from vending
machines as described in subsection 5-4-4D of this chapter.
F. Restrictions On Tobacco Product Vending Machines: No retailer shall sell or distribute tobacco products through a vending machine unless the vending
machine is located in an area of factories, businesses, offices, private clubs and other places not open to the public.
G. Posting Of Warning To Minors: Every retailer of tobacco products shall place and maintain, in legible condition, at each point of sale of tobacco products
to consumers, including the front of each vending machine, a sign stating:
WARNING - IT IS A VIOLATION OF THE LAW FOR CIGARETTES OR OTHER TOBACCO PRODUCTS TO BE SOLD TO ANY PERSON UNDER
THE AGE OF EIGHTEEN (18).
The sign shall not be less than eight inches by eleven inches (8" x 11") in size, except for a sign placed on the front of a vending machine. The sign for
a vending machine shall not be less than four inches by four inches (4" x 4") in size. The text of such printed card shall be in red letters on a white
background, said letters to be at least one inch (1") high.
H. Minimum Age To Sell Tobacco Products: It shall be unlawful for any retailer to permit or allow any person under eighteen (18) years of age to sell
tobacco products in any licensed establishment.
I. Violation: It shall be unlawful for any licensee to sell or possess tobacco products or cigarettes subject to any state or county tax upon which said tax has
not been paid or which contains counterfeit state or county tax stamps, improperly stamped packs or unstamped packs in violation of state law or
county ordinance. (Ord. O-03-14, 2-10-2014)
5-4-4: LICENSED RETAILERS:
A. License Requirement: No person shall engage in the retail sale of tobacco products or operate a facility containing vending machines that dispense
tobacco products unless the person is authorized to do so by a license issued pursuant to this chapter, or pursuant to title 3 of this code, or is an
employee or agent of a person who has been issued a license. A separate license must be obtained for each point of sale maintained by the retailer.
Licenses shall not be transferable and shall only be valid for that location set forth in the license. The license to sell tobacco products shall be displayed
prominently at the point of sale for which it is issued.
B. License Administration: The mayor shall administer the licensing of retailers of tobacco products and shall approve or deny all applications for such
licenses and shall further be authorized to fine, suspend and/or revoke existing licenses for any violations of this code, other ordinances, regulations or
state law, including, but not limited to, failure to pay any tax when due.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 173/416
C. License Application: An application for a tobacco retailer's license shall be filed in writing on a form provided by the village. Each application for a
license shall contain the following:
1. The applicant's full name, the address and telephone number where the applicant is engaged in the business of the retail sale of tobacco products
and the name, address and telephone number of the person authorized to receive notices issued pursuant to this chapter.
2. If the applicant is a corporation, the corporate name, address and telephone number of the principal place of business; the date and the state of
incorporation; the corporate officers and the name, address and telephone number of the person authorized to receive notices issued pursuant to
this chapter.
3. If the applicant is a partnership, the name, address and telephone number of the principal place of business; the names of all partners; the name,
address and telephone number of the person authorized to receive notices issued pursuant to this chapter.
4. Any retailer whose license is revoked for violating this chapter shall be eligible to apply for reinstatement upon the expiration of the revocation period.
D. Licenses For Tobacco Product Vending Machines: The village shall issue an adhesive self-voiding license emblem to be placed at each retail location
and on each licensed tobacco product vending machine. Each license emblem shall be coded to identify the retailer who has control over retail tobacco
sales and/or each tobacco product vending machine. The license emblem shall bear the words: "LICENSED TOBACCO PRODUCT
RETAILER/VENDING MACHINE". The license shall designate the period of time for which the license is valid and such other language as may be
prescribed by the mayor and village council. A replacement license emblem will not be issued unless the application for such replacement emblem is
accompanied by a police report of the incident in which the emblem to be replaced was lost, stolen or mutilated or unless the remnants of the emblem
being replaced are submitted with the replacement application.
E. Conditions Of License:
1. Term: Every retailer's license shall be issued for an annual period beginning May 1 and ending April 30. Each license shall expire on the last day of
the license year for which the license was issued.
2. Fee: The annual license fee for a retailer shall be as set out in section 3-5-1 of this code. The village administrator may, from time to time, raise
inspection fees as necessary to cover administration and enforcement costs.
3. Transfer Prohibited: The transfer of any license issued hereunder is prohibited. Any such purported transfer is void. (Ord. O-03-14, 2-10-2014)
5-4-5: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
A. Administration: The mayor shall be charged with the administration of this chapter.
B. Suspension Or Revocation Of License: The mayor may suspend for up to thirty (30) days or revoke any license issued under the provisions of this
chapter or tobacco dealer's license issued pursuant to title 3 of this code if it is determined that the licensee has violated any of the provisions of this
code or any other ordinance, regulation or state law including, but not limited to, failure to pay any tax when due.
C. Fine And Penalty: In addition to a license suspension or revocation, any person who violates any provision of this code or any other ordinance,
regulation or state law related to the sale of tobacco products may be fined as provided by section 1-3-1 of this code. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which the violation occurs or continues.
D. Hearing; Decisions; Fees:
1. Notice Of Hearing: No tobacco dealer's license issued pursuant to this chapter or title 3 of this code shall be suspended or revoked and no licensee
shall be fined except after a public hearing by the mayor with a five (5) day written notice to the licensee setting forth the nature of the violation(s)
and affording the licensee an opportunity to appear and defend against the charges contained in such notice. The five (5) day notice provisions shall
begin the day following delivery by certified mail or personal service.
2. Mayor's Decision: The mayor shall, within fourteen (14) days after such hearing, issue written findings, decision and order determining whether or
not the alleged violations occurred and whether the license should be revoked or suspended and/or be fined for violation(s) proven. The findings,
decision and order shall further state the amount of the fine imposed, if any, the period of suspension or revocation, if any, and serve a copy of such
order within the fourteen (14) days upon the licensee.
3. Fees: Any licensee determined by the mayor to have violated any of the provisions of this chapter, any other ordinance, regulation or state law,
including failure to pay any tax when due, may also be ordered to, in addition to any other sanction, pay to the village the costs of the hearing before
the mayor on such violation(s). The mayor shall determine the costs incurred by the village for said hearing, including, but not limited to, court
reporter fees, the costs of transcripts or records, attorney fees, the cost of preparing and mailing notices and orders and all other miscellaneous
expenses incurred by the village or such lesser sum as the mayor may allow. Unless otherwise provided in the findings, decision and order, the
licensee shall pay said costs and fine to the village within fourteen (14) days of notification of the costs by the mayor. Failure to pay said costs and
fine within fourteen (14) days of notification is a violation of this chapter and may be cause for license suspension or revocation or the levy of
additional fines.
E. Use Of Premises During License Suspension: When any license shall have been suspended for any cause, no license shall be granted to any person
for the period of the suspension, for the conduct of business of selling tobacco products in the premises described in such license.
F. Responsibility Of Licensee For Agents And Employees: Every act or omission constituting a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter by any
officer, director, manager or other agent or employee of any licensee shall be deemed and held to be the act of such licensee and shall be punishable
in the same manner as if such act or omission had been done or omitted by the licensee personally. (Ord. O-03-14, 2-10-2014)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 174/416
Title 6
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Chapter 1
GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
6-1-1: ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE:
A. Adoption: There is hereby adopted by reference the most current Illinois vehicle code, as may hereafter be amended from time to time, three (3) copies
of which have been on file in the office of the village clerk for the time period provided by law. (Ord. O-49-10, 10-25-2010)
B. Penalty: Every person convicted of a violation of the Illinois vehicle code, incorporated by this section shall upon such conviction be fined as provided in
the general penalty in section 1-3-1 of this code. (Village code § 19-98; amd. 2004 Code)
C. Specific Violations: The following violations of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes, otherwise known as the Illinois vehicle code three (3) copies of which have
been on file in the office of the village clerk for the period of time as prescribed by law, as presently enacted, or as may be amended from time to time,
are hereby adopted by reference and shall qualify for administrative adjudication as described in this title:
625 ILCS 5/ Subject
3-112(b) Failure to transfer title within twenty (20) days
3-401(a) No valid registration - never applied
3-404 No bill of lading or manifest dispatch record
3-411(a) Failure to carry registration card or reciprocity permit -- second division vehicle
3-413(a,b) Improper display of license plates
3-413(f) Operation of vehicle with expired registration plate or sticker
3-416 Failure to notify the secretary of state of name/address change
3-417(a) Failure to immediately apply for replacement registration card, plate or sticker
3-701(1) No valid registration -- no valid plate or sticker obtained
3-701(2) No valid registration -- reciprocity, prorate or apportionment
5-201(h) No in-transit plates
5-202(e) Failure to display three tow-truck plates
11-1419.01 Failure to display Illinois motor fuel tax identification card
11-1419.02 Failure to display external Illinois motor fuel tax identification device
11-1507(a) Operation of bicycle without lamp and reflector
12-101(a) Operation of vehicle with unsafe equipment
12-201(a) Operation of motorcycle without lighted headlamp
12-201(b) Driving vehicles without two lighted headlamps and tail lamps when required
12-202(a,b) Insufficient clearance, identification or side marker lamps and reflectors -- second division vehicle
12-203(a) Failure to use parking lights while vehicle is standing on highway
12-204 Improper lamp or flag on projecting load
12-205 Improper use of lamps on towing and towed vehicles
12-207(a) Improper use of more than one spot lamp
12-207(b) Improper use of more than three auxiliary driving lamps
12-208(a) No stop signal lamp or device
12-209(c) Defective backup lights
12-210(a) Failure to dim headlights/auxiliary driving lamps within 500 feet on approach of vehicle
12-210(b) Failure to dim headlights/auxiliary driving lamps within 300 feet of vehicle in same direction
12-211(a) Improper lighting on vehicles other than motorcycles - only one headlamp
12-211(b) Improper use of more than four lighted headlights/auxiliary driving lamps
12-212(a) Improper use of red light visible from front of vehicle
12-212(b) Unlawful use of flashing lights
12-215 Unlawful use of oscillating, rotating or flashing lights
12-301 Use of defective brakes
12-401 Unlawful use of metal studded tire
12-405(d) Use of unsafe tire
12-501(a) Operation of vehicle without windshield
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 175/416
12-502 Operation of vehicle without rear reflecting mirror
12-503(a) Obstructed view of windshield or side windows adjacent to driver
12-503(c) Obstructed view of any window by stationary or suspended object(s)
12-503(d) Operation of vehicle without windshield cleaning device; operation of vehicle with view obstructed by snow, ice or moisture
12-503(e) Obstructed view due to defective condition or repair of any window
12-601(a) Operation of vehicle with defective horn
12-601(b) Unlawful possession or use of siren
12-602 Operation of vehicle with defective or modified exhaust system
12-603(b) Operation of vehicle without two front seat safety belts -- vehicles of 1965 or later model years
12-603.1 Failure of driver/front seat occupants to use seat safety belt
12-604(a) Operation of vehicle with television receiver visible to driver
12-606 Operation of tow truck without:
a) Identifying sign attached on each side
b) Required equipment -- one broom, shovel, trash can and fire extinguisher
c) Removing roadway debris and spreading dirt or sand on oil/grease deposits
d) Insurance policy in cab
12-607(a) Operation of vehicle with unlawfully altered vehicle suspension system -- body lifted in excess of three inches from chassis
12-607.1(a) Operation of first division vehicle with frame in excess of 22 inches above ground
12-607.1(b) Operation of second division vehicle with frame in excess of specified limits above ground -- refer to statute
12-608(a) Operation of vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of 9,000 pounds or less or a recreational vehicle without two bumpers
12-608(a) Operation of vehicle with unlawful bumper height
12-702(a) Operation of second division vehicle without carrying flares/warning devices
12-702 (c,
d,e,f,g)
Failure to use flares, warning devices when second division vehicle is disabled
2-707 Overloaded school bus, commuter van or motor vehicle used for hire
12-711 Operation of garbage truck, roll-off hoist or roll-on container without audible backing warning system
12-806 Failure to cover school bus sign
12-808 Operating school bus without fire extinguisher
12-809 Operating school bus without first aid kit
12-810 Transporting handicapped passenger(s) without restraining device
13-111 Operating without certificate of valid safety test attached to windshield -- second division vehicle
13A-104(c) Failure to display valid unexpired emission inspection sticker (affected Illinois counties only)
15-105 Load projecting in any excess beyond left fenders or six inches beyond right fenders of first division vehicle
15-106 Failure to fasten loose projecting member
15-108 Failure to plank edge of pavement for any vehicle in excess of 8,000 pounds
15-109(a) Spilling load on highway
15-109(b) Operating loaded vehicle without securely fastened covering
15-109.1 Operating second division vehicle with load falling, blowing or dropping to highway
15-114 Unlawful pushing of disabled vehicle
18C-4104(a)
Operation without registration -- intrastate or interstate
18C-4604(1)
Operation without current cab car and Illinois identifier stamp
18C-4604(3)
Use of a cab card and Illinois identifier stamp issued to another carrier
18C-4604(4)
Failure to display to present a cab card and Illinois identifier stamp
18C-4701(1)
Operation without trade name, license and registration number of carrier painted or affixed to both doors of power unit
1203-1 Operation of all-terrain vehicle or off-highway motorcycle without valid registration
1203-4(b) Operation of all-terrain vehicle or off-highway motorcycle without affixed registration decal
1203-4(c) Operation of all-terrain vehicle without registration certificate in possession of operator
1203-9 Failure to renew registration certificate
1204-3 Operation of all-terrain vehicle or off-highway motorcycle with safety helmet and eye protection
1204-6 Operation of all-terrain vehicle without headlamp and tail lamp when required
1204-7 Operation of all-terrain vehicle without operational service brake
1204-8 Operation of all-terrain vehicle without adequate muffler system
1204-10 Operation of all-terrain vehicle with modified exhaust system
11-1507(a) Operation of bicycle without lamp and reflector
11-1507.1 Operation of motorized pedicycle without lamp and reflector
12-101(a) Operation of vehicle with unsafe equipment
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 176/416
625 ILCS 40/
603-1 Operation of unnumbered snowmobile
604-1 Operation of snowmobile without required:
a) One white headlamp during darkness
b) One rear taillight during darkness
c) Brake system in good mechanical condition
d) Reflective material on each side of cowling
e) Adequate sound suppression equipment
605-1(D) Operation of snow mobile without lighted headlamp and taillight
(Ord. O-7-92, 5-26-1992; amd. 2004 Code)
6-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever in this title the following terms are used, they shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:
ALLEY: A public way within a block, generally giving access to the rear of lots or buildings, and not used for general traffic circulation.
BICYCLE: Any device propelled by human power upon which any person or persons may ride, having two tandem wheels, except scooters and similar
devices.
BUSINESS DISTRICT: The territory within the village contiguous to and including a street or highway when within any six hundred feet (600') along such
highway there are buildings in use for business or industrial purposes, including, but not limited to, hotels, banks or office buildings, railroad stations and
public buildings which occupy at least three hundred feet (300') of frontage on one side or three hundred feet (300') collectively on both sides of the street
or highway.
CROSSWALK: That portion of the roadway included within the prolongation of the sidewalk lines at street intersections.
DRIVER: Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle.
EMERGENCY VEHICLE: Police vehicles, vehicles of the fire department, ambulances, vehicles carrying a state, county or municipal officer or employee in
response to an emergency call, and emergency vehicles of public service corporations on an emergency call.
EXPLOSIVE: Any chemical compound or mechanical mixture that is commonly used or intended for the purpose of producing an explosion and which
contains any oxidizing and combustive units or other ingredients in such proportions, quantities or packing that an ignition by fire, by friction, by
concussion, by percussion or by detonator of any part of the compound of mixture may cause such a sudden generation of highly heated gases that the
resultant gaseous pressures are capable of producing destructible effects on contiguous objects or of destroying life or limb.
FARM TRACTOR: Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily as a farm implement for drawing plows, mowing machines and other implements of
husbandry.
FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS: Any liquid which has a flash point of seventy degrees Fahrenheit (70°F) or less, as determined by tabliabue or equivalent closed
cup test device.
IMPROVED HIGHWAY: A roadway of concrete, brick, asphalt, macadam or gravel.
INTERSECTION: The area embraced within the prolongation of the property lines of two (2) or more streets which join at an angle, whether or not such
streets cross.
LANED ROADWAY: A street, the roadway of which is divided into two (2) or more clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic.
LOADING ZONE: The space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials.
MERGING TRAFFIC: A maneuver executed by the drivers of vehicles on converging roadways to permit simultaneous or alternate entry into the junction
thereof, wherein the driver of each vehicle involved is required to adjust his vehicular speed and lateral position so as to avoid a collision with any other
vehicle.
METAL TIRES: Every tire the surface of which in contact with the roadway is wholly or partially of metal or other hard, nonresilient materials.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Every vehicle which is self-propelled, and every vehicle which is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead wires, but not
operated upon rails.
MOTORCYCLE: Every motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three (3) wheels in contact with the
ground, but excluding a tractor.
PARK: To stand a vehicle, whether occupied or not, for a period of time greater than is reasonably necessary for the actual loading or unloading of
passengers or persons.
PARKWAY: The area from the public sidewalk to the public street.
PEDESTRIAN: Any person afoot, including a person with a physical hearing or visual disability.
PNEUMATIC TIRE: Every tire in which compressed air is designed to support the load.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 177/416
PROPERTY LINE: The line marking the boundary between any street and the lots or property abutting thereon.
PUBLIC BUILDING: A building used by the municipality, the county,any park district, school district, the state of Illinois or the United States government.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway.
ROAD TRACTOR: Every motor vehicle designed and used for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry any load thereon either
independently or any part of the weight of a vehicle or load so drawn.
SAFETY ZONE: That portion of a roadway reserved for the exclusive use of pedestrians, suitably marked or elevated.
SCHOOL BUS: Every motor vehicle of the second division operated by or for a public or governmental agency or by or for a private or religious
organization solely for the transportation of pupils in connection with school activities.
SEMITRAILER: Every vehicle without motive power designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed
that some part of its weight and that of its load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle.
SIDEWALK: That portion of a street between the curb line or roadway and the adjacent property line designated for pedestrian use.
SOLID TIRE: Every tire of rubber or other resilient material which does not depend upon compressed air for the support of the load.
STREET OR HIGHWAY: The entire width between property lines of each side or place of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use of the
public as a matter of right, for the purpose of vehicular traffic and each way set aside for public travel by vehicles.
TRAFFIC: Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other conveyances either singly or together while using any highway for the purpose of
travel.
TRAILER: Every vehicle without motive power designed for carrying passengers or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed
that no part of its weight rests upon the towing vehicle.
TRUCK: A motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for the transportation of property.
TRUCK TRACTOR: Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part
of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn.
UNPAVED SURFACE: Any land cover that does not have a cement or asphalt surface cover.
URBAN DISTRICT: The territory contiguous to and including any street which is built up with structures devoted to business, industry or dwelling houses
situated at intervals of less than one hundred feet (100') for a distance of a quarter mile or more.
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway except devices moving by human
power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
YIELD RIGHT OF WAY: When required by an official sign means the act of granting the privilege of the immediate use of the intersecting roadway to traffic
within the intersection and to vehicles approaching from the right or left, provided that when the roadway is clear the vehicle may proceed into the
intersection. (Village Code § 19-1; amd. Ord. O-13-71, 10-11-1971; Ord. O-38-00, 9-25-2000; 2004 Code)
6-1-3: OBEDIENCE TO AUTHORITY:
A. Police Officers: Members of the police department, and special police assigned to traffic duty, are hereby authorized to direct all traffic in accordance
with the provisions of this title, or in emergencies as public safety or convenience may require, and it shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to
comply with any lawful order, signal or direction of a police officer. Except in case of emergency, it shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by
law to direct or attempt to direct traffic. (Village Code § 19-2)
B. Scene Of Fire: The fire department officer in command, or any firefighter designated by him, may exercise the powers and authority of a police officer in
directing traffic at the scene of any fire or where the fire department has responded to an emergency call for so long as fire department equipment is on
the scene, in the absence of or in assisting the police. (Village Code § 19-3)
6-1-4: TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNS AND SIGNALS:
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to disobey the instructions of any traffic sign or signal placed in view by authority of the village council or in
accordance with the laws of the state of Illinois, excepting on direction of a police officer. All signs and signals established by direction of the governing
body shall conform to the state manual of uniform traffic control devices for streets and highways. (Village Code § 19-4)
A. Traffic Control Signal Legend: Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic control signals exhibiting the words "go", "caution" or "stop", or exhibiting different
colored lights successively the following colors only shall be used and said terms and lights shall indicate as follows:
1. Green alone or "go":
a. Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed straight through or turn right or left unless a sign at such place prohibits either such turn. But
vehicular traffic shall yield the right of way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the intersection at the time such signal is exhibited.
b. Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk.
2. Yellow or "caution" when shown with or following the green or "go" signal:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 178/416
a. Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at the intersection, but if such stop cannot be made in safety, a
vehicle may be driven cautiously through the intersection.
b. Pedestrians facing such signal are thereby advised that there is insufficient time to cross the roadway, and any pedestrian then starting across
shall yield the right of way to all vehicles. (Village Code § 19-5)
3. Red alone or "stop":
a. Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at such other point as may be indicated by a
clearly visible line and shall remain standing until green or "go" or may turn right after stopping.
b. Such right turn option is prohibited at the streets listed in section 6-5-5 of this title. (Ord. O-6-74, 7-27-1974)
4. Red with green arrow:
a. Vehicular traffic facing such signal may cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow but shall not interfere
with other traffic or endanger pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk.
b. No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway unless he can do so safely and without interfering with any vehicular traffic.
5. Yellow when shown with the red signal:
a. Vehicular traffic facing such signal shall not enter the nearest crosswalk at an intersection nor proceed beyond such other points as may be
indicated by a clearly visible line while this signal is displayed, but is advised that another signal indication which will permit a traffic movement is
about to be displayed.
b. No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway unless he can do so safely and without interfering with anyvehicular traffic.
6. In the event an official traffic control signal or flashing red signal is erected and maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this
section shall be applicable except as to provisions which by their nature can have no application. Any stop required shall be at a sign or marking on
the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of any such sign or marking, the stop shall be made at the signal. (Village
Code § 19-5)
B. Flashing Signals: Whenever flashing red or yellow signals are used they shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as follows:
1. Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated by rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the nearest
crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when marked, or if none, then before entering the intersection and the right to proceed shall be subject
to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign.
2. Flashing yellow (caution signal): When a yellow lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the
intersection or past such signal only with caution. (Village Code § 19-6)
C. Unauthorized Signs: No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which
purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic control device or railroad sign or signal or which attempts to direct the movement of
traffic, nor shall any person place, maintain or display upon or in view of any highway any other sign which hides from view or interferes with the
movement of traffic or effectiveness of any traffic control device or any railroad sign or signal, and no person shall place or maintain nor shall any public
authority permit upon any highway any traffic or signal bearing thereon any commercial advertising.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, injure, move or interfere with any official traffic sign or signal. Any such unauthorized device is hereby
declared to be a nuisance, and may be removed by any police officer.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, injure, move or interfere with any official traffic sign or signal. (Village Code § 19-7)
6-1-5: ANIMALS OR BICYCLES ON ROADWAYS:
Every person riding a bicycle or an animal, or driving any animal drawing a vehicle upon any street, shall be subject to the provisions of this title applicable
to the driver of a vehicle, except those provisions which can have no application to oneriding a bicycle or driving or riding an animal. Provided that, except
in business districts, bicycles may be ridden on sidewalks. (Village Code § 19-8)
6-1-6: EXEMPTIONS FROM REGULATIONS:
The provisions of this title regulating the movement or parking of vehicles shall not apply to the driver of any authorized emergency vehicle when
responding to an emergency call, but such driver upon approaching a red or stop signal or any stop sign shall slow down as necessary for safety but may
proceed cautiously past such red or stop sign or signal. At other times drivers of authorized emergency vehicles shall stop in obedience to a stop sign or
signal1.
No driver of any authorized emergency vehicle shall assume any special privileges under the act except when such vehicle is operated in response to an
emergency call or in the immediate pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law.
The provisions of this title regulating the movement and parking of vehicles shall not apply to equipment or vehicles and while actively engaged in
installing, repairing or otherwise improving streets or street pavement. (Village Code § 19-9)
6-1-7: PEDESTRIANS:
A. Right Of Way:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 179/416
1. Where traffic control signals are not in place or in operation, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right of way slowing down or stopping if need be, to
a pedestrian crossing the roadway or street within any marked crosswalk or within any unmarked crosswalk.
2. Whenever stop signals or flashing red signals are in place at an intersection or a marked crosswalk between intersections the pedestrian shall have
the right of way over drivers of vehicles; and at such marked places drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk and any
pedestrian within or entering the crosswalk at either edge of the roadway shall have the right of way over any vehicle so stopped.
3. The driver of a vehicle shall stop before entering any crosswalk when any vehicle proceeding in the same direction is stopped at such crosswalk for
the purpose of permitting a pedestrian to cross. (Village Code § 19-52)
B. Pedestrians On Public Ways:
1. Crossing Roadways: At no place shall a pedestrian cross anyroadway other than by the most direct route to the opposite curbing, and when crossing
at any place other than a crosswalk he shall yield the right of way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
No person shall stand or loiter in any roadway other than in a safety zone, if such act interferes with the lawful movement of traffic. (Village Code §
19-53)
2. Signals: At intersections where traffic is directed by a policeman or by a stop and go signal, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to cross the
roadway other than with released traffic, if such crossing interferes with the lawful movement of traffic. (Village Code § 19-54)
3. Standing On Sidewalk: It shall be unlawful for a pedestrian to stand upon any sidewalk except as near as reasonably possible to the building line or
curb line, if such standing interferes with the use of said sidewalk by other pedestrians. (Village Code § 19-55)
4. Pedestrian Crossings:
a. Between adjacent intersections at which traffic control signals are in operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a crosswalk.
b. No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than in a crosswalk in any business section. (Village Code § 19-56)
5. Walking Along Roadways:
a. Where sidewalks are provided it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway.
b. Where sidewalks are not provided, any pedestrian walking along and upon a highway shall when practicable walk only on the left side of the
roadway or its shoulder facing traffic, and upon meeting a vehicle shall step off to the left.
c. No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride from the driver of any vehicle. (Village Code § 19-57)
C. Blind Pedestrians: Any blind person who is carrying in a raised or extended position a cane or walking stick which is white in color or white tipped with
red, or who is being guided by a dog, shall have the right of way in crossing any street or highway, whether or not traffic on such street or highway is
controlled by traffic signals, anything in this act to the contrary notwithstanding. The driver of every vehicle approaching the place where a blind person,
so carrying such a cane or walking stick, or being so guided, is crossing a street or highway shall bring his vehicle to a full stop and before proceeding
shall take such precautions as may be necessary to avoid injury to the blind person. The provisions of this section shall not apply to a blind person who
is not carrying such a caneor walking stick or who is not guided by a guide dog when walking on streets, highways, or sidewalks. (Village Code § 19-
58)
6-1-8: DRIVERS:
A. Liquor Or Drugs2: It shall be unlawful for the habitual user of narcotic drugs to operate any motor vehicle on any streets and it shall be unlawful for any
intoxicated person or any person under the influence of alcohol or of a narcotic drug, to operate or attempt to operate any motor vehicles on any street.
(Village Code § 19-90)
B. Accidents3: The driver of a vehicle which has collided with, or been in an accident with any vehicle, person or property in such a manner as to cause
injury or damage shall stop immediately, and render such assistance as may be possible, and to give his true name and residence to the injured person
or any other persons requesting the same on behalf of the injured persons or the owner of the property damaged, and to a police officer if one is
present. A report of each such accident shall be given by the driver of each vehicle concerned in it to the chief of police within twenty four (24) hours
after the accident. (Village Code § 19-91)
6-1-9: MOTOR DRIVEN SCOOTERS; RESTRICTIONS ON USE:
A. Definition: For purposes of this section, the term "motor driven scooters" is defined as any electric or gas driven wheeled scooter, cycle or other vehicle
for which the state of Illinois does not issue a title document, and does not issue license plates or registration documents.
B. Prohibited Use: No person shall operate a motor driven scooter upon any public street, sidewalk, alleyway or bike path, or within any public parking lot
or park, or on any other public property.
C. Exemptions: The following shall be exempt from the prohibitions contained in this section:
1. Any police vehicle, fire vehicle, municipal vehicle, special district vehicle, county vehicle or forest preserve district vehicle operated by an employee
in the course of his or her duties.
2. Motorized wheelchairs. For purposes of this section, a "motorized wheelchair" means any motorized vehicle designated for and used by a person
with disabilities.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 180/416
3. Electric personal assistance mobility devices, as defined insection 5/1-117.7 of the Illinois vehicle code4.
D. Penalty: Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall be fined as provided in the general penalty section 1-3-1 of this code for
each offense. (Ord. O-6-05, 2-14-2005)
Footnote 1: See also section 6-3-7 of this title.
Footnote 2: 625 ILCS 5/11-500.
Footnote 3: 625 ILCS 5/11-401 et seq.
Footnote 4: 625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq.
Chapter 2
VEHICLE LICENSES
6-2-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
A. Vehicles To Be Licensed:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person residing or having his principal place of business within the village to use or cause or permit any of his agents or
employees to use any motor vehicle upon the streets, avenues or alleys of the village unless such vehicle be licensed as provided by law, and unless
such vehicle be licensed as provided in this chapter.
2. Each and every vehicle which has been issued a current license by the Illinois secretary of state which is registered to an address in the village shall
also have the village license (also known as a vehicle sticker), and the owner of such vehicle, as reflected by the records of the secretary of state's
office, shall be responsible for securing the license herein required. If such vehicle is the subject of an agreement for lease or conditional sale, the
lessee or conditional vendee shall be treated as if the owner of said vehicle. The regular housing or frequent parking of a motor vehicle in a building
or parking area located within the village shall be deemed prima facie evidence of ownership of such vehicle by a person required to obtain the
license as provided by this chapter.
3. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle for which a license is required, as provided by this chapter, without such required
license displayed as provided by this chapter.
B. Application: Any person desiring a license for a motor vehicle shall file an application with the village clerk, upon such forms as the village clerk shall
prescribe, setting forth the name and address of the applicant, a description of the motor vehicle for which the license is desired and the place where
such motor vehicle is to be kept when not in use, together with such other information as may be required on such forms. Such application shall be
transmitted to the village clerk and, upon the payment by the applicant of the license fee hereinafter provided, the village clerk shall issue or cause to
be issued a license authorizing the use of such motor vehicle within the village, until the expiration of such license. Applications for motor vehicles of
the second division, as defined in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-217, must be accompanied by the registration card issued by the Illinois secretary
of state pursuant to 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-410. (Ord. O-6-04 2-9-2004)
6-2-2: LICENSE FEE SCHEDULE:
The fees for the licenses required by this chapter shall be as follows:
A.
Motor Vehicles Of The First Division1:
Motor vehicles of the first division (not including motorcycles or recreational vehicles) not for hire, each $ 35.00
Recreational vehicles, each 40.00
Motorcycles, each 30.00
Automobiles, motor vehicles or recreational vehicles, not for hire, registered to a "senior citizen" 65 years of age or over (limited to 1
per "senior citizen"), each
10.00
Motor vehicles of the first division and of the second division weighing no more than 8,000 pounds for which the secretary of state of
the state of Illinois has issued handicapped registration plates or permanent placard (1 vehicle per placard) for handicapped persons
as defined in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-159.1 and 5/3-616, each
10.00
Dealer motor vehicles with dealer plates, each 30.00
B.
Motor Vehicles Of The Second Division2:
Vehicles of the second division, such as motor trucks, trailers or semitrailers, tractors, coaches, or buses, according to the secretary
of state classification, as follows:
Class B - 8,000 pounds and less (including vehicle and maximum load), each 40.00
Class D - 8,001 pounds to 12,000 pounds (including vehicle and maximum load), each 70.00
Class F - 12,001 pounds to 16,000 pounds (including vehicle and maximum load), each 85.00
Class H - 16,001 pounds to 26,000 pounds (including vehicle and maximum load), each 100.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 181/416
Class J and above - in excess of 26,000 pounds (including vehicle and maximum load), each 120.00
(Ord. O-02-17, 2-13-2017)
6-2-3: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
A. Determination Of Weight: The weight of a vehicle shall be determined in the manner prescribed by statute for determining such factor for the purpose of
fixing the state license fees.
B. Term Of License: The license fees herein provided to be paid shall be due and payable on or before April 1 in each year and all licenses shall expire on
March 31 following the date of issuance. (Ord. O-6-04, 2-9-2004)
C. Payments:
1. Late Payments: The owner of any vehicle required to have a license who fails to pay the prescribed fee on or before May 1, or the due date
prescribed in subsection C3 of this section, shall be required to pay, in addition to the license fee prescribed by this chapter, a late penalty of one
hundred percent (100%) of the original license prescribed by this chapter. (Ord. O-02-12, 1-23-2012)
2. Nonpayment Of Fee For Previous Year: All owners of vehicles who have not paid license fees for previous years shall not be entitled to a license for
the year applied for until the required license fee for previous years has been paid, including the payment of any late penalty fees, as provided in
subsection C1 of this section.
3. Possession Of Vehicle After April 1: For the owners or operators of any vehicle who first come into possession of a vehicle after the April 1 due date
for obtaining a license, the due date for timely application of the license and payment of the license fee shall be deemed to be ten (10) days after
possession of the vehicle is acquired. If such possession is acquired between the dates of April 1 through September 30, the entire fee prescribed by
this chapter shall be required. If such possession is not acquired until after October 1, only one-half (1/2) the annual fee shall be required for the
balance of the license year. Late penalty fees, as prescribed in subsection C1 of this section, shall apply to all vehicles acquired pursuant to this
section.
D. Transfer Of License: Immediately upon the sale of any motor vehicle licensed under this chapter, the vendor shall remove the village license sticker or
plate from the vehicle so sold. Such license shall cease to be valid upon the sale of such vehicle. Any person who sells a motor vehicle licensed under
this chapter may transfer such license to a different vehicle upon making application to the village clerk and giving such information as the village clerk
may require, and paying a transfer fee of one dollar ($1.00). In the event that the new vehicle to be so licensed shall be a class requiring a greater fee
under this chapter than that already paid, such owner shall pay the difference in fees before such transfer shall become effective, except that if the
transfer is made after October 1 of the licensed year, one-half (1/2) of the difference of such fees shall be paid. (Ord. O-6-04, 2-9-2004)
6-2-4: LICENSE EMBLEMS:
After payment of the fees provided in section 6-2-2 of this chapter, the village clerk shall issue the license required for a motor vehicle by this chapter and
shall deliver the license sticker or metal plate, which shall bear the word "Forest Park", the number of such license and the year for which such license is
issued. It shall be the duty of the licensee to attach such sticker or plate in a conspicuous place on such vehicle. In the case of any vehicle having a
windshield, the licensee shall attach the sticker to the lower right hand corner of the windshield in such a manner as to be easily read from the outside. In
the case of a motorcycle, motorbicycle or motortricycle, the plate shall be attached to the rear thereof. Any person carrying a sticker or plate on his vehicle
shall keep the same clear of dust, mud or other materials so that it can be seen plainly at all times. (Ord. O-6-04, 2-9-2004)
6-2-5: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined as provided in the general penalty in section 1-3-1 of this code for each
offense. (Ord. O-6-04, 2-9-2004; amd. 2004 Code)
Chapter 3
RULES OF THE ROAD
6-3-1: POSTING SIGNS:
The chief of police or any other person designated by the mayor or village council shall post or cause to be posted in appropriate places and free from
obstructions suitable signs advising traffic of restrictions applicable where such signs are posted. (Village Code § 19-13; amd. 2004 Code)
6-3-2: THROUGH AND ONE-WAY STREETS:
A. Through Streets: The streets and parts of streets of the village designated by ordinance as through streets are hereby declared to be through streets1.
The driver of a vehicle shall stop at the entrance to a through street and shall yield the right of way to other vehicles which have entered the
intersection or which are approaching so close on a through street as to constitute an immediate hazard, unless directed otherwise by the traffic officer
or a traffic control signal. (Village Code § 19-10)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 182/416
B. One-Way Streets: It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle on any street or alley designated as a one-way street or alley by ordinance2, in any
direction other than that so designated. (Village Code § 19-11)
6-3-3: STOP STREETS3:
The driver of a vehicle shall stop in obedience to a stop sign at an intersection where a stop sign is erected at one or more entrances thereto, and shall
proceed cautiously yielding to the vehicles not so obliged to stop which are within the intersection or approaching so close as to constitute an immediate
hazard, unless traffic at such intersection is controlled by a police officer on duty, in which event, the directions of the police officer shall be complied with.
The intersections at which stops shall be required by motorists entering therein shall be indicated on the map referred to in section 6-5-4 of this title. (Ord.
O-1-81, 1-26-1981)
6-3-4: TURNING MOVEMENTS:
A. Required Position And Method Of Turning At Intersections: The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do as follows:
1. Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close as practical to the right hand curb or edge of the roadway.
2. At any intersection where traffic is permitted to move in both directions on each roadway entering the intersection, an approach for a left turn shall be
made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the centerline thereof and by passing to the right of such centerline where it enters the
intersection and after entering the intersection the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the centerline of the roadway
being entered. Whenever practicable the left turn shall be made in that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the intersection.
3. At any intersection where traffic is restricted to one direction on one or more of the roadways, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any such
intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme left hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of such vehicle
and after entering the intersection the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection, as nearly as practicable in the left lane lawfully available
to traffic moving in such direction upon the roadway being entered.
The driver of a vehicle about to enter or cross a highway from a private road or driveway shall yield the right of way to all vehicles approaching on
said highway. (Village Code § 19-14)
B. Turning On Crest Of Hill: No vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any curve, or upon the approach to, or near the
crest of a grade, where such vehicle cannot be seen by the driver of any other vehicle approaching from either direction within five hundred feet (500').
(Village Code § 19-15)
C. Vehicles Turning Left: The driver of a vehicle within an intersection intending to turn to the left shall yield the right of way to any vehicle approaching
from the opposite direction which is within the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard, but said driver, having so yielded
and having given a signal when and as required, may make such left turn and the drivers of all other vehicles approaching the intersection from said
opposite direction shall yield the right of way to the vehicle making the left turn. (Village Code § 19-21)
D. Limitations On Turning Around: It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction unless
such movement can be made in safety and without backing into traffic or otherwise interfering with traffic. (Village Code § 19-22)
E. U Turns: It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to make a "U" turn at any place where such turns are prohibited by ordinance. (Village Code
§ 19-23)
F. No Left Turns4: It shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle to turn left at any place where such turns are prohibited by ordinance. (Village
Code § 19-24)
G. No Right Turn5: It shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle to turn right at any place where such turns are prohibited by ordinance. (Ord.
O-8-96, 3-25-1996)
6-3-5: SPEED RESTRICTIONS:
A. It shall be unlawful to drive any motor vehicle on any street not under the jurisdiction of the department of public works and buildings, state of Illinois, or
the county, in any urban district within the city at a speed in excess of thirty (30) miles per hour, or in an alley at a speed in excess of fifteen (15) miles
per hour. (Village Code § 19-35)
B. Provided that if the city council, by ordinance, sets other limits as provided by statute after an engineering or traffic survey, then such limits shall govern
the rate of speed on the streets indicated in such ordinance6. (Village Code § 19-35; amd. 2004 Code)
C. Provided further that the speed of all vehicles, of the second division, as defined by statute; having two (2) or more solid tires shall not exceed ten (10)
miles per hour.
D. The fact that the speed of a vehicle does not exceed the applicable maximum speed limit does not relieve the driver from the duty to decrease speed
when approaching and crossing an intersection, when approaching and going around a curve, when approaching a hill crest, when traveling upon any
narrow or winding roadway or when special hazards exist with respect to pedestrians or other traffic by reason of weather or highway conditions; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 183/416
speed shall be decreased as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person or vehicle on or entering the highway in compliance with legal
requirements and the duty of all persons to use due care.
E. It shall be unlawful to drive any vehicle on any street or highway within the city under the jurisdiction of the state department of public works and
buildings, or of the county, at a speed exceeding that lawfully set for such street. (Village Code § 19-35)
6-3-6: GENERAL RULES FOR DRIVING:
A. Driver's Signals: No driver of a vehicle shall suddenly start, slow down, stop or attempt to turn without first giving a suitable signal in such a manner as
to apprise others who might be affected by his action.
1. No person shall turn a vehicle from a direct course upon a highway unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety and then
only after giving a clearly audible signal by sounding the horn if any pedestrian may be affected by such movement or after giving an appropriate
signal in the manner hereinafter provided in the event any other vehicle may be affected by such movement.
2. A signal of intention to turn right or left shall be given during not less than the last one hundred feet (100') traveled by the vehicle before turning.
3. The signals herein required shall be given either by means of the hand and arm or by a signal lamp or signal device, but when a vehicle is so
constructed or loaded that a hand and arm signal would not be visible both to the front and rear of such vehicle then said signals must be given by
such a lamp or device. All signals herein required given by hand and arm shall be given from the left side of the vehicle in the following manner and
such signals shall indicate as follows:
Left turn Hand and arm extended horizontally
Right turn Hand and arm extended upward
Stop or decrease speed Hand and arm extended downward
(Village Code § 19-17)
B. Right Of Way: Excepting as otherwise herein provided, the driver of a vehicle approaching an intersection shall yield right of way to a vehicle which has
entered the intersection from a different highway; and when two (2) vehicles entering an intersection from different highways at approximately the same
time, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield the right of way to the vehicle on the right. (Village Code § 19-20)
C. Driving On Right Side Of Roadway: Upon all roadways of sufficient width a vehicle shall be driven upon the right half of the roadway except as follows:
1. When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction under the rules governing such movement;
2. When the right half of a roadway is closed to traffic while under construction or repair;
3. Upon a roadway divided into three (3) marked lanes for traffic under the rules applicable thereon; or
4. Upon a roadway designated and signposted for one-way traffic.
5. Whenever there is a single track paved road on one side of the public highway and two (2) vehicles meet thereon, the driver on whose right is the
wider shoulder shall give the right of way on such pavement to the other vehicle. (Village Code § 19-26)
D. One-Way Roadways And Rotary Traffic Islands:
1. Upon a roadway designated and signposted for one-way traffic, a vehicle shall be driven only in the direction designated.
2. A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven only on the right of the island. (Village Code § 19-31)
E. Driving On Roadways Laned For Traffic: Whenever any roadway has been divided into three (3) or more clearly marked lanes for traffic the following
rules in addition to all others consistent herewith shall apply:
1. A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practical entirely within a single lane and shall not be moved from such lane until the driver has first
ascertained that such movement can be made with safety.
2. Upon a roadway which is divided into three (3) lanes a vehicle shall not be driven in the center lane except when overtaking and passing another
vehicle where the roadway is clearly visible and such center lane is clear of traffic within a safe distance, or in preparation for a left turn or where
such center lane is at the time allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the direction that the vehicle is proceeding and is signposted to give notice of
such allocation.
3. Official signs may be erected directing slow moving traffic to use a designated lane or allocating specified lanes to traffic moving in the same
direction and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of every such sign. (Village Code § 19-32)
6-3-7: EMERGENCY VEHICLES7:
A. Fire Department Vehicles And Vehicles At Fires: Upon the approach of a fire department vehicle, drivers of vehicles shall comply with the provisions of
subsection B of this section relating to the approach of authorized emergency vehicles. (Village Code § 19-25)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 184/416
B. Operation Of Vehicles On Approach Of Authorized Emergency Vehicles: Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle, when the
driver is giving audible sign by siren or bell, the driver of every other vehicle shall yield the right of way and shall immediately drive to a position parallel
to and as close as possible the right hand edge or curb of the highway clear of any intersection and shall stop and remain in such position until the
authorized emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a police officer. This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an
authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons using the highway. (Village Code § 19-33)
6-3-8: OVERTAKING AND PASSING PROCEDURES:
A. Passing Vehicles: Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other to the right and upon roadways having width for not more
than one line of traffic in each direction each driver shall give to the other at least one-half (1/2) of the main traveled portion of the roadway as nearly as
possible. (Village Code § 19-27)
B. Overtaking Vehicles: The following rules shall govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles proceeding in the same direction, subject to those
limitations, exceptions and special rules hereinafter stated:
1. The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding the same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and shall not again
drive to the right side of the roadway until safely clear of the overtaken vehicle.
2. Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the overtaking
vehicle on audible signal and shall not increase the speed of his vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle. (Village Code § 19-28)
C. Overtaking Vehicles On The Right:
1. The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass upon the right of another vehicle which is making or about to make a left turn.
2. The driver of a vehicle may overtake and, allowing sufficient clearance, pass another vehicle proceeding in the same direction either upon the left or
upon the right on a roadway with unobstructed pavement of sufficient width for four (4) or more lines of moving traffic when such movement can be
made in safety. No person shall drive off the pavement or upon the shoulder of the roadway in overtaking or passing on the right.
3. The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle upon the right on a one-way street or on any street on which traffic is restricted to one
direction of movement where the roadway is free from obstructions and of sufficient width for two (2) or more lanes of moving vehicles. (Village Code
§ 19-29)
4. Notwithstanding the foregoing, it shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to drive in the parking lane to overtake or pass another vehicle upon the
right on Jackson Boulevard between Harlem Avenue and Des Plaines Avenue at any time. The curb lane shall be designated as a parking lane only
and shall be marked with appropriate signage and pavement markings. (Ord. O-17-99, 6-28-1999)
D. Limitations On Overtaking On The Left:
1. No vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the center of the roadway in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction
unless such left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic, for a sufficient distance ahead to permit such overtaking and passing to be
completely made without interfering with the safe operation of any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction or any vehicle overtaken. In every
event the overtaking vehicle must return to the right hand side of the roadway before coming within one hundred feet (100') of any vehicle
approaching from the opposite direction.
2. No vehicle shall in overtaking and passing another vehicle or at any other time, be driven to the left side of the roadway under the following
conditions:
a. When approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve in the highway, where the driver's view is obstructed within sufficient distance as to create
a hazard in the event another vehicle might approach from the opposite direction.
b. When approaching within one hundred feet (100') of or traversing any intersection or railroad grade crossing.
c. Where official signs are in place directing that traffic keep to the right, or a distinctive centerline is marked, which distinctive line also so directs
traffic as declared in the sign manual adopted by the state department of transportation.
d. The limitations in subsections D2a and D2b of this section shall not apply upon a one-way street or upon a street with unobstructed pavement of
sufficient width for two (2) or more lanes of moving traffic in each direction when such movement can be made with safety. (Village Code § 19-30)
6-3-9: CERTAIN MOTOR VEHICLE OPERATIONS RESTRICTED:
A. Train Signals:
1. The driver of a vehicle approaching a railroad grade crossing when a signal device gives warning of the immediate approach of a train, shall stop
within fifty feet (50') but not less than fifteen feet (15') from the nearest track of such railroad and shall not proceed until he can do so safely.
2. The driver of a vehicle shall stop at and not traverse such grade crossing when a crossing gate is lowered or when a flagman or automatic signal
warns of the approach of a train.
3. The driver of any motor vehicle carrying passengers for hire, or any school bus carrying any school children, or any vehicle carrying explosives or
flammable liquid as cargo shall stop such vehicle within fifty feet (50') but not less than fifteen feet (15') from the nearest rail of the tracks and shall
listen and look in both direction along such track from which a train might come before proceeding across such tracks at a grade crossing. Provided,
that no such stop need be made at any such crossing where a police officer or a traffic control signal directs traffic to proceed. (Village Code § 19-43;
amd. 2004 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 185/416
B. Processions:
1. Driving Through Funeral Or Other Processions: No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized
procession while they are in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated as required in this section. This provision shall not apply
at intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic control signals or police officers. (Village Code § 19-44)
2. Drivers In A Procession: Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the right hand edge of the roadway as practical and shall
follow the vehicle ahead as close as practical and safe. (Village Code § 19-45)
3. Funeral Processions Identified: A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified as such by the display upon the outside of each
vehicle of a pennant or other identifying insignia and by having the lights of each vehicle lighted. (Village Code § 19-46)
C. Backing: The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same unless such movement can be made with reasonable safety and without interference with other
traffic. (Village Code § 19-47)
D. Restricted Access: No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled or limited controlled access roadway except at such entrances and exits
as are established by public authority. (Village Code § 19-48)
E. Truck And Commercial Traffic:
1. Trucks Prohibited On Certain Streets8: It shall be unlawful to drive any truck, except for the purposes of making a delivery and then for one block
only on any street so designated by ordinance and properly signposted. (Village Code § 19-49)
2. Limited Load Streets9: Whenever the weight of vehicles permitted on a street is limited by ordinance and signs indicating such limitations are posted,
it shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle in excess of such weight on such street, except for the purpose of making delivery or picking up a load, in
which case such vehicle may be driven on such street for not more than the minimum distance necessary for the purpose. (Village Code § 19-50)
3. Parking Of Commercial Vehicles: It shall be unlawful to park a commercial vehicle having a gross weight in pounds, including the vehicle and load, of
more than eight thousand (8,000) pounds on that side of a public street abutting any residential district, as defined and depicted in the zoning
ordinance of the village10, or on any public or private driveway in any such residential district except for the purpose of making a delivery or
performing a service at a particular residence. (Village Code § 19-59b)
F. School Buses: The driver of a vehicle on a street or highway, upon meeting or overtaking from either direction any school bus which has stopped on the
highway for the purpose of receiving or discharging any school children, shall stop the vehicle before reaching such school bus when there is in
operation on the bus a visual signal as required by state law for operation while the bus is transporting students; provided, that the driver of a vehicle
upon a street or highway, of which the roadway for traffic moving in opposite directions is separated by a strip of ground which is not surfaced or
suitable for vehicle traffic, need not stop his vehicle upon meeting or passing a school bus which is on the opposite roadway. (Village Code § 19-51)
G. Starting Parked Vehicle: No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing, or parked unless and until such movement can be made with
reasonable safety. (Village Code § 19-16)
H. Driving From Alleys, Driveways Or Garages: The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or garage, shall stop such vehicle immediately
prior to driving onto a sidewalk, or across a sidewalk line projected across such alley, and shall exercise extreme care in driving upon said sidewalk or
across such line. (Village Code § 19-18)
I. Driving On Sidewalks, Safety Zones: No driver of a vehicle shall drive within any sidewalk area, except at a permanent or temporary driveway, nor at any
time into or upon any portion of a roadway marked as a safety zone. (Village Code § 19-19)
6-3-10: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
A. Traffic Not To Be Obstructed: No vehicle shall be operated or allowed to remain upon the street in such a manner as to form an unreasonable
obstruction to the traffic thereon. (Village Code § 19-36)
B. Unattended Vehicles: No vehicle shall be left unattended while the motor of such vehicle is running; and no vehicle shall be left without a driver on any
hill or incline unless the vehicle is secured against moving. Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle unattended upon any bridge or causeway or in
any tunnel where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic, such officer is hereby authorized to provide for the removal of such vehicle to the
nearest garage or other place of safety. (Village Code § 19-38)
C. Unattended Animals: It shall be unlawful to leave any horse or other draft animal unattended in any street without having such animal securely
fastened. (Village Code § 19-39)
D. Clinging To Vehicles: It shall be unlawful for any person on any street riding a bicycle, motorcycle or any toy vehicle to cling to or to attach himself or his
vehicle to any moving motor vehicle or wagon. (Village Code § 19-40)
E. Toy Vehicles: It shall be unlawful for any person upon skates, a coaster, sled or other toy vehicle, to go upon any roadway other than at a crosswalk.
(Village Code § 19-41)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 186/416
F. Riding On Running Boards: It shall be unlawful for any person to ride upon the fenders, running board or outside step of any vehicle. (Village Code § 19-
42)
G. Negligent Driving: It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle within the village negligently, heedlessly and without due caution in a
manner as to endanger or be likely to endanger person or property. (Ord. O-1-64, 1-13-1964)
H. Unnecessary Noise: See the provisions of subsection 5-2-3B of this code regarding unnecessary motor vehicle noise. (Ord. O-16-93, 7-26-1993; amd.
2004 Code)
I. Spilling Loads: No vehicle shall be so loaded that any part of its load spills or drops on any street or alley in the municipality. (Village code § 19-88)
J. Repairing Vehicle Or Racing Engine On Street Or In Alley Prohibited: No person shall adjust or repair any automobile or motorcycle or race the motor
thereof, while such vehicle is standing on the public streets or alleys of this village, excepting in case of breakdown or other emergency, and no person
or employee connected with a garage or repair shop shall use the streets or alleys in the vicinity of such garage or shop for the purpose of repairing
vehicles of any description. (Ord. O-44-09, 7-13-2009)
Chapter 4
STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
6-4-1: NO PARKING PLACES:
A. Prohibited Parking: It shall be unlawful to permit any vehicle to stand in any of the following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other
traffic or in compliance with a police officer or traffic control device:
1. In any intersection.
2. In a crosswalk.
3. Upon any bridge or viaduct or the approach thereto.
4. Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty feet (30') of a point of the curb immediately opposite the end of a safety zone.
5. Within thirty feet (30') of a traffic signal, beacon or sign on the approaching side.
6. Within twenty feet (20') of any intersection or crosswalk.
7. At any place where the standing of a vehicle would reduce the usable width of the roadway for moving traffic to less than eighteen feet (18').
8. Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant.
9. At any place where the vehicle would reduce the use of a driveway.
10. In an alley where all four (4) tires are not parked on a private apron.
11. On private property without the owner's consent.
12. In any area where official signs prohibit parking. (Ord. O-17-98, 5-11-1998)
13. On any street, highway or private off street parking facility reserved for a handicapped person, as defined in section 5/1-159.1 of the Illinois vehicle
code, without having handicapped/disabled placards or license plates specified in section 5/11-1301.1 of the Illinois vehicle code or such devices
approved by the secretary of state of the state of Illinois, the village or other duly authorized branch of government deemed as evidence that the
vehicle is operated by or for the benefit of a handicapped person or disabled veteran. (Ord. O-60-06, 10-24-2006)
Upon receiving a parking ticket for a violation under this subsection A13, a sum of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) shall be paid. Said fine shall be
paid on or before the date of the hearing as indicated on the violation notice, unless some other payment due date is determined at the hearing. If the
fine is not received on or before the date of the hearing and the person to whom the violation notice has been served fails to appear at the hearing,
said fine will increase in accordance with the fine payment schedule, under the category entitled "handicapped zone", found in subsection 6-9-9D of
this title. (Ord. O-1-09, 1-12-2009)
14. Parking a commercial vehicle having a gross weight in pounds, including vehicle and load, of more than eight thousand (8,000) pounds on that side
of a public street abutting any residential district, as defined and depicted in the zoning ordinance1, or any such residential district except for the
purpose of making a delivery or performing a service at a particular residence.
15. Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing.
16. Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire department station and on the side of the street opposite the entrance to any such
station within seventy five feet (75') of such entrance when properly posted. (Ord. O-17-98, 5-11-1998)
Upon receiving a parking ticket for a violation under this subsection A16, a sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be paid. Said fine shall be
paid on or before the date of the hearing as indicated on the violation notice, unless some other payment due date is determined at the hearing. If the
fine is not received on or before the date of the hearing and the person to whom the violation notice has been served fails to appear at the hearing,
said fine will increase in accordance with the fine payment schedule, under the category entitled "opposite fire door/in fire lane", found in subsection
6-9-9D of this title. (Ord. O-1-09, 1-12-2009)
17. It will be illegal for any vehicle to park on any sidewalk at any time or on any parkway if any of the following occur: (Ord. O-38-00, 9-25-2000)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 187/416
a. The vehicle blocks any portion of a public sidewalk; (Ord. O-5-05, 2-14-2005)
b. Twelve inches (12") or more of the vehicle overhangs onto a public street;
c. The vehicle hinders street cleaning or snow removal operations;
d. Any part of the vehicle is parked on an unpaved surface;
e. The vehicle obstructs traffic or emergency vehicles exiting or entering an adjoining alley;
f. The vehicle totally obstructs the vision of any vehicle exiting an adjoining alley. (Ord. O-38-00, 9-25-2000)
18. Where a vehicle is not displaying current valid license plates or "license applied for" sticker. (Ord. O-17-98, 5-11-1998)
19. In a fire lane. Upon receiving a parking ticket for a violation under this subsection A19, a sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be paid. Said
fine shall be paid on or before the date of the hearing as indicated on the violation notice, unless some other payment due date is determined at the
hearing. If the fine is not received on or before the date of the hearing and the person to whom the violation notice has been served fails to appear at
the hearing, said fine shall be increased in accordance with the fine payment schedule, under the category entitled "opposite fire door/in fire lane",
found in subsection 6-9-9D of this title. (Ord. O-1-09, 1-12-2009)
20. Facing the wrong designated direction of travel on a one-way street. (Ord. O-02-10, 1-11-2010)
B. Fines: Unless otherwise specifically provided in this section, upon receiving a parking ticket for any violations of this section, a fine shall be paid in
accordance with the provisions of the fine payment schedule, under the category entitled "general fine amount", found in subsection 6-9-9D of this title.
(Ord. O-1-09, 1-12-2009)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 13-19 - LOADING ZONES. Go to new ordinance.
6-4-2: PARKING RESTRICTIONS:
A. Parking At Curb:
1. No vehicle shall be parked with the left side of such vehicle near to the curb, except when facing in the designated direction of travel on a one-way
street. (Ord. O-02-10, 1-11-2010)
2. It shall be unlawful to stand or park any vehicle on a street other than parallel with the curb and with the two (2) right wheels within twelve inches
(12") of the regularly established curb line, except that upon those streets that have been marked for angle parking, vehicles shall be parked at the
angle to the curb as indicated by such marks.
3. After a snowfall of two inches (2") or more, it shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or leave standing at any time a motor vehicle, attended
or unattended, on that portion of any street designated by the village council as a snow route and posted as a snow route by appropriate signage.
(Ord. O-52-02, 10-28-2002)
B. Vehicles For Sale: It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle upon any street for the purpose of displaying it for sale, or to park any vehicle upon any
business street from which vehicle merchandise is peddled.
C. Parking In Loading Zones: It shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to stand a passenger vehicle for a period of time longer than is necessary for
loading or unloading of passengers, not to exceed three (3) minutes. It shall be unlawful for the driver to stand any freight carrying vehicles for a period
of time longer than is necessary to load, unload and deliver materials, not to exceed thirty (30) minutes, in any place designated and marked by the
Village Council as a loading zone, or in any of the following designated places:
1. In any place within seventy five feet (75') along the curb before the entrance to any hospital;
2. At any place within seventy five feet (75') along the curb before the entrance to a public building between eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and six o'clock
(6:00) P.M. except Sundays. (Ord. O-17-98, 5-11-1998)
D. All Night Parking:
1. No person shall park a motor vehicle on any street in the Village for a period of more than fifteen (15) minutes between the hours of two o'clock
(2:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. of any day, except for the following:
a. Emergency: Physicians on emergency calls;
b. Caregivers: Licensed caregivers;
c. Handicapped: Person(s) who have been issued a handicapped parking permit by the Illinois Secretary of State, provided the following conditions
are met:
(1) The person must be established to be a natural person who is unable to walk two hundred feet (200') or more unassisted by another person or
without the aid of a walker, crutches, braces, prosthetic device or a wheelchair or without great difficulty or discomfort due to the following
impairments: neurological, orthopedic, respiratory, cardiac, arthritic disorder, blindness or the loss of function or absence of a limb or limbs.
(2) The parking space for the vehicle is necessary for the handicapped person to enter his residence with safety and security.
(3) The vehicle which will occupy the parking space must be a passenger vehicle equipped to be operated only by the handicapped person or a
passenger who cannot be left unattended by the operator of the vehicle.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 188/416
(4) There is no other adaptable parking space available to the person.
(5) The parking of the handicapped person will not adversely affect the purposes of the long standing Village ban on all night parking which
includes improving fire protection and police surveillance and providing street maintenance, cleaning and snow removal. (Ord. O-17-02, 3-25-
2002)
d. Exceptions: The above parking restriction shall not apply to any vehicle parked within a two (2) block radius of the following streets: Circle Avenue,
Madison Street, Roosevelt Road and Des Plaines Avenue. No vehicle shall park within these designated areas between the hours of two thirty
o'clock (2:30) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. Monday through Friday morning, and between the hours of three thirty o'clock (3:30) A.M. and five
o'clock (5:00) A.M. Saturday and Sunday mornings. The above restrictions shall also not apply to any vehicle bearing a Madison Street employee
parking program parking permit which is parked along the south side of Adams Street or along the north or south sides of Jackson Boulevard
between Harlem Avenue and Des Plaines Avenue. No vehicle bearing such special parking permit shall park within those designated areas
between the hours of three o'clock (3:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. Monday through Friday morning, and between the hours of four o'clock
(4:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. Saturday and Sunday mornings. (Ord. O-32-07, 7-23-2007)
e. Overnight Parking Passes: Any person requesting permission from the Police Department Parking Division to park overnight on a public street
shall be limited to five (5) overnight passes within a calendar month unless otherwise authorized by the Police Department. (Ord. O-27-11, 8-8-
2011)
f. Fines: Upon receiving a parking ticket for a violation under this subsection D1, a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be paid. Said fine shall be paid on
or before the date of the hearing as indicated on the violation notice, unless some other payment due date is determined at the hearing. If the fine
is not received on or before the date of the hearing and the person to whom the violation notice has been served fails to appear at the hearing,
said fine will increase in accordance with the fine payment schedule, under the category "no parking 2:00 A.M. - 5:00 A.M.", found in subsection 6-
9-9D of this title. (Ord. O-25-09, 4-13-2009; amd. Ord. O-30-17, 11-13-2017)
2. Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle in violation of subsection D1 of this section and said vehicle is parked on Madison Street or Roosevelt
Road, the officer is authorized to remove such vehicle or require the driver or other person in charge of such vehicle, or authorize a towing service, to
remove the vehicle to a position off the street on which the overnight parking violation is prohibited, to a location heretofore designated by either the
village or the towing service. (Ord. O-17-02, 3-25-2002)
Upon receiving a parking ticket for a violation under this subsection D2, a sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be paid. Said fine shall be paid on or
before the date of the hearing as indicated on the violation notice, unless some other payment due date is determined at the hearing. If the fine is not
received on or before the date of the hearing and the person to whom the violation notice has been served fails to appear at the hearing, said fine will
increase in accordance with the fine payment schedule, under the category entitled "removal/relocation of vehicle", found in subsection 6-9-9D of this
title. (Ord. O-1-09, 1-12-2009)
3. When a vehicle is authorized to be relocated, removed or towed as provided in this section, the owner of such vehicle will be responsible for the cost
of such relocation, removal, towing and storage fees, if applicable, in addition to the parking ticket issued for the violation. (Ord. O-17-02, 3-25-2002)
E. Alleys: No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet (10') of the
width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such a position as to
block the driveway entrance to any abutting property. (Village code § 19-64; amd. 2004 Code)
F. Cab And Bus Stands/Stops: No vehicle other than a taxicab licensed by the village shall be parked in any area designated by ordinance as a cab stand;
and no vehicle other than a bus shall be parked in a place so designated as a bus loading zone. (Ord. O-17-98, 5-11-1998)
G. Time Limit Parking: Except on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on any street for a longer consecutive period of
time than two (2) hours between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M., except for the following:
1. Except on Sundays and holidays, it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on Madison Street for a longer consecutive period of time than three (3)
hours between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M.;
2. Except on Sundays and holidays and in parking meter zones, it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle for a longer consecutive period of time than
three (3) hours between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. on the 400 through 600 blocks of the following streets:
Ferdinand Avenue, Beloit Avenue, Thomas Avenue, Hannah Avenue, Circle Avenue, Marengo Avenue, and Elgin Avenue;
3. Except as provided in subsection D of this section, there shall be no time limit for parking of vehicles bearing Madison Street employee parking
program permits parked on the south side of Adams Street or the north or south side of Jackson Boulevard between Des Plaines Avenue and
Harlem Avenue. (Ord. O-32-07, 7-23-2007)
H. Bridge Parking: There shall be no parking along the bridge carrying Madison Street over the Des Plaines River within the limits of the village. Future
parking at such locations on or immediately adjacent to the Madison Street bridge crossing the Des Plaines River, as determined and directed by the
state of Illinois to be necessary to ensure the free flow of traffic and safety to the motoring public, is hereby prohibited. (Ord. O-20-02, 4-22-2002)
I. Fines: Unless otherwise specifically provided in this section, upon receiving a parking ticket for any violations of this section, a fine shall be paid in
accordance with the provisions of the fine payment schedule, under the category entitled "general fine amount", found in subsection 6-9-9D of this title.
(Ord. O-1-09, 1-12-2009)
6-4-3: PARKING METERS:
A. Definitions:
PARKING METER: A mechanical device located upon a public street or sidewalk in a place designated by the village council as a parking meter zone,
which device shall record a certain number of minutes by the use of a clock mechanism determining the period of time for which parking privileges may
be extended to the person depositing a coin therein.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 189/416
PARKING METER ZONE: An area designated by the village council where a vehicle may be temporarily parked and allowed to remain for the period of
time indicated on the meter.
B. Parking Meter Zones: Parking meter zones shall be such as may from time to time be established by ordinance2. (Ord. O-17-98, 5-11-1998)
C. Parking Meter Rules, Parking Meter Rates And Permit Parking In Municipal Lots:
1. Parking Meter Rules: It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle or to permit a vehicle to remain parked in any parking meter zone for a period longer
than designated on such meter, between the hours and days designated thereon, or to park a vehicle in any zone without paying the fee hereinafter
designated, or without displaying the proper parking permit, or to permit a vehicle to remain parked longer in any such zone than for the period for
which the fee was paid or for which the permit authorized.
2. Parking Meter Rates; Municipal Lots: Persons parking in village owned and/or operated municipal parking lots designated by the village for use by
the general public as metered parking during the hours designated shall pay a fee in accordance with the following rate schedule:
a. All twelve (12) hour meters: The fee shall be twenty five cents ($0.25) for each one and one-half (11/2) hours of parking.
b. All twelve (12) minute, one hour and two (2) hour meters: The fee shall be five cents ($0.05) for each twelve (12) minutes of parking; ten cents
($0.10) for each one hour of parking; and twenty five cents ($0.25) for each two (2) hours of parking. (Ord. O-38-05, 8-8-2005)
c. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions in subsections C2a and C2b of this section, persons parking in the following village owned and/or
operated municipal parking lots:
Lot #2 Beloit and Madison
Lot #3 Hannah and Madison (west)
Lot #4 Hannah and Madison (east)
Lot #5 Circle and Madison (south)
Lot #12 Thomas at Madison (Constitution Court)
shall pay a parking meter fee and shall be authorized to park in accordance with the following parking rate fee schedule and subject to the
following time restrictions:
Between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. through six o'clock (6:00) P.M., fifty cents ($0.50) per hour, maximum two (2) consecutive hour
parking;
Between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) P.M. through six o'clock (6:00) A.M., one dollar ($1.00) per hour, maximum four (4) consecutive hour
parking. (Ord. O-49-07, 11-13-2007)
d. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions in subsections C2a and C2b of this section, persons parking in the following village owned and/or
operated parking areas:
Circle from Harlem to Franklin
Dunlop from Harrison to York
Elgin from Circle to Franklin
Lehmer from Des Plaines to Harlem
Marengo from Circle to Franklin
shall pay a parking meter fee of twenty five cents ($0.25) per thirty (30) minutes. (Ord. O-32-11, 10-11-2011)
3. Parking Meter Rates; On Street Parking: Persons parking on village owned and/or operated streets designated by the village for use by the general
public as metered on street parking spaces during the hours designated shall pay a fee in accordance with the following rate schedule:
a. All twelve (12) hour meters: The fee shall be twenty five cents ($0.25) for each four (4) hours of parking.
b. All twelve (12) minute, one hour and two (2) hour meters: The fee shall be five cents ($0.05) for each twelve (12) minutes of parking; ten cents
($0.10) for each one hour of parking; and twenty five cents ($0.25) for each two (2) hours of parking. (Ord. O-38-05, 8-8-2005)
4. Permit Parking In Municipal Lots: No person shall park a vehicle in any Municipal lot parking space which space has been designated and marked
"PERMIT PARKING ONLY", between the hours specified in section 6-5-10 of this title unless a valid parking permit is properly displayed. Any vehicle
in violation of this subsection shall be towed at the owner's expense and fined a sum of fifty dollars ($50.00). Said fine shall be paid on or before the
date of the hearing as indicated on the violation notice, unless some other payment due date is determined at the hearing. If the fine is not received
on or before the date of the hearing and the person to whom the violation notice has been served fails to appear at the hearing, said fine will increase
in accordance with the fine payment schedule, under the category entitled "removal/relocation of vehicle", found in subsection 6-9-9D of this title.
(Ord. O-1-09, 1-12-2009)
D. Parking Spaces:
1. Placing Meters: Parking meters shall be installed in the parking meter zones as established and provided for by ordinance and shall be placed upon
the curb immediately adjacent to the individual parking places hereinafter described. Each parking meter shall be placed or set in such a manner as
to show or display by a signal whether or not the parking space adjacent to such meter is legally in use.
2. Marking Places: The Chief of Police shall have markings painted or placed upon the curb of the street adjacent to each parking meter for the
purpose of designating the parking space and the angle at which vehicles are parked to the curb. Each vehicle parked within any parking meter zone
shall park within the line or markings so established. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle across any such line or marking or to park said vehicle in
such position that the same shall not be entirely within the area designated by such lines or markings. (Ord. O-17-98, 5-11-1998)
3. Parking Of Vehicles Backward: Parking in areas marked to prohibit the parking of vehicles backward into a designated or marked parking space, or
contrary to posted signs or in any other manner that will interfere with traffic into, through or out of a parking space shall be unlawful. (Ord. O-31-15,
11-9-2015)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 190/416
E. Placing Coins In Meters; Tampering:
1. Any person desiring to park any vehicle within such desired meter space shall deposit the proper coins for the time desired.
2. All meters are posted as to cost with a yellow or green sticker as to hours of operation and enforcement.
3. It shall be unlawful to deposit any slug, device or metallic or other substitute devices for a coin in any parking meter.
4. It shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by the Village Council to deface, tamper with, open or wilfully break, destroy or impair the
usefulness of any parking meter installed under the provisions of this section. (Ord. O-17-98, 5-11-1998)
6-4-4: PARKING PERMITS:
Non-metered parking will be allowed in all Municipal parking lots and on certain designated streets as provided herein for vehicles eight thousand (8,000)
pounds or less at certain times and under the conditions stated herein, provided a permit for such parking is obtained from the Village Clerk's Office, as set
forth below:
A. Fees:
1. Day parking permits are to be purchased at the Village Clerk's Office for the sum of thirty five dollars ($35.00) per month or one hundred dollars
($100.00) per quarter, except for senior citizens (age 65 or older) the permit fees shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00) per month or forty dollars ($40.00)
per quarter.
2. Night parking permits are to be purchased at the Village Clerk's Office for the sum of forty dollars ($40.00) per month or one hundred fifteen dollars
($115.00) per quarter, except for senior citizens (age 65 or older) the permit fees shall be thirty dollars ($30.00) per month or eighty five dollars
($85.00) per quarter.
3. A combination day and night permit, commonly referred to as a 24-hour parking permit, is to be purchased at the Village Clerk's Office for the sum of
sixty five dollars ($65.00) per month or one hundred eighty five dollars ($185.00) per quarter, except for senior citizens (age 65 or older) the permit
fees shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) per month or one hundred forty five dollars ($145.00) per quarter.
B. Display Of Permits: Parking permits are to be displayed in the lower right hand corner of the rear window of the automobile.
C. Restrictions:
1. Parking will be permitted in any Municipal parking lot which space has been designated and marked "PERMIT PARKING ONLY" for those vehicles
displaying a valid parking permit, only between those hours for that particular permit, as specified in section 6-5-10 of this title.
2. The sale of night parking permits and 24-hour parking permits shall be restricted to residents only with valid proof of residency required at time of
purchase. (Ord. O-31-17, 11-27-2017)
6-4-5: MUNICIPAL PARKING LOTS:
Members of the Village Police Department are hereby authorized to cause the removal of any vehicle from a Municipal parking lot when:
A. A vehicle is parked in a prohibited area or an area not designated as a parking space.
B. A vehicle is parked in a permit parking lot without a parking permit displayed on the vehicle.
C. The vehicle has been or becomes abandoned, disabled, wrecked, burned or partially dismantled.
D. When the vehicle has been parked in the same parking space for over seven (7) days without prior notice to, and permission from, the Police
Department for good and sufficient cause.
E. For the cleaning, maintaining and/or snow removal of a Municipal lot, provided that: (Ord. O-5-02, 2-11-2002)
1. The Director of Public Works, or his/her designee, must first post notice that the Municipal lot will be closed for maintenance at least twenty four (24)
hours prior thereto. (Ord. O-36-04, 9-13-2004)
2. On the morning of the Municipal lot closure and prior to the removal of any vehicle, the Police Department will exhaust all reasonable means of
contacting the vehicle's owner in an attempt to have the vehicle removed by the owner.
3. Any vehicle that is removed from the Municipal lot shall be relocated back to its original parking place after the Municipal lot has been serviced and
reopened. (Ord. O-5-02, 2-11-2002; amd. Ord. O-1-09, 1-12-2009)
a. All costs associated with the removal of the vehicle pursuant to this subsection E shall be paid by the vehicle owner. (Ord. O-1-09, 1-12-2009)
b. The Village shall not be liable for any damage to a vehicle which must be removed from any Municipal parking lot pursuant to this subsection E.
(Ord. O-5-02, 2-11-2002; amd. Ord. O-1-09, 1-12-2009)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 191/416
6-4-6: COMMUTER PARKING:
The daily fee for commuter parking shall be as follows:
Lot #13 $5.00
(Ord. O-27-17, 10-23-2017)
6-4-7: PRIMA FACIE PROOF:
The fact that an automobile which is illegally parked is registered in the name of a person, shall be considered prima facie proof that such person was in
control of the automobile at the time of parking. (Village Code § 19-95)
Chapter 5
TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
6-5-1: THROUGH STREETS:
In accordance with the provisions of subsection 6-3-2A of this title, the following streets are declared to be through streets:
Circle Avenue
Des Plaines Avenue
Harlem Avenue
Harvard Avenue
Jackson Boulevard
Lathrop Avenue, North of Madison Street
Madison Street
Roosevelt Road (Village Code § 19-10)
6-5-2: ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS:
In accordance with the provisions of subsection 6-3-2B of this title, the following streets are declared to be one-way streets and alleys:
Southbound Only:
Dunlop Avenue From Harrison Street to Roosevelt Road
Elgin Avenue From Harrison Street to 16th Street
Ferdinand Avenue From Harrison Street to Roosevelt Road
Ferdinand Avenue From Madison Street to Lehmer Street
Hannah Avenue From Adams Street to Jackson Boulevard between the hours of 8:00 A.M. to 9:00 A.M. and 2:15 P.M. to
3:15 P.M. on school days
Hannah Avenue From first east/west alley south of Harrison Street to Roosevelt Road
Marengo Avenue From Circle Avenue to Lehmer Street
Rockford Avenue From Randolph Street to Rockford Court
Thomas Avenue From Adams Street to Lehmer Street
Northbound Only:
900 Block Beloit Ferdinand Alley From Harvard Street to intersection of first east/west alley and westbound to Ferdinand Avenue
Brown Avenue From Randolph Street to Franklin Street
Elgin Avenue From Lehmer Street to Circle Avenue
Hannah Avenue and Thomas
Avenue, alley between
From Adams Street to the first east/west alley south of Madison Street
Lathrop Avenue From Roosevelt Road to Harrison Street
Marengo Avenue From 16th Street to first east/west alley north of Roosevelt Road
Rockford Avenue From Randolph Street to Brown Avenue
Thomas Avenue From Adams Street to first east/west alley south of Madison Street
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 192/416
Thomas Avenue From Roosevelt Road to Harrison Street
Troost Avenue From Roosevelt Road to Harrison Street
Eastbound Only:
16th Street From Circle Avenue to Harlem Avenue
Dixon Street From Lathrop Avenue to Harlem Avenue
Lincoln Court From Des Plaines Avenue to Brown Avenue
Madison Street First alley south of Madison Street from first alley west of Elgin to Elgin
Madison Street First east/west alley south of Madison Street from Thomas Avenue to fist north/south alley East of Thomas
Avenue
Monroe Street From first north/south alley west of Des Plaines to Jackson
Randolph Street First east/west alley north from Brown Street to Circle Avenue between the hours of 8:00 A.M. and 9:00
A.M. and 2:15 P.M. and 3:15 P.M. on school days
Warren Avenue From Burkhardt Court to first north/south alley west of Circle Avenue
Washington Street From Des Plaines Avenue to Circle Avenue
Westbound Only:
13th Street From Harlem Avenue West to first north/south alley
Greenberg Road Between 3:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M from Jacobs Road to Des Plaines Avenue
Rockford Court From Rockford Avenue to Lathrop Avenue
Van Buren Street From Des Plaines Avenue to a line approximately 200 feet west
Wilcox Street From first north/south alley west of Des Plaines to Jackson
(Ord. O-29-96, 10-14-1996; amd. Ord. O-17-99, 6-28-1999)
6-5-3: RESTRICTED STREETS:
Industrial Drive:
It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to operate a motor vehicle on Industrial Drive between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. and six o'clock
(6:00) A.M.
For the purpose of this section, an "unauthorized person" shall be defined as a person who is not the owner, lessee, sublessee, employee, agent or person
having the permission of the owner, lessee, or sublessee of the land and/or the improvements abutting Industrial Drive to use or visit said land or
improvements thereon. (Ord. O-20-82, 10-25-1982)
6-5-4: STOP STREETS:
In accordance with the provisions of section 6-3-3 of this title and when signs are erected indicating stop intersections, that certain map kept up to date
and on file with the village indicating new and existing stop streets is hereby adopted by reference. (Village Code § 19-12; amd. 2004 Code)
6-5-5: TURNING RESTRICTIONS:
A. No Left Turn:
1. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle to turn left or cross the centerline of Harlem Avenue at the following intersections:
Eastbound traffic on Circle Avenue at the intersection of Circle Avenue and Harlem Avenue.
Eastbound traffic on Franklin Street at the intersection of Franklin Street and Harlem Avenue.
2. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle to turn left from northbound traffic on Lathrop Avenue to westbound traffic on Jackson
Boulevard. (Ord. O-42-05, 9-12-2005)
B. No Right Turn: It shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle to turn right at any place where such turns are prohibited by ordinance. Such
right turns are prohibited at the following streets and intersections and at the following times when posted:
16th Street, eastbound/westbound at Harlem Avenue
I-290 eastbound exit ramp, at Des Plaines
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 193/416
Circle and Randolph
Circle, southbound at Roosevelt
Des Plaines, northbound at Harrison/Dunlop/I-290 exit ramp
Des Plaines, northbound at Madison
Des Plaines, northbound at Roosevelt
Des Plaines, northbound/southbound at Jackson
Des Plaines, northbound/southbound at Randolph
Jackson, eastbound/westbound at Des Plaines
Madison, eastbound at Des Plaines
Randolph, eastbound/westbound at Des Plaines
Roosevelt, westbound at Circle
Roosevelt, westbound at Troost between seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. through nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and between four o'clock (4:00) P.M. through
seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. (Ord. O-62-06, 10-23-2006)
6-5-6: SPEED RESTRICTIONS:
In accordance with the provisions of section 6-3-5 of this title, the following speed limits are hereby established:
20 mile per hour speed limit:
Ferdinand Avenue between Madison Street and Jackson Boulevard (400 and 500 blocks)
25 mile per hour speed limit:
Madison Street between Harlem Avenue and Lathrop Avenue
35 mile per hour speed limit:
Madison Street between Lathrop Avenue and the Des Plaines River
(Village Code § 19-35; amd. Ord. O-17-79, 10-8-1979)
6-5-7: TRUCK RESTRICTIONS:
It shall be unlawful to drive any truck, except for the purposes of making a delivery and then for one block only on any street so designated by ordinance
and properly signposted.
A. Through Truck Traffic Permitted: Through truck traffic shall be permitted on the following streets only:
Circle Avenue
Des Plaines Avenue
Franklin Street
Harlem Avenue
Harvard Street
Madison Street
Randolph Street
Roosevelt Road
Sixteenth Street
Van Buren Street
B. Truck Traffic Prohibited: In accordance with the provisions of subsection 6-3-9E1 of this title, it shall be unlawful to operate a truck on any of the
following streets:
Elgin Ave. between Roosevelt Road and 16th Street
Marengo Avenue between Roosevelt Road and 16th Street
Monroe Street, 7600 block
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 194/416
13th Street between Circle Avenue and Harlem Avenue
14th Street between Circle Avenue and Harlem Avenue
15th Street between Circle Avenue and Harlem Avenue
16th Street between Circle Avenue and Harlem Avenue
This prohibition shall not apply to a person operating a truck on any of the foregoing streets for the purpose of delivering or removing goods to or from
any residence thereon but in such case a person shall not operate a truck on any of the said streets for a distance of more than three (3) blocks.
(Village code § 19-49; amd. Ord. O-14-71, 10-11-1971; Ord. O-16-79, 10-8-1979)
C. Limited Load Streets: In accordance with the provisions of subsection 6-3-9E2 of this title, the following streets are declared to be limited load streets:
Harrison Street, traffic over five (5) tons is prohibited (Ord. O-5-84, 4-9-1984)
6-5-8: PARKING METER ZONES:
In accordance with the provisions of section 6-4-3 of this title, the following are hereby designated as parking meter zones:
Brown Avenue, north side, from Des Plaines Avenue to Lathrop Avenue
Circle Avenue from Franklin Street to Harlem Avenue
Franklin Street, north side, from Circle Avenue to Des Plaines Avenue
Lehmer Avenue, south side, from Harlem Avenue to Lathrop Avenue
Madison Street, from Harlem Avenue to Lathrop Avenue and intersecting streets north and south to east and west bound alleys.
Roosevelt Road, from Harlem Avenue to Circle Avenue
Van Buren Street from Des Plaines Avenue to Madison Street
York Street, north side, from Des Plaines Avenue to Dunlop Street
(Ord. O-5-72, 3-27-1972; amd. Ord. O-19-73, 9-8-1973)
6-5-9: MUNICIPAL PARKING LOTS:
Parking in the following municipal parking lots, certain village streets designated hereinafter shall be regulated in the manner designated as follows:
MUNICIPAL LOTS
Regulated By:
Lot
No. Location Meters Permits
Collection
System
1 Beloit, south of Madison, west X X
1 Ferdinand, south of Madison, east X X
2 Beloit, south of Madison, east X X
4 Hannah, south of Madison, east X X
4 Hannah, south of Madison, west X X
5 Circle, south of Madison, east X X
6 Circle, south of Madison, west X X
7 Jackson at Des Plaines (s/w corner) X
8 Village hall Official business only
8 510 Des Plaines lot Employee parking only
9 Lathrop, north of Madison X X
10 Marengo, north of Roosevelt X X
11 Marengo, south of Roosevelt X X
121 Thomas at Madison (Constitution Ct.) X
13 Van Buren commuter lot X
14 Elgin and Madison (n/w corner) X X
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 195/416
15 Circle and Roosevelt (s/w corner) X X
16 Washington lot X X
172 541 Des Plaines X X
18 1004 Troost X
19 Lehmer Avenue (metered south side) X X
23 Randolph Street (west of Circle) X
25 Ferdinand, west side, north of Roosevelt X
26 700 Hannah X
Notes:
1. There shall be 1 parking space designated for the parking of authorized Village vehicles only in Lot 12 located at Thomas and Madison. Any
other vehicle parked in such designated space at any time shall be towed at the owner's expense and fined $50.00 for each violation.
2. The Village of Forest Park hereby determines that 10 metered parking spaces within the Municipal Parking Lot 17 shall be designated, with
appropriate signage, to be restricted to use only by patrons of the Forest Park Library during the hours of 10:00 A.M. until 9:00 P.M., Monday
through Friday, and 10:00 A.M. until 5:00 P.M., Saturday and Sunday.
(Ord. O-29-13, 10-15-2013; amd. Ord. O-22-18, 8-13-2018)
DESIGNATED VILLAGE STREETS
Location Meters Permits
14th Street cul-de-sac X1
15th Street cul-de-sac X1
7339 West 15th Street X1
1140 - 1155 Hannah, east and west sides X1
7700 York Street (and Dunlop Avenue) X2 X1
Notes:
1. Night only permit.
2. Daytime.
(Ord. O-29-13, 10-15-2013)
6-5-10: PERMIT PARKING LOTS:
The designated permit parking hours for Municipal lots and for certain designated Village streets shall be as follows:
Lot Day Night Combination
1 E & W 6 A.M. to 8 P.M. 8 P.M. to 9 A.M. 24 hours
2 6 A.M. to 8 P.M. 8 P.M. to 9 A.M. 24 hours
4 E & W 6 A.M. to 8 P.M. 8 P.M. to 9 A.M. 24 hours
5 6 A.M. to 8 P.M. 8 P.M. to 9 A.M. 24 hours
6 None 8 P.M. to 9 A.M. 24 hours
7 None 9 P.M. to 7 A.M. None
8 None None None
9 6 A.M. to 8 P.M. 8 P.M. to 9 A.M. 24 hours
10 9 A.M. to 8 P.M. 8 P.M. to 9 A.M. 24 hours
11 9 A.M. to 8 P.M. 8 P.M. to 9 A.M. 24 hours
12 None None None
13 None None None
14 6 A.M. to 8 P.M. 8 P.M. to 9 A.M. 24 hours
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 196/416
15 9 A.M. to 8 P.M. 8 P.M. to 9 A.M. 24 hours
16 None 8 P.M. to 9 A.M. None
17 6 A.M. to 8 P.M. 8 P.M. to 9 A.M. 24 hours
18 9 A.M. to 8 P.M. 8 P.M. to 9 A.M. 24 hours
19 None 8 P.M. to 9 A.M. None
23 None 7 P.M. to 7 A.M. None
25 None 7 P.M. to 7 A.M. None
26 None 8 P.M. to 8 A.M. None
(Ord. O-29-13, 10-15-2013; amd. Ord. O-22-18, 8-13-2018)
Designated Village Streets
14th Street cul-de-sac Night only 8 P.M. to 9 A.M.
15th Street cul-de-sac Night only 8 P.M. to 9 A.M.
7339 West 15th Street Night only 8 P.M. to 7 A.M.
1140 - 1155 Hannah, east and west sides Night only 8 P.M. to 9 A.M.
7700 York Street (and Dunlop Avenue) Night only 8 P.M. to 9 A.M.
(Ord. O-29-13, 10-15-2013)
6-5-11: SNOW ROUTES:
In accordance with the provisions of section 6-4-2 of this title, the following streets are hereby designated snow routes within the Village, and parking
thereon shall be prohibited as provided in said section 6-4-2 of this title:
All streets within the Village with the exception of the following:
Harlem Avenue
Harrison Street
Jackson Boulevard
Lehmer Street
Madison Street
Randolph Street
Roosevelt Road
(Ord. O-17-98, 5-11-1998)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 13-19 - LOADING ZONES. Go to new ordinance.
6-5-12: LOADING ZONES:
Pursuant to subsection 6-4-2C of this title, the Village hereby designates the following as a loading zone and further directs that such location be marked
by appropriate signs:
Des Plaines Avenue East side of 200 block
(Ord. O-36-03, 10-14-2003)
Chapter 6
VEHICLE EQUIPMENT AND CONDITION
6-6-1: CLEAR VISION:
It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle which is loaded or in such a condition that the operator does not have a clear vision of all parts of the roadway
essential to the safe operation of the vehicle. Any view of the roadway to the rear so obstructed shall be equipped with a mirror so attached as to give him
a view of the roadway behind him. (Village Code § 19-75)
6-6-2: LIGHTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 197/416
A. Required: It shall be unlawful to operate or park on any street any vehicle not equipped with adequate lights conforming to the requirements of the state
law, provided that vehicles may be parked at nighttime without lights on any street or portion thereof, designated by ordinance as a place where
vehicles may be parked at nighttime without lights on any street or portion thereof, designated by ordinance as a place where vehicles may so park at
nighttime. (Village Code § 19-83)
B. Signal Lamps: Any motor vehicle in use on a highway shall be equipped with, and required signal shall be given by, a signal lamp or lamps or
mechanical signal device when the distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the left outside limit of the body, cab, or load of such
motor vehicle exceeds twenty four inches (24"), or when the distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the rear limit of the body or load
thereof exceed fourteen feet (14'). The latter measurement shall apply to any single vehicle, also to any combination of vehicles. (Village Code § 19-76)
C. Volunteer Firefighters' Lights: Any motor vehicle owned or usually operated by a volunteer firefighter may be equipped with not to exceed two (2) lamps
which shall emit a blue light without glare. One such lamp may be mounted on the rear of any such vehicles. A flashing blue light may be used only
when such firefighter is responding to a fire call. (Village Code § 19-84)
6-6-3: HORN:
Every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a good and sufficient audible signalling device in efficient working condition. Such signalling device shall be
sounded when necessary to give timely warning of the approach of a vehicle, but such horn or other signalling shall not be sounded for any purpose other
than as a warning of impending danger.
No motor vehicle other than an emergency vehicle shall be equipped with a siren or gong signalling device. (Village Code § 19-78)
6-6-4: BRAKES:
It shall be unlawful to drive any motor vehicle upon a street unless such vehicle is equipped with good and sufficient brakes in good working condition, as
required by the state traffic law, or to operate any vehicle which is so loaded that the operator does not have ready access to the mechanism operating the
brakes of such vehicle. (Village Code § 19-81)
6-6-5: TIRES:
A. General: It shall be unlawful to operate on any street any motor vehicle which is not equipped with tires conforming to the requirements of the state
traffic law. (Village Code § 19-86)
B. Nonskid Devices: It shall be unlawful to operate upon any street any motor vehicle equipped with any nonskid device so constructed that any rigid or
nonflexible portion thereof comes into contact with the pavement or roadway. (Village Code § 19-85)
6-6-6: NOISE AND SMOKE:
A. Mufflers: No motor vehicle shall be operated on any street unless such vehicle is provided with a muffler in efficient actual working condition; and the
use of a cutout is prohibited. (Village Code § 19-82)
B. Gas And Smoke: It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle which emits dense smoke or such an amount of smoke or fumes as to be dangerous to the
health of persons or as to endanger the drivers of other vehicles. (Village Code § 19-79)
6-6-7: PROJECTING LOADS:
A. The maximum width and height of any vehicle and its load shall not exceed the limits expressed in the state traffic law.
B. No passenger type vehicle shall be operated on the street with a load extending beyond the line of the fenders on the left sideof the vehicle nor
extending more than six inches (6") beyond the line of the fenders on the right side thereof.
C. No vehicle, unladen or with load, shall exceed a length of forty two feet (42') extreme over all dimensions.
D. No combination of vehicles coupled together shall consist of more than two (2) units, and no such combination of vehicles, unladen or with load, shall
exceed a total length of fifty feet (50'); but such length limitations shall not apply to vehicles operated in daytime when transporting pipes, poles,
machinery and other objects which cannot be readily dismembered, nor to such vehicles operated at nighttime by a public utility when engaged in
emergency repair work; but such loads carried at night shall be clearly marked with sufficient lights to show the full dimensions of the load.
E. No part of the load of a vehicle shall extend more than three feet (3') in front of the extreme front portion of the vehicle. (Village Code § 19-80)
6-6-8: WEIGHT:
It shall be unlawful to drive on any street any motor vehicle with a weight, including load, in excess of that permitted by the state traffic law for driving on
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 198/416
improved highways, or with weight distributed in a manner not conforming to such law. (Village Code § 19-87)
6-6-9: HANDICAPPED PARKING IDENTIFICATION:
Upon application and the submission of proper documentation, the village clerk shall issue to any person entitled thereto a decal indicating that the person
is entitled to all of the privileges afforded a handicapped licensed vehicle as provided by law. (Ord. O-20-80, 11-24-1980)
Chapter 7
BICYCLES
6-7-1: LICENSE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Required: No person who resides in the village shall ride or propel a bicycle on any street or upon any public way within the village unless such bicycle
has been licensed and the license is attached thereto.
B. Application: Application for a bicycle license shall be made upon a form provided by the village and shall be made to the village clerk. An initial license
fee of twenty five cents ($0.25) shall be paid to the village before a license is granted. An annual fee shall not be required.
C. Issuance:
1. The police department upon receiving the proper application and fee, upon approval by the chief of police, is authorized to issue a license and an
identification card as prescribed by the police department, containing the name and address of the owner and a complete description of the bicycle.
2. The chief of police shall not approve the issuance of a license for any bicycle if he knows or has reasonable grounds to believe the applicant is not
the owner of or entitled to the possession of such bicycle.
3. The police department shall keep a record of the number of each bicycle registered, the name and address of the person to whom the license was
issued, and the color and serial number of the bicycle for which the license was issued.
D. Inspection: The chief of police may inspect a bicycle before approving the licensing of same and may refuse to approve a license for any bicycle which
he determines is in unsafe mechanical condition. (Ord. O-4-72, 1-24-1972)
6-7-2: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
A. License Affixed To Bicycle:
1. The police department, upon issuing a license, which shall contain the name Forest Park, Illinois, and a number, shall causethe same to be mounted
and firmly attached to the frame attached to seat and connected to the sprocket of the bicycle.
2. The license shall be permanently assigned to this bicycle and no person shall remove this license from the bicycle, except upon the transfer of
ownership or in the event the bicycle is wrecked, junked or dismantled and is no longer used upon the streets of the village.
B. Transfer Of Ownership: Upon the sale of the bicycle the license should be removed, destroyed and the police department notified that the bicycle is no
longer in the possession of the former owner. Any bicycle registered by a new owner must have a new license.
C. Serial Numbers: It shall be unlawful to destroy, remove, alter, cover or deface the manufacturer's serial number on any bicycle. It shall be unlawful for
any person to own or have custody of a bicycle on which the original serial number has been destroyed, altered, removed, covered or defaced. In the
event a bicycle has been purchased which does not contain a manufacturer's serial number the police department shall assign an original serial
number on the frame of the bicycle and this number shall be considered the original number. (Ord. O-4-72, 1-24-1972)
6-7-3: COMMERCIAL ACTIVITIES:
A. Buying Or Selling1: Every person engaged in the business of buying, selling or exchanging bicycles in the village shall maintain for five (5) years a
record containing the name, color, type, and serial number of each bicycle bought, sold or exchanged, and shall contain the name and address of each
person buying, selling or exchanging a bicycle, which record shall be open to inspection by a representative of the police department during reasonable
business hours.
B. Rental Agencies: No rental agency shall rent or offer to rent any bicycle unless the bicycle is licensed and the license plate is firmly attached as
provided herein and such bicycle is equipped with lamps and other equipment as required in this chapter. (Ord. O-4-72, 1-24-1972)
6-7-4: RIDING ON BICYCLES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, or permit to ride on any bicycle any more persons than the number of permanently installed seats on said
bicycle. (Ord. O-4-72, 1-24-1972)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 199/416
6-7-5: BICYCLE EQUIPMENT:
A. Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped with a lamp on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least five
hundred feet (500') to the front and with a reflector on the rear of a type which shall be visible from all distances from fifty feet (50') to three hundred
feet (300') to the rear when directly in front of lawful upper beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light visible from a distance
of five hundred feet (500') to the rear may be used in addition to the red reflector.
B. No person shall operate a bicycle that is not equipped with a bell or other device capable of giving a signal audible for a distance of at least one
hundred feet (100'), except that a bicycle shall not be equipped with nor shall any persons use upon a bicycle any siren or whistle.
C. Every bicycle shall be equipped with a good and adequate brake. (Ord. O-4-72, 1-24-1972)
Chapter 8
ABANDONED AND INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES
6-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
Terms used in this chapter not hereinafter defined shall have the same meaning as in the Illinois vehicle code1:
ABANDONED VEHICLE: Any vehicle in a state of disrepair rendering the vehicle incapable of being driven in its condition or any vehicle that has not been
moved or used for seven (7) consecutive days or more and is apparently deserted.
HIGHWAY: The entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained, when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for
purposes of vehicular travel.
INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle from which, for a period of at least seven (7) days, the engine, wheels or other parts have been
removed, or on which the engine, wheels or other parts have been altered, damaged or otherwise so treated that the vehicle is incapable of being driven
under its own motor power.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Every vehicle which is self-propelled, and every vehicle which is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead wires, but not
operated upon rails.
OWNER: A person who holds legal title to a vehicle, or in the event a vehicle is the subject of an agreement for the conditional sale or lease thereof with
the right of purchase upon performance of the conditions stated in the agreement and with an immediate right of possession vested in the conditional
vendee or lessee, or in the event a mortgagor of such vehicle is entitled to possession, then such conditional vendee or lessee or mortgagor shall be
deemed the owner for the purpose of this chapter.
PERSON: Every natural person, firm, copartnership, association or corporation. (Ord. O-18-99, 6-28-1999)
6-8-2: ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES:
A. Abandonment Prohibited: The abandonment of a motor vehicle or other vehicle or any part thereof on any highway in the village is unlawful and subject
to penalties as set forth herein. The abandonment of a motor vehicle or other vehicle or any part thereof on private or public property, other than a
highway, in view of the general public, anywhere in the village is unlawful.
B. Removal:
1. A motor vehicle or other vehicle or any part thereof so abandoned on private property may be authorized for removal by or upon the order of the
chief of police after expiration of a ten (10) day notice sent to the registered owner.
2. A motor vehicle or other vehicle or any part thereof so abandoned on any public property may be authorized for removal by or upon the order of the
chief of police after expiration of a three (3) day notice sent to the registered owner.
3. Any subsequent violation of this section shall result in the immediate issuance of a citation to the registered owner pursuant to section 6-8-5 of this
chapter. (Ord. O-18-99, 6-28-1999)
6-8-3: REMOVAL OF ABANDONED VEHICLES:
A. Notice To Police: When an abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed motor vehicle or other vehicle comes into the temporary possession or custody of a
person in this state, not the owner of the vehicle, such person shall immediately notify the police department when the vehicle is within the corporate
limits of the village. Upon receipt of such notification, the chief of police shall authorize a towing service to remove and take possession of the
abandoned, lost, stolen, or unclaimed motor vehicle or other vehicle. The towing service will safely keep the towed vehicle and its contents, maintain a
record of the two (2) until the vehicle is claimed by the owner, or any other person legally entitled to possession thereof, or until it is disposed of as
provided herein.
B. Removal Of Vehicles:
1. Authority: When a stock car, demolition derby vehicle or abandoned, unattended, wrecked, burned, or partially dismantled motor vehicle or other
vehicle is creating a traffic hazard within the village or its physical appearance is causing the impediment of traffic, its immediate removal by a towing
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 200/416
service may be authorized by order of the chief of police.
2. Owner to Bear Costs: When a vehicle is removed from either public or private property authorized by order of the chief of police, the owner of vehicle
will be responsible for all towing costs.
3. Records Of Vehicle Removed: When a motor vehicle or other vehicle is authorized to be towed away, the police departmentshall keep and maintain
a record of the vehicle towed, listing the color, year of the manufacture, manufacturer's trade name, manufacturer's series name, body style, vehicle
identification number and license plate year and number displayed on the vehicle. The record shall also include the date and hour of tow, location
towed from, location towed to, reason for towing and the name of the officer authorizing the tow.
4. Search For Owner: When the police department does not know the identity of the registered owner or other legally entitled person, they will cause
the motor vehicle records of the state of Illinois to be searched by a directed communication to the secretary of state for the purpose of obtaining the
required ownership information. The police department shall cause the stolen vehicle files of the Illinois state police to be searched by a directed
communication to the Illinois state police to be searched by a directed communication to the Illinois state police for stolen or wanted information on
the vehicle. When the Illinois state police files are searched with negative results, the information contained in the national crime information center
(NCIC) files will be searched by the Illinois state police. The information determined from these record searches will be used by the police
department in sending a notification by certified mail to the owner or legally entitled person advising where the vehicle is held, requesting a
disposition to be made and setting forth public sale information.
5. Notice To State Police: When the registered owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of a motor vehicle or other vehicle cannot be
identified from the registration files of this state or from the registration files of a foreign state, if applicable, the police department shall notify the
Illinois state police for the purpose of identifying the vehicle's owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of the vehicle. The information
obtained by the Illinois state police will be immediately forwarded to the law enforcement agency having custody of the vehicle for notification of
owner.
C. Reclaiming Vehicles: Any time before a motor vehicle or other vehicle is sold at public sale or disposed of as provided herein, the owner or other person
legally entitled to its possession may reclaim the vehicle by presenting to the police department proof of ownership or proof of the right to possession of
the vehicle.
No vehicle shall be released to the owner or other person entitled to its possession until all towing and storage charges have been paid.
D. Sale Of Vehicle: Whenever an abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed motor vehicle or other vehicle, seven (7) years of age or newer, remains unclaimed
by the registered owner or other person legally entitled to its possession for a period of thirty (30) days after notice has been given as provided herein,
the police department having possession of the vehicle may cause it to be sold at public sale to the highest bidder.
Notice of the time and place of the sale shall be posted in a conspicuous place for at least ten (10) days prior to the sale on the premises where the
vehicle has been impounded. At least ten (10) days prior to the sale, the police department shall cause a notice of the time and place of the sale to be
sent by certified mail to the registered owner or other person known by the police department or towing service to be legally entitled to the possession
of the vehicle to be sold and what steps must be taken by any legally entitled person to reclaim the vehicle.
In those instances where the certified notification specified herein has been returned by the postal authorities to the police department due to the
addressee having moved, or being unknown at the address obtained from the registration records of this state, the sending of a second certified notice
will not be required.
E. Older Vehicles: When the identity of the registered owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of an abandoned, lost or unclaimed vehicle
of seven (7) years of age or older (other than an antique vehicle) cannot be determined by any means provided for in subsection B4 of this section, the
vehicle may be sold as provided herein or disposed of in the manner authorized by subsection D of this section without notice to the registered owner
or other person legally entitled to the possession of the vehicle.
When an abandoned vehicle of more than seven (7) years of age is impounded as specified by this section (other than an antique vehicle), it will be
kept in custody for contacting the registered owner by the U.S. mail, public service or in person for a determination of disposition, and an examination
of the Illinois state police stolen motor vehicle files for theft and wanted information. At the expiration of the ten (10) day period, without the benefit of
disposition information being received from the registered owner, the chief of police will authorize the disposal of the vehicle as junk only.
F. Records: When a motor vehicle or other vehicle in the custody of the police department is reclaimed by the registered owner or other legally entitled
person, or when the vehicle is sold at public sale or otherwise disposed of as provided in this section, a record of the transaction shall be maintained by
the police department for a period of one year from the date of the sale or disposal.
G. Disposition Of Sale Proceeds: When a vehicle located within the corporate limits of the village is authorized to be towed away by the chief of police and
disposed of as set forth in subsection D of this section, the proceeds of the public sale or disposition after the deduction of towing, storage and
processing charges shall be deposited in the municipal treasury.
H. Liability Of Officers: Any police officer, towing service owner, operator or employee shall not be held to answer or be liable for damages or his legal
representatives, or any otherperson legally entitled to the possession of a motor vehicle or other vehicle when the vehicle was processed and sold or
disposed of as provided by subsection D of this section. (Ord. O-18-99, 6-28-1999)
6-8-4: INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES:
A. Wrecked, Inoperable Vehicles A Nuisance: No person shall leave any partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked or junked vehicle on any street in the
village. Inoperable vehicles, whether on public or private property, are hereby declared to be a nuisance.
B. Abatement:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 201/416
1. Disposal: All persons are required to dispose of any inoperable motor vehicles under their control upon written notice received from the corporate
authorities or from the chief of police, or any member of his department designated by him authorizing such disposition of such inoperable motor
vehicle.
2. Impounding: The chief of police or any member of his department designated by him is hereby authorized to remove or to have removed any vehicle
left at any place within the village which reasonably appears to be in violation of this chapter or which reasonably appears to be lost, stolen,
unclaimed, or which is an inoperable vehicle as defined herein. Such vehicle shall be impounded until lawfully claimed or disposed of in accordance
with 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/4-201 et seq. (Ord. O-18-99, 6-28-1999)
6-8-5: VIOLATIONS; PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined as provided in the general penalty in section 1-3-1 of this code for each offense. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which such violation occurs or continues. (Ord. O-54-07, 11-13-2007)
Chapter 9
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
6-9-1: PURPOSE:
The stated purpose of this chapter is to provide a fair and efficient enforcement of municipal vehicular standing, parking and condition of vehicle regulation
violations and other motor vehicle regulation violations as may be allowed by law, excluding violations of section 6-1-1/13-111 of this title, "operation
without certificate of valid safety test attached to windshield second division vehicle", through the administrative adjudication of violation of municipal
ordinances regulating the standing, parking and condition of vehicles within the geographic boundaries of the village and a schedule of uniform fines and
penalties and authority and procedures for collection of unpaid fines and penalties.
For purposes of this chapter, "compliance violation" means a violation of a municipal regulation governing the condition or use of equipment on a vehicle or
governing the display of a municipal wheel tax license1. (Ord. O-54-07, 11-13-2007)
6-9-2: ADMINISTRATIVE COMPOSITION:
The system of administrative adjudication of vehicular standing, parking and compliance regulation violations shall provide for a traffic compliance
administrator, hearing officer, computer operator/system coordinator and hearing room personnel (deputy), with the power, authority and limitations as are
hereinafter set forth:
A. Traffic Compliance Administrator: The traffic compliance administrator shall be empowered and is hereby authorized and directed to:
1. Operate and manage the system of administrative adjudication of vehicular standing, parking and compliance regulation violations.
2. Adopt, distribute and process standing, parking and compliance violation notices and other notices as may be required under this chapter or as may
be reasonably required to carry out the purpose of this chapter.
3. Collect monies paid as fines and/or penalties assessed after a final determination of vehicular standing, parking or compliance regulation violation
liability.
4. Conduct hearings, as a hearing officer, with the same power and authority as is hereinafter set forth, during the absence of the appointed hearing
officer.
5. Certify copies of final determination of standing, parking and compliance regulation violation liability and factual reports verifying that the final
determination of standing, parking and compliance regulation violation liability was issued in accordance with this chapter and 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-208.3.
6. Review final determination of vehicular standing, parking and compliance regulation violation liability, validity of notices of impending impoundment
or validity of notice of impending driver's license suspension, in an administrative review capacity in accordance with provisions of this chapter
hereinafter set forth.
7. Promulgate rules and regulations reasonably required to operate and maintain the administrative adjudication system hereby created.
8. Collect unpaid fines and penalties by filing complaints in the circuit court of Cook County or selecting or appointing an individual or agency to act on
behalf of the village in filing complaints seeking judgments for unpaid fines or penalties and pursuit of all post judgment remedies available by current
law.
9. Select or appoint an individual, agency or firm to tow and impound vehicles in accordance with the provisions of this chapter hereinafter set forth.
B. Hearing Officer: The hearing officer shall be empowered and is hereby authorized and directed to:
1. Preside over the administrative hearings, established herein, as the adjudicator.
2. Administer oaths.
3. Issue subpoenas to secure the attendance of witnesses and production of relevant papers or documentation.
4. Assess fines and penalties for the violation of vehicular standing, parking or compliance regulation violations as are established in section 6-9-9 of
this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 202/416
5. Make final determination of:
a. Vehicular standing, parking and compliance regulation violation liability.
b. Validity of notice of impending impoundment.
c. Validity of notice of impending driver's license suspension in accordance with provisions of this chapter hereinafter set forth.
6. Provide for the accurate recordation of the administrative adjudication hearings.
C. System Coordinator/Computer Operator: The system coordinator/computer operator is hereby authorized and directed to operate and maintain the
computer programs for the administrative adjudication system hereby created, on a day to day basis including, but not limited to:
1. Input of violation notice information.
2. Hearing dates and notice dates.
3. Fine and penalty assessments and payments.
4. Issue payment receipts.
5. Issue succeeding notices of hearing dates, final determination of liability, notice of impending impoundment and notice of impending driver's license
suspension, as directed by the traffic compliance administrator in accordance with the provisions hereinafter set forth.
6. Keep accurate records of appearances and nonappearances at administrative hearings, pleas entered, fines and penalties assessed and paid.
D. Hearing Room Personnel: Hearing room personnel are hereby authorized and directed to:
1. Maintain hearing room decorum.
2. Have and execute authority as is granted to courtroom deputies of the circuit court.
3. Perform such other duties or acts as may reasonably be required and as directed by the hearing officer or traffic compliance administrator.
4. This position is limited to off duty, full time, part time or auxiliary police officers.
E. Appointments: The mayor is hereby authorized to appoint persons to hold the positions above set forth. One person may hold and fulfill the
requirements of one or more of the above stated positions.
F. Compensation: Compensation to be paid for each of the above stated positions shall be as determined by the mayor and approved by the village
council. (Ord. O-41-03, 10-14-2003)
6-9-3: PROCEDURES:
The system of administrative adjudication of vehicular standing, parking and compliance regulation violations shall be in accordance with the following
procedures and final determinations of vehicular standing, parking and compliance regulation violation liability, validity of notice of impending
impoundment, validity of notice of impending driver's license suspension, impoundment of vehicle and collections shall be made only in accordance with
the provisions set forth below:
A. Violation Notice: Vehicular standing, parking and compliance regulation violation notices shall be issued by the person authorized herein and shall
contain information and shall be served, certified and have evidentiary admissibility as is hereinafter set forth.
B. Authorization: All commissioned police officers, full time and part time, auxiliary police and community service officers, as well as other specifically
appointed individuals, shall have the authority to issue violation notices.
C. Detection Of Violations: Any individual authorized hereby to issue violation notices and who detects a violation of any section of any applicable
municipal ordinance, shall issue a notice of violation thereof and shall make service thereof as is hereinafter set forth.
D. Contents Of Notice: The vehicular standing, parking and compliance regulation violation notice shall contain, but shall not be limited to, the following
information:
1. The date, time and place of the violation (date of issuance).
2. The particular vehicular standing, parking or compliance regulation violated.
3. The fine and any penalty which may be assessed for late payment.
4. The signature and identification number of the person issuing the notice.
5. A section entitled "Request for Hearing" which shall clearly set forth that the registered owner or lessee may appear at the initial administrative
hearing to contest the validity of the violation notice on the date and at the time and place as specified in the violation notice by:
a. Checking or placing a mark in a space provided and clearly identified request for hearing.
b. Placing his name and current address in the place provided.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 203/416
c. Signing his name in the appropriate indicated place.
d. Filing the violation notice with the request for hearing portion fully completed; with the traffic compliance administrator postmarked within ten (10)
days of the violation notice issuance. The request shall be deemed filed upon receipt by the traffic compliance administrator.
6. The date, time and place of an administrative hearing at which the violation may be contested on its merits.
7. That payment of the indicated fine and any late payment penalty shall operate as a final disposition of the violation.
8. A section entitled "nonresident request for hearing - nonappearance", which clearly sets forth that a nonresident registered owner or lessee may
appear at the initial administrative hearing to contest the validity of the violation notice without personally appearing by:
a. Checking or placing a mark in a space provided and clearly identified "nonresident request for hearing - nonappearance".
b. Placing his name and current address in the place provided.
c. Signing his name in the appropriate indicated place.
d. Filing the violation notice with the nonresident request for hearing portion fully completed, with the traffic compliance administrator postmarked
within ten (10) days of the violation notice issuance. The request shall be deemed filed upon receipt by the traffic compliance administrator.
e. Filing a notarized statement of facts specifying the grounds for challenging the violation notice which must be filed with the traffic compliance
administrator postmarked within ten (10) days of the violation notice issuance. The request shall be deemed filed, if post marked by the due dates
herein specified.
f. A clearly marked statement that execution of the nonresident request for hearing is a waiver of the nonresident's right to a personal appearance
and that the adjudication will be made based upon the notarized statement of facts submitted by the nonresident and the facts contained in the
violation notice.
E. Service Of Notice: Service of the violation notice shall be made by the person issuing such notice by:
1. Affixing the original or a facsimile of the notice to an unlawfully standing or parked vehicle; or
2. Handing the notice to the registered owner, operator or lessee of the vehicle, if present.
F. Certification Of Facts: The correctness of facts contained in the vehicular standing, parking or compliance regulation violation notices shall be certified
by the person issuing said notice by:
1. Signing his name to the notice at the time of service; or
2. In the case of a notice produced by a computer device, by signing a single certificate, to be kept by the traffic compliance administrator, attesting to
the correctness of all notices produced by the device while under his control.
G. Records Kept: The original or a facsimile of the violation notice shall be retained by the traffic compliance administrator and kept as a record in the
ordinary course of business.
H. Prima Facie Evidence Of Correctness: Any violation notice issued, signed and served in accordance herewith, or a copy of the notice, shall be prima
facie correct and shall be prima facie evidence of the correctness of the facts shown on the notice.
I. Admissibility: The violation notice or a copy shall be admissible in any subsequent administrative or legal proceeding. (Ord. O-41-03, 10-14-2003)
6-9-4: ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS:
An administrative hearing to adjudicate the alleged standing, parking or compliance regulation violations on its merits:
A. Granting: Shall be granted to the registered owner or operator of the cited vehicle, pursuant to 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-208.3 or the lessee of
the cited vehicle, pursuant to 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-1306, incorporated herein by reference.
B. Hearing Dates: Hearing dates shall be at the date, time and place as is set forth in the violation notice issued and served, or such additional notices
issued in accordance with this chapter. Violators shall be given no less than three (3) opportunities to appear and failure to appear by the third
scheduled hearing date will result in a final determination of liability as hereinafter set forth.
C. Recording: Shall be tape recorded.
D. Determination: Shall culminate in a determination of liability or nonliability, made by the hearing officer, who shall consider testimony and other evidence
without the application of the formal or technical rules of evidence. The hearing officer shall, upon a determination of liability, assess fines and penalties
in accordance with section 6-9-9 of this chapter.
E. Representation By Attorney: Persons appearing to contest the alleged standing, parking or compliance violation on its merits may be represented by
counsel at their own expense.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 204/416
F. Review: The final determination of any matter which may be decided by the hearing officer may be reviewed as is hereinafter set forth. (Ord. O-41-03,
10-14-2003)
6-9-5: ADDITIONAL NOTICES:
Upon failure of the registered owner or lessee of the cited vehicle to appear at the administrative hearing indicated in the vehicular standing, parking or
compliance regulation violation notice, or upon final determination of violation liability, the traffic compliance administrator shall send or cause to be sent
additional notices which:
A. Shall be sent to the registered owner or lessee of the cited vehicle at the address as is recorded with the secretary of state.
B. Shall be sent to the lessee of the cited vehicle at the address last known to the lessor of the cited vehicle at the time of the lease.
C. Shall be sent by first class mail, postage prepaid.
D. Service of additional notices sent in accordance herewith shall be complete as of the date of deposit in the United States mail.
E. The additional notices sent in accordance herewith shall be in the following sequence and contain, but not be limited to, the following information:
1. Upon the failure of the registered owner or lessee of the cited vehicle to appear at the hearing set forth in the vehicular standing, parking or
compliance regulation violation notice, additional notices shall be sent, as above set forth, and shall contain, but not be limited to, the following
information:
a. Date and location of violation cited in the vehicular standing, parking or compliance regulation violation notice.
b. Particular standing, parking or compliance regulation violated.
c. Vehicle make and state registration.
d. Fine and any penalty that may be assessed for late payment.
e. Notice to the registered owner or lessee of their current status, other than paid in full.
f. Date, time and place of the administrative hearing at which the alleged violation may be contested on its merits.
g. Statement that failure to either pay fine and any applicable penalty or failure to appear at the hearing on its merits on the date and at the time and
place specified will result in a final determination of vehicle standing, parking or compliance regulation violation liability for the cited violation in the
amount of the fine and penalty indicated.
h. Statement that upon the occurrence of a final determination of vehicular standing, parking or compliance violation liability for the failure and the
exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust, available administrative or judicial procedures for review, any unpaid fine or penalty will constitute a debt
due and owing the village.
2. A notice of final determination of vehicular standing, parking or compliance regulation violation liability shall be sent following an appearance by the
violator and a determination of liability, or the failure to appear by the violator by the third and final hearing date upon conclusion of any administrative
and/or judicial review, as is hereinafter set forth, and the notice shall contain, but not be limited to, the following information and warnings:
a. A statement that the unpaid fine and any penalty assessed is a debt due and owing the village.
b. A warning that failure to pay the fine and any penalty due and owing the village within the time specified may result in the village filing a complaint
in the circuit court of Cook County to have the unpaid fine or penalty rendered a judgement in accordance with 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-
208.3(f), incorporated herein by reference.
c. A warning that the vehicle owned by the person and located within the village may be impounded for failure to pay fines or penalties for five (5) or
more vehicular standing, parking or compliance regulation violations. (Ord. O-41-03, 10-14-2003)
6-9-6: FINAL DETERMINATION OF LIABILITY:
A final determination of vehicular standing, parking or compliance regulation violation liability shall:
A. Occur following the failure to pay the total assessed fine or penalty after the hearing officer's determination of vehicular standing, parking or compliance
regulation violation liability and the exhaustion of or the failure to exhaust any administrative review procedures hereinafter set forth; or
B. Where a person fails to appear at a prior hearing or by the third and final administrative hearing provided to contest the alleged violation on the date and
at the time and place specified in a prior served or mailed notice, the hearing officer's determination of vehicular standing, parking or compliance
regulation violation liability shall become final:
1. Upon denial of a timely petition to set aside that determination; or
2. Upon the expiration of the period for filing petition without a filing having been made. (Ord. O-41-03, 10-14-2003)
6-9-7: ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 205/416
A petition to set aside a determination of vehicular standing, parking or compliance regulation violation liability may be filed by a person owing an unpaid
fine or penalty in the manner and subject to the restrictions and grounds hereinafter set forth:
A. A written petition to set aside a determination of liability must be filed in the office of the traffic compliance administrator within, but not later than,
fourteen (14) days from the date the determination of liability is made.
B. The traffic compliance administrator shall act upon the petition timely filed and render a decision thereon within fourteen (14) days of the date filed.
C. The grounds for setting aside a determination of liability shall be limited to the following:
1. The person against whom the determination of liability is made was not the owner or lessee of the cited vehicle on the date the vehicular standing,
parking or compliance regulation violation notice was issued.
2. The person's having paid the fine or penalty prior to the determination of liability for the violation in question.
3. Excusable failure to appear at or request a new date for a hearing.
D. Should the determination of liability be set aside, the traffic compliance administrator shall:
1. Notify the registered owner or lessee, as the case may be, that the determination of liability has been set aside.
2. Notify the registered owner or lessee, as the case may be, of a date, time and place for a hearing on the merits of the violation for which
determination of liability has been set aside.
3. Notice of setting aside of the determination of liability and the notice of the hearing date shall be by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the address
set forth on the petition to set aside the determination of liability.
4. Service of the notice shall be complete on the date the notice is deposited in the United States mail. (Ord. O-41-03, 10-14-2003)
6-9-8: NONRESIDENT PROCEDURES:
Nonresidents of the village who have been served a vehicular standing, parking or compliance regulation violation notice, in accordance with this chapter,
may contest the alleged violation on its merits, as could a resident, or may contest the validity without personally appearing at an administrative hearing
by:
A. Completing, in full, the nonresident request for hearing section of the violation notice, served upon him pursuant to this chapter.
B. Signing the nonresident request for hearing in the space specified in the violation notice, and acknowledging that his personal appearance is waived
and submitting to an adjudication based upon the notarized statement filed by him and the facts contained in the violation notice.
C. Filing the violation notice with the request for hearing section fully completed with the traffic compliance administrator postmarked within ten (10) days
of the violation notice issuance. The request shall be deemed filed upon receipt by the traffic compliance administrator.
D. Filing a notarized statement of facts specifying the grounds for challenging the violation notice which must be filed with the traffic compliance
administrator postmarked within ten (10) days of the violation notice issuance. The request shall be deemed filed upon receipt by the traffic compliance
administrator. The acceptance of a nonresident request for hearing after the due date or with cause shall, at the discretion of the traffic compliance
administrator, be accepted for hearing consideration and decision.
E. The hearing officer shall make an adjudication based upon the facts set forth in the notarized statement of facts filed by the nonresident as is contained
in the violation notice.
F. Notice of the determination of the hearing officer shall be served upon the nonresident by first class mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the nonresident
at the address set forth in the statement of facts submitted.
G. Service of the notice shall be complete on the date the notice is placed in the United States mail.
H. All other provisions of this chapter shall apply equally to nonresidents of the village. (Ord. O-41-03, 10-14-2003)
6-9-9: SCHEDULE OF FINES/PENALTIES:
A. General Penalty: Any person found liable of a violation of a standing, stopping or condition of motor vehicle violation, excluding a violation of section 6-
1-1/13-111 of this title, operation without certificate of valid safety test attached to windshield second division vehicle, after a hearing conducted in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, shall be fined in an amount not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each offense; provided,
however, that any person found liable of an offense of unauthorized parking in a parking space reserved for persons with disabilities, shall be fined in
an amount not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) for each offense. (Ord. O-54-07, 11-13-
2007)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 206/416
B. Separate Offenses: Except as provided in subsection A of this section, and except for those violations specifically set forth in subsection D of this
section, the fines and penalties which shall be imposed for each violation of a vehicular standing, parking or compliance regulation violation shall be as
set forth in the following fine payment schedule, in subsection D of this section, under category "general fine amount".
C. Uniform Application: The fines and penalties herein set forth for each violation of a standing, parking or compliance regulation violation shall be
uniformly applied. (Ord. O-5-04, 2-9-2004)
D. Fine Payment Schedule:
Fine Schedule
General
Fine
Amount
Opposite
Fire
Door/In
Fire
Lane
Handicapped
Zone
Expired
Parking
Meter
No
Parking
2:00
A.M. -
5:00
A.M.
Condition
Of Motor
Vehicle
Violation
Or
Removal/
Relocation
Of Vehicle
Step 1 - Upon service of a "Violation Notice" issued and paid on or before the
date of the hearing as indicated on the violation notice, unless some other
payment due date is determined at the hearing, the fine amount owed shall be:
$ 40.00
$100.00 $250.00
$ 30.00
$ 50.00
$ 50.00
Step 2 - Having failed to pay the fine amount specified in step 1, the fine amount
owed on or prior to the 2nd hearing date, shall be:
80.00 125.00 275.00 50.00 125.00 125.00
Step 3 - Having failed to pay the fine amount specified in step 2, the fine amount
owed on or prior to the 3rd hearing date, shall be:
120.00 150.00 300.00 100.00 150.00 150.00
Step 4 - Having failed to pay the fine amount specified in step 3, the fine
amount, upon a finding of liability for the violation, after failure to appear at the
3rd hearing, will be:
200.00 200.00 325.00 150.00 250.00 250.00
(Ord. O-30-17, 11-13-2017)
6-9-10: IMMOBILIZATION, TOWING AND IMPOUNDMENT:
A. Authority: Any motor vehicle whose registered owner has been determined to be liable for five (5) or more vehicular standing, parking or compliance
regulation violations, for which the fines or penalties assessed remain unpaid, may be immobilized or towed and impounded if:
1. The Traffic Compliance Administrator has determined that a person has been determined to be liable for five (5) or more vehicular standing, parking
or compliance regulation violations, the fines or penalties for which remain unpaid.
2. The person determined to be liable for five (5) or more violations is the registered owner of a motor vehicle located within the Village's geographical
boundaries.
3. A pretowing notice has been sent to the registered owner of the motor vehicle located within the geographical boundaries of the village which
contains, but shall not be limited to, the following:
a. A final determination has been made on five (5) or more vehicular standing, parking or compliance regulation violations, the fines and penalties for
which remain unpaid.
b. A listing of the violations for which the person has been determined to be liable, which shall include for each violation:
(1) The vehicular standing, parking or compliance regulation violation notice number.
(2) Date of issuance.
(3) Total amount of fines and penalties assessed.
c. The motor vehicle owned by the person and located within the village is subject to immobilization and/or towing and impoundment if the fines and
penalties are not paid within fourteen (14) days of the date of the notice.
d. The registered owner may contest the validity of the notice by fully completing and signing the request for hearing portion of one notice and by
filing the request for hearing with the traffic compliance administrator within, but not later than, fourteen (14) days of the date of the notice. The
request for hearing shall be deemed filed upon receipt by the traffic compliance administrator.
4. The motor vehicle of the registered owner to whom notice is sent has failed to make payment of the fines or penalties as specified in the notice and
no timely request for hearing has been filed with the traffic compliance administrator to contest the validity of the notice.
5. Upon the receipt of the request for hearing to contest the validity of the notice of impending immobilization or towing and impoundment, the traffic
compliance administrator shall schedule an administrative hearing to contest the validity of said notice, by disproving liability for the unpaid final
determinations of parking, standing or compliance regulation violation liability listed on the notice, on the next available hearing date, but in no case
shall the hearing be scheduled later than sixty (60) days after the request for hearing is filed.
a. The traffic compliance administrator shall serve notice of the hearing date upon the registered owner.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 207/416
b. Notice shall be sent by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the address as is set forth on the request for hearing.
c. Service of the notice shall be complete on the date it is placed in the United States mail.
B. Procedures: The registered owner of a vehicle immobilized or towed and impounded under this section shall have the right to a prompt administrative
hearing without the requirement of payment of outstanding fines and penalties for which final determination has been made.
1. The traffic compliance administrator shall serve a posttowing notice upon the registered owner of a vehicle immobilized or towed and impounded
under this section which notice shall contain, but not be limited to, the following information:
a. Date of immobilization or towing and date of impoundment.
b. Location of vehicle.
c. The vehicle was immobilized under this section for nonpayment of fines or penalties assessed for the violation of five (5) or more violations of
vehicular standing, parking or compliance regulations for which the registered owner has been determined liable and notified of impending
immobilization or towing and impoundment.
d. Date of notice of impending immobilization or towing and impoundment.
e. The registered owner may contest the validity of the immobilization or towing and impoundment by completing and signing the request for hearing
portion of the notice and filing the request for hearing with the traffic compliance administrator within, but not later than, fourteen (14) days of the
date of the notice which shall be deemed filed upon receipt by the traffic compliance administrator.
2. Upon the receipt of the request for hearing to contest the validity of the immobilization or towing and impoundment, the traffic compliance
administrator shall schedule an administrative hearing to contest the validity of the immobilization or towing and impoundment on the next available
hearing date or if sooner scheduled by the traffic compliance administrator for good cause shown, but in no case shall the hearing be scheduled later
than sixty (60) days after the request for hearing is filed.
a. The traffic compliance administrator shall serve notice of the hearing date upon the registered owner.
b. Notice shall be sent by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the address as is set forth on the request for hearing.
c. Service of the notice shall be complete on the date it is placed in the United States mail.
3. An order entered after the hearing to contest the validity of the immobilization or towing and impoundment is a final administrative decision within the
meaning of 735 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-101 et seq., incorporated herein by reference. (Ord. O-41-03, 10-14-2003)
C. Release Of Vehicle: A vehicle impounded pursuant to this section shall be released to the registered owner thereof, or his agent, upon payment of all
fines and penalties due and owing the village as specified in the notice sent in accordance with this section, plus a one hundred dollar ($100.00)
immobilization fee, in addition to the payment of any towing charges and accrued daily impound charges or upon order of the hearing officer following a
hearing contesting the validity of the impoundment. (Ord. O-6-10, 1-25-2010)
D. Services Provided: The traffic compliance administrator shall appoint or retain the services of an individual agency or company to tow and impound
vehicles in accordance herewith, provided:
1. The individual, agency or company is fully licensed according to local and state law.
2. The individual, agency or company is fully insured.
3. The individual, agency or company has available a secured impound area within which to retain vehicles impounded hereunder. For the purpose of
this subsection, a "secured area" shall mean an area bounded by a fence, chainlink or otherwise, of a sufficient height and with locking gates so as
to minimize or prevent unauthorized entry into the impounded vehicles. (Ord. O-41-03, 10-14-2003)
6-9-11: JUDICIAL REVIEW:
Judicial review of final determinations of vehicular standing, parking or compliance regulation violations and final administrative decisions issued after
hearing regarding vehicle immobilization or towing and impoundment made under this chapter shall be subject to the provisions of the administrative
review law as is set forth in 735 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/301 et seq., incorporated herein by reference. (Ord. O-41-03, 10-14-2003)
6-9-12: DEBT TO VILLAGE:
Any fine, penalty or part of any fine or any penalty assessed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and remaining unpaid after the exhaustion
of, or the failure to exhaust, administrative remedies created under this chapter and the conclusion of any judicial review procedures shall be a debt due
and owing the village and, as such, may be collected in accordance with the applicable law. Payment in full of any fine or penalty resulting from a standing,
parking or compliance violation shall constitute a final disposition of that violation. (Ord. O-41-03, 10-14-2003)
6-9-13: JUDGMENT:
A. The traffic compliance administrator shall, following the expiration of the period within which administrative or judicial review may be sought for a final
determination of violation, take all necessary actions, execute all required documents and appoint or retain any individual or agency deemed
appropriate to obtain a judgment against and collect monies from the persons who have been assessed fines or penalties which remain unpaid and
have become a debt due and owing the village in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-208.3 by:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 208/416
1. Filing a complaint in the circuit court of Cook County praying for the entry of a judgment against the person for whom a final determination of
standing, parking or compliance regulation violation liability has been made.
2. The complaint filed by the traffic compliance administrator or individual or agency on behalf of the village seeking entry of a judgment against an
individual for unpaid fines and/or penalties pursuant to a final determination of standing, parking or compliance regulation violations shall have
appended:
a. A certified copy of the final determination of the standing, parking or compliance regulation violations.
b. A certification that recites facts sufficient to show that the final determination of standing, parking or compliance regulation violation was issued in
accordance with this chapter and 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-208.3.
3. Nothing shall prevent the village from consolidating multiple final determinations of standing, parking or compliance regulation violation liability in an
action in the circuit court of Cook County against an individual.
4. Pursuing all available remedies allowed by law to collect money judgments.
B. Service of summons and a copy of the complaint may be served upon the person against whom a judgment is sought under the provisions of this
chapter by any method provided under 735 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/2-203, incorporated herein by reference, or by certified mail, return receipt
requested, provided the total amount of fines and penalties for final determination of standing, parking or compliance regulation violations does not
exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). (Ord. O-41-03, 10-14-2003)
Chapter 10
AUTOMATED TRAFFIC LAW ENFORCEMENT SYSTEM
6-10-1: ADOPTION:
There is hereby adopted an automated traffic law enforcement system of the village of Forest Park, Cook County, Illinois. (Ord. O-14-14, 5-12-2014)
6-10-2: DETECTION OF CERTAIN VIOLATIONS; DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
AUTOMATED TRAFFIC LAW ENFORCEMENT SYSTEM: A device(s) located within the village of Forest Park with one or more motor vehicle sensors
working in conjunction with a red light signal to produce recorded images of a motor vehicle entering an intersection against a steady red or flashing red
signal indication in violation of section 11-306 of the Illinois vehicle code1; or similar provisions of section 6-1-4 of this title. The automated traffic law
enforcement system shall not be used to enforce speed limit regulations. The system is designed to obtain a clear recorded image of a violating motor
vehicle and its license plate.
RECORDED IMAGES: Images recorded by an automated traffic law enforcement system, on either two (2) or more photographs, two (2) or more
micrographs, two (2) or more electronic images or a video recording showing the motor vehicle, capturing and displaying images of the vehicle violating
traffic control signals, together with at least one clearly recorded image identifying the vehicle's license plate. The recorded image shall also display the
time, date and location of the violation.
TRAFFIC COMPLIANCE ADMINISTRATOR: A person appointed by the village's chief of police or his designee who shall have the following power and
authority: adopt, distribute and process automated traffic law violation notices and other such notices as may be required by this chapter, collect and audit
money paid to the village as fines and/or penalties, operate the automated traffic law enforcement system, and make certified reports to the office of the
Illinois secretary of state, as required by this chapter and 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-208.6 of the vehicle code. If the traffic compliance
administrator is the person who reviews the recorded images on behalf of the village to determine whether a violation has occurred, then the traffic
compliance administrator shall be a village police officer or retired village police officer.
VEHICLE CODE: The Illinois vehicle code2.
VILLAGE: The village of Forest Park, Cook County, Illinois.
VILLAGE CODE: The village code of ordinances of the village of Forest Park, Cook County, Illinois. (Ord. O-14-14, 5-12-2014)
6-10-3: SIGNAGE:
Each intersection equipped with an automated traffic law enforcement system shall have a sign posted which is clearly visible to approaching traffic
indicating that the intersection is being monitored by an automated traffic law enforcement system. (Ord. O-14-14, 5-12-2014)
6-10-4: VIOLATIONS; REVIEW, NOTICE, SERVICE:
When the automated traffic law enforcement system records a motor vehicle entering an intersection in spite of a steady red or flashing red signal
indication, in violation of section 11-306 of the vehicle code, or similar provision of section 6-1-4 of this title, the traffic compliance administrator or other
duly appointed village official or his/her designee shall, for each violation recorded, issue a written notice of the violation to the registered owner or lessee
of the vehicle as the alleged violator. The notice shall be delivered by first class mail, postage prepaid, within thirty (30) days after the Illinois secretary of
state notifies the village of the identity of the registered owner or lessee of the vehicle, but in no event later than ninety (90) days after the violation. The
village shall only be required to notify the lessee of a motor vehicle if the leasing company/lessor provides the village with the lessee's name by means of
an affidavit along with a copy of the lease within sixty (60) days of issuing a notice to the leasing company/lessor. In the event the lessee's information is
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 209/416
not provided to the village within sixty (60) days, the leasing company/lessor may be found liable for a violation proven.
Prior to service of a notice of violation, the associated recorded image shall be reviewed by a technician employed or contracted by the village and by
village police officer or retired village police officer, who shall inspect the image and determine whether the motor vehicle was operated in violation of
section 11-306 of the vehicle code or similar provision of section 6-1-4 of this title, and whether one of the defenses enumerated in section 6-10-5 of this
chapter is visibly applicable upon inspection of the recorded image. No notice of violation shall be issued if the village police officer or retired police officer
determines that no such violation has occurred. Upon determination that the recorded image captures a violation of one of the foregoing vehicle code or
village code provisions and that no defense applies, the notice of violation shall be served upon the registered vehicle owner or lessee in the manner
herein provided. The traffic compliance administrator or other duly appointed official shall retain a copy of all violation notices, recorded images and other
correspondence mailed to the alleged violator. Each notice of violation shall constitute evidence of the facts contained in the notice and is admissible in
any proceeding alleging a violation of the above noted statutory and local ordinance provisions and shall establish prima facie evidence of a violation,
subject to rebuttal on the basis of the defenses established in section 6-10-5 of this chapter. Each notice of violation shall include the following:
A. The name and address of the registered owner or lessee of the vehicle, as indicated by the records of the Illinois secretary of state or lessor,
respectively, or, if such information is outdated or unattainable, then the last known address recorded in a United States post office approved database;
B. The make of the motor vehicle, if discernable, and registration number of the motor vehicle involved in the violation;
C. The violation charged, with specific reference to that section of the village code or vehicle code, allegedly violated;
D. The location where the violation occurred;
E. The date and time of the violation;
F. A copy of the recorded images;
G. The amount of the civil penalty and late fee imposed under section 6-10-7 of this chapter and the date by which the civil penalty shall be paid if liability
for the violation is not going to be contested and a statement that payment of the fine shall operate as a final disposition of the violation;
H. A statement that the recorded images are prima facie evidence of a violation of a red light signal violation;
I. A warning that failure to either pay the civil penalty or request a hearing to contest liability within fourteen (14) days of the mailing of the notice of
violation is an admission of liability and may result in a suspension of the driving privileges of the registered owner or lessee of the vehicle;
J. A statement that the registered owner or lessee of the vehicle may elect to proceed either by paying the fine stated in the notice of violation or by
challenging the charge in court, by mail or at an administrative hearing;
K. A statement of how an administrative hearing may be requested;
L. The signature, or identification number, electronic or otherwise, of the technician and/or police officer or retired police officer reviewing the recorded
images and confirming that a violation took place; and
M. A website address accessible through the internet, where the alleged violator may review the recorded images of the violation. (Ord. O-14-14, 5-12-
2014)
6-10-5: DEFENSES AVAILABLE TO ALLEGED VIOLATOR FOR VIOLATION OF A RED LIGHT SIGNAL:
The following shall be the only defenses available for an alleged violator contesting liability for a violation of a red light signal, which defenses shall be
weighed by the hearing officer and shall only rebut the prima facie case established by the notice of violation insofar as one or more of the following
defenses are established by a preponderance of the evidence:
A. The motor vehicle and/or registration plates were stolen before the violation occurred and were not under the exclusive control of or in the possession of
the owner at the time of the red light signal violation, which defense may be demonstrated through the submission of a certified copy of a report
concerning the stolen motor vehicle or registration plates filed with a law enforcement agency prior to the time of the alleged violation;
B. The driver of the vehicle passed through the intersection in spite of a red light either to yield the right of way to an emergency vehicle, or as part of a
funeral procession;
C. The driver of the vehicle passed through the intersection in spite of a red light at the direction of a police officer acting within the scope of his duties; or
D. The operator of the vehicle received a uniform traffic citation from a police officer, for a violation of section 11-306 of the vehicle code or section 6-1-4 of
this title. (Ord. O-14-14, 5-12-2014)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 210/416
6-10-6: VIOLATION; EXCEPTIONS:
A. The registered owner or lessee of a motor vehicle operated in violation of section 11-306 of the vehicle code or section 6-1-4 of this title shall be civilly
liable for an automated traffic law enforcement violation and shall be penalized as provided by section 6-10-7 of this chapter.
B. The provisions of subsection A of this section notwithstanding, no notice of violation shall be issued to the owner or lessee of a motor vehicle in those
instances where a motor vehicle comes to a complete stop, as defined by section 1-199 of the vehicle code, and prior to entering the intersection, as
defined by section 1-132 of the vehicle code, during the cycle of the red signal indication, even if the motor vehicle stops at a point past the stop line or
crosswalk where a driver is required to stop, as specified in subsection (c) of section 11-306 of the vehicle code or section 6-1-4 of this title, unless one
or more pedestrians or bicyclists are present. (Ord. O-14-14, 5-12-2014)
6-10-7: PENALTY:
Unless the driver of the motor vehicle in question received a uniform traffic citation from a police officer for a violation of section 11-306 of the vehicle code
or section 6-1-4 of this title, at the time of the alleged violation, and notwithstanding any other provision of the village code, the motor vehicle owner or
lessee is subject to a civil penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a proved violation of this chapter, plus an additional late payment penalty of one
hundred dollars ($100.00) for failure to pay the original penalty within fourteen (14) days after service of a notice of final determination of liability.
No hearing fees or hearing costs shall be imposed upon a vehicle owner or lessee for exercising their right to contest the violation at an administrative
hearing. Any penalty imposed for a violation of this chapter is a civil penalty and is a debt due and owing the village but is not a violation of a traffic
regulation governing the movement of motor vehicles. (Ord. O-14-14, 5-12-2014)
6-10-8: HEARING:
The owner or lessee of a vehicle being operated in violation of section 11-306 of the vehicle code or section 6-1-4 of this title may request a hearing no
later than the respond by date on the notice of violation (14 days from the date of issuance of the notice), to challenge the evidence or set forth an
applicable allowable defense. The notice of violation shall constitute evidence of the facts contained in the notice and is admissible in any proceeding
alleging a violation of section 11-306 of the vehicle code or section 6-1-4 of this title. The notice of violation shall be prima facie evidence of a violation,
subject to rebuttal on the basis of the defenses established in section 6-10-5 of this chapter.
The owner's or lessee's failure to appear at a requested hearing shall result in a finding of liability. In the event of a failure to appear at the hearing, a
"findings, decision and order" letter will be sent to the owner or lessee. The owner's or lessee's failure to pay the fine amount by the date specified in that
letter will result in a final determination of liability. (Ord. O-14-14, 5-12-2014)
6-10-9: NOTICE OF DETERMINATION OF LIABILITY:
A determination of automated traffic law violation liability shall occur following failure to pay the fine or penalty, or to contest the alleged violation within
fourteen (14) days of the notice of violation. Where a person fails to appear at a hearing to contest the alleged violation in the time and manner specified in
a prior mailed notice, the hearing officer will enter findings, decision and order's determination of automated traffic law violation liability which shall become
final: a) upon denial of a timely petition to set aside the determination, or b) upon expiration of the period for filing such a petition without a filing having
been made. If a person appears at a hearing and is found liable or contests the violation by mail and is found liable, the hearing officer will enter findings,
decision and order, which is a final determination of automated traffic law violation liability that is a final, appealable order. (Ord. O-14-14, 5-12-2014)
6-10-10: FINAL DETERMINATION:
A final determination of automated traffic law violation(s) liability shall occur:
A. Following the failure to pay the total assessed fine or penalty after the hearing officer's determination of automated traffic law violation(s) liability within
twenty five (25) days of the issuance of the hearing officer's findings, decision and order, and the exhaustion of or the failure to exhaust any
administrative or judicial review procedures, or
B. Where a person fails to appear at the hearing for an automated traffic law violation on the date and at the time and place specified in a prior mailed
notice. The hearing officer's determination of automated traffic law violation(s) liability shall become final upon the exhaustion of or the failure to
exhaust any applicable administrative or judicial review procedures:
1. Upon denial of a timely petition to set aside that determination, or
2. Upon the expiration of the period for filing a petition without a filing having been made.
C. Appeals from determination of liability shall be to the circuit court of Cook County pursuant to the provisions of the Illinois administrative review law.
(Ord. O-14-14, 5-12-2014)
6-10-11: NOTICE OF FINAL DETERMINATION:
A notice of final determination shall be sent following the final determination of automated traffic law violation liability and after the conclusion of the thirty
five (35) day period for filing a petition for judicial review. The notice of final determination shall include the following information:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 211/416
A. A statement that the unpaid fine is a debt due and owing to the village of Forest Park; and
B. A warning that a failure to pay any fine due and owing to the village of Forest Park within fourteen (14) days may result in a petition to the circuit court of
Cook County to have the unpaid fine rendered a judgment and may result in the suspension of the person's driver's license for failure to pay fines or
penalties for five (5) or more final determinations of liability under this chapter. (Ord. O-14-14, 5-12-2014)
6-10-12: CONTEST BY MAIL:
Where the registered owner or lessee of the cited vehicle seeks to contest the merits of the alleged violation, but does not wish to appear at an
administrative hearing, such person may contest the charges using the same available defenses set forth in section 6-10-5 of this chapter, but rather than
attend the administrative hearing, the registered owner or lessee of the cited vehicle may submit any and all documentary evidence to the traffic
compliance administrator or other duly appointed official no later than the hearing date, together with a written statement setting forth with specific
reason(s) why they believe that the owner or lessee is not liable. The traffic compliance administrator or other duly appointed official shall forward all timely
submitted materials to the hearing officer for review and determination. (Ord. O-14-14, 5-12-2014)
6-10-13: PETITIONS TO SET ASIDE DETERMINATION:
A petition to set aside determination of an automated traffic law violation must be filed with or mailed to the appropriate traffic compliance administrator
within fourteen (14) days of the date of mailing of the notice of determination of liability. The grounds for the petition are limited to:
A. The person was not the owner or lessee of the cited vehicle on the date the violation notice was issued;
B. The person already paid the fine for the violation in question;
C. Excusable failure to appear at or request a new date for a hearing; or
D. The person received a uniform traffic citation from a police officer for the violation.
Upon receipt of a timely petition to set aside the determination of liability, the hearing officer shall review the petition to determine if cause has been
shown to set aside the determination. If cause has been shown, the village shall forward the petitioner a new hearing date on which the petitioner must
appear to present his case. The village shall notify the petitioner of the hearing officer's decision to grant a hearing or deny the petition within fourteen
(14) days of the hearing officer's decision. (Ord. O-14-14, 5-12-2014)
6-10-14: NOTICE OF IMPENDING DRIVER'S LICENSE SUSPENSION:
A notice of impending driver's license suspension shall be sent to any person liable for any fine or penalty that remains due and owing on five (5) or more
final determinations of liability for violations of this chapter. The notice of impending driver's license suspension shall state that the failure to pay the fine
owing within forty five (45) days of the notice's date will result in the village of Forest Park notifying the secretary of state of the state of Illinois that the
person is eligible for initiation of suspension proceedings under section 6-306.5 of the Illinois vehicle code3.
The notice of impending driver's license suspension shall be sent by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the address recorded with the secretary of state
or, if any notice to that address is returned as undeliverable, to the last known address recorded in a United States post office approved database. (Ord. O-
14-14, 5-12-2014)
6-10-15: DRIVER'S LICENSE SUSPENSION:
The traffic compliance administrator or other duly appointed official, by certified report, shall request that the secretary of state suspend the driving
privileges of an owner of a registered vehicle who has failed to pay any fine or penalty due and owing as a result of five (5) final determinations of liability.
The report shall be certified and contain the following:
A. The name, last known address of the owner of the vehicle as recorded with the secretary of state, or as provided by the lessor of the cited vehicle at the
time of lease, or as recorded in a United States post office approved database if any notice sent under this chapter is returned as undeliverable, and
driver's license number of the person who failed to pay the fine(s) or penalty(ies) and the registration number of any vehicle known to be registered to
such person in another state;
B. The name of the village of Forest Park as making the report; and
C. A statement that a notice of impending driver's license suspension has been sent to the person named in the report at the address recorded with the
secretary of state or at the last address known to the lessor of the cited vehicle at the time of the lease or, if any notice sent under this chapter is
returned as undeliverable at the last known address recorded at a United States post office approved database; the date on which such notice was
sent; and address to which such notice was sent.
The village shall notify the secretary of state whenever a person named in the certified report has paid the previously recorded fine(s) or penalty(ies) or
whenever the village determines that the original report was in error. A certified copy of such notification shall also be given upon request and at no
additional charge to the person named therein. (Ord. O-14-14, 5-12-2014)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 212/416
6-10-16: DISCLOSURE OF ENFORCEMENT INTERSECTIONS:
Notice of the locations of automated traffic law enforcement systems within the village shall be posted on the village's official website. (Ord. O-14-14, 5-12-
2014)
6-10-17: EXCLUSIVITY:
Notwithstanding any provision of chapter 9 of this title, or title 1, chapter 3, article A of this code to the contrary, and unless a moving violation citation is
issued, the provisions of this chapter shall be the exclusive method of notice, citation, processing, adjudication and final disposition and review of
automated traffic enforcement of violation of section 11-306 of the Illinois vehicle code or similar provision of section 6-1-4 of this title. (Ord. O-14-14, 5-12-
2014)
6-10-18: CONFIDENTIALITY:
Recorded images made by the automated traffic enforcement system shall be confidential and shall be made available only to the alleged violator,
governmental agencies and the village of Forest Park police department for purposes of adjudicating violations, statistical or other governmental purposes.
(Ord. O-14-14, 5-12-2014)
Chapter 11
SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES USED IN THE COMMISSION OF
CRIMINAL OFFENSES
6-11-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
HEARING OFFICER: An attorney licensed to practice law in the state of Illinois for a period in excess of three (3) years, appointed by the village to serve
and preside as the hearing officer for the village's administrative adjudication hearing system.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Every vehicle which is self-propelled as defined by the Illinois vehicle code, except a vehicle which is propelled by electric power
obtained from overhead trolley wires, but not operated upon rails, vehicles moved solely by human power, and motorized wheelchairs.
OWNER OF RECORD: The record titleholder to a motor vehicle, as registered with the secretary of state of the state of Illinois or any other applicable
governmental agency. (Ord. O-29-16, 11-14-2016)
6-11-2: VEHICLE SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT:
Any motor vehicle operated, used, or in the physical control of any person, with the express or implied permission or consent of the owner of record (as
registered with the secretary of state of Illinois or any applicable state), within the village or on any public highway or roadway within the village during the
commission of, or in furtherance of any criminal offense or violation as set forth in section 6-11-3 of this chapter, shall be subject to seizure and
impoundment by the village, and the owner of record of said vehicle may be liable to the village for an administrative fee in an amount not to exceed five
hundred dollars ($500.00), in addition to any towing and storage fees as hereinafter provided. (Ord. O-29-16, 11-14-2016)
6-11-3: OFFENSES SUBJECT TO MOTOR VEHICLE SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT:
Offense
ILCS Code
Section
Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the attempt to commit, an offense for which a motor vehicle may be
seized and forfeited pursuant to section 36-1 of the Illinois criminal code of 2012; or
720 ILCS
5/36-1
Driving under the influence of alcohol, another drug or drugs, an intoxicating compound or compounds, or any combination thereof,
in violation of section 11-501 of the Illinois vehicle code; or
625 ILCS
5/11-501
Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the attempt to commit, a felony or in violation of the cannabis control
act; or
720 ILCS
550/1 et seq.
Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the attempt to commit, an offense in violation of the Illinois controlled
substances act; or
720 ILCS
570/100 et
seq.
Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the attempt to commit, an offense in violation of section 24-1, 24-1.5,
or 24-3.1 of the Illinois criminal code of 1961 or the Illinois criminal code of 2012; or
720 ILCS
5/24-1, 24-
1.5, or 24-
3.1
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 213/416
Driving while a driver's license, permit, or privilege to operate a motor vehicle is suspended or revoked pursuant to section 6-303 of
the Illinois vehicle code; except that vehicles shall not be subjected to seizure or impoundment if the suspension is for an unpaid
citation (parking or moving) or due to failure to comply with emission testing; or
625 ILCS
5/6-303
Operation or use of a motor vehicle while soliciting, possessing, or attempting to solicit or possess cannabis or a controlled
substance, as defined by the cannabis control act or the Illinois controlled substances act; or
720 ILCS
550/1 et seq.
720 ILCS
570/100 et
seq.
Operation or use of a motor vehicle with an expired driver's license, in violation of section 6-101 of the Illinois vehicle code, if the
period of expiration is greater than one year; or
625 ILCS
5/6-101
Operation or use of a motor vehicle without ever having been issued a driver's license or permit, in violation of section 6-101 of the
Illinois vehicle code, or operating a motor vehicle without ever having been issued a driver's license or permit due to a person's age;
or
625 ILCS
5/6-101
Operation or use of a motor vehicle by a person against whom a warrant has been issued by a circuit clerk in Illinois for failing to
answer charges that the driver violated section 6-101, 6-303, or 11-501 of the Illinois vehicle code; or
625 ILCS
5/6-101, 6-
303, or 11-
501
Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the attempt to commit, an offense in violation of article 16 of the
Illinois criminal code of 2012; or
720 ILCS
5/16-1 et
seq.
Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the attempt to commit, any other misdemeanor or felony offense in
violation of the Illinois criminal code of 1961 or the Illinois criminal code of 2012; or
Operation or use of a motor vehicle in violation of section 11-503 of the Illinois vehicle code: a) while the vehicle is part of a funeral
procession; or b) in a manner that interferes with a funeral procession.
625 ILCS
5/11-503
(Ord. O-29-16, 11-14-2016)
6-11-4: EXISTING REGULATIONS NOT ABROGATED:
A. The provisions of this chapter shall be in addition to and shall not replace or otherwise abrogate any existing state or federal law or village ordinance
that relates to the seizure and/or impoundment of motor vehicles, including a seizure pursuant to article 36 of the Illinois criminal code, and any
administrative fee or cost provided herein shall be in addition to any and all fees that may be assessed or imposed by a court for violation of any
criminal offense or local ordinance violation offense.
B. Any and all fees incurred for towing and/or storage of a motor vehicle seized under this chapter shall be those approved by the chief of police for all
towing companies authorized to tow for the village. (Ord. O-29-16, 11-14-2016)
6-11-5: EXCEPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply if, at the time of the criminal offense serving as the basis for the seizure, the motor vehicle was stolen and the
theft was reported to the appropriate police authority within twenty four (24) hours after the theft was discovered, or the motor vehicle was otherwise
operated without the knowledge and express or implied consent of its owner. (Ord. O-29-16, 11-14-2016)
6-11-6: NOTICE; TOWING IMPOUNDMENT; RELEASE:
A. Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a motor vehicle is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this chapter and the
police officer has arrested the operator or person in physical control of the motor vehicle for any of the criminal offenses set forth in section 6-11-3 of
this chapter, the police officer shall provide for the towing of the motor vehicle to a facility authorized by the village.
1. Prior to or at the time the motor vehicle is towed, the police officer shall notify or make a reasonable attempt to notify the owner(s) or any person(s)
identifying himself as the owner(s) or lessee of the motor vehicle, or any person who is found to be in physical control of the motor vehicle at the time
of the alleged criminal offense, of the fact of the seizure and of the motor vehicle owner's or lessee's right to request a preliminary motor vehicle
impoundment hearing to be conducted in accordance with subsection 6-11-7A of this chapter and a hearing pursuant to subsection 6-11-7B of this
chapter.
2. The motor vehicle shall be impounded pending the completion of the hearing(s) provided for in subsections 6-11-7A and/or B of this chapter, unless
the owner or lessee of the motor vehicle or someone on his/her behalf posts with the village a cash bond in the amount of five hundred dollars
($500.00) and pays any and all towing and storage charges.
B. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, the arresting police officer may release the motor vehicle prior to towing if the motor
vehicle subject to seizure and impoundment:
1. Was not owned by the person placed under arrest and the registered owner or some other person legally authorized to possess the motor vehicle
shall arrive at the scene of the arrest prior to the actual removal or towing of the motor vehicle and the lawful owner or person lawfully entitled to
possession of the motor vehicle possesses a valid operator's license, proof of ownership or registration, proof of liability insurance and would not, as
determined by the arresting police officer, indicate a lack of ability to operate the motor vehicle in a safe manner, or who would otherwise, by
operating the motor vehicle, not be in violation of the Illinois vehicle code.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 214/416
2. If the vehicle subject to seizure and impoundment is owned by the person under arrest, the arresting officer may, prior to the actual removal or
towing of the motor vehicle, release the motor vehicle to another person present with the written consent of the owner, provided that such other
person possesses a valid operator's license, proof of liability insurance and would not, as determined by the arresting police officer, indicate a lack of
ability to operate the motor vehicle in a safe manner or who would otherwise, by operating the motor vehicle, not be in violation of the Illinois vehicle
code. (Ord. O-29-16, 11-14-2016)
6-11-7: HEARINGS:
A. Preliminary Hearing: The owner of record of a motor vehicle seized and impounded may contest the seizure and impoundment of the motor vehicle by
requesting a preliminary hearing. The owner must make a request for a preliminary hearing within twenty four (24) hours of the seizure. The request
shall be deemed filed upon delivery to the chief of police care of the Forest Park police department. The preliminary hearing request shall be in writing
and the chief of police or his designee shall conduct the preliminary hearing within twenty four (24) hours after receipt of the request, excluding
Saturdays, Sundays, or village holidays, in which case the preliminary hearing shall be heard on the next business day after the request. All interested
parties shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard at the preliminary hearing. The formal rules of evidence shall not apply at the hearing, and
hearsay evidence shall be admissible only if it is of the type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs. If, after
the hearing, the chief of police or his designee determines that there is probable cause to believe that the motor vehicle is subject to seizure and
impoundment, he/she shall order the continued impoundment of the motor vehicle as herein provided, unless the owner of the motor vehicle posts with
the village a cash bond in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00), and pays any applicable towing and storage fees. If the chief of police or
his/her designee determines that there is no such probable cause to believe the motor vehicle was used, operated or in the physical control of the
operator during the commission or attempted commission of any of the criminal offenses set forth in section 6-11-3 of this chapter, then the motor
vehicle shall be returned to the registered owner and any bond posted shall be returned.
B. Notice Of Hearing To Contest Seizure; Hearing Procedures; Conduct Of Hearing:
1. Within ten (10) days after a motor vehicle is seized and impounded, the chief of police or his designee shall notify the registered owner of record or
lessee of the seized and impounded motor vehicle and any lienholder of record in writing by personal service or first class mail, postage prepaid, of
the date, time, and location of the hearing to be conducted and the basis for the motor vehicle seizure. All hearings shall be scheduled and convened
within forty five (45) days of the date of personal service of the notice or of the date the notice of hearing is sent. The owner, lessee or their attorney
may appear at the hearing and enter a determination to contest or not contest the basis of the motor vehicle seizure and impoundment.
2. If the owner, lessee or attorney elects not to contest the basis for the seizure, the case will be disposed of at that time by entry of an administrative
fee, not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00), if a factual basis exists for the seizure and impoundment. If the owner of the motor vehicle elects to
contest the basis for the impoundment and seizure, a hearing shall be held immediately, unless continued by order of the hearing officer.
Continuances shall only be granted for good cause shown. All interested persons shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard at the hearing
and to present all relevant evidence.
3. At any time prior to the hearing, the hearing officer may, upon written motion or written request by the registered owner of the motor vehicle or by the
village, direct witnesses to appear and give testimony at the hearing.
4. Subpoenas for the production of witnesses and records may be issued upon request of either party.
5. The formal rules of evidence shall not apply at the hearing, and hearsay evidence shall be admissible only if it is of the type commonly relied upon by
reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs. An arresting police officer's sworn report and copies of driving abstracts or records issued
by the Illinois secretary of state shall be admissible.
6. All administrative hearings relating to the village's seizure and impoundment and release of vehicles under this chapter shall include the following
requirements concerning administrative hearings:
a. Administrative hearings shall be conducted by a hearing officer who is an attorney licensed to practice law in the state of Illinois for a minimum of
three (3) years;
b. At the conclusion of the administrative hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a written decision either sustaining or overruling the vehicle
impoundment;
c. If the basis of the vehicle impoundment is sustained by a preponderance of the evidence, any administrative fee posted to secure the release of
the vehicle shall be forfeited to the village in satisfaction of the administrative fee;
d. All final decisions of the administrative hearing officer shall be subject to review under the provisions of the administrative review law;
e. Unless the administrative hearing officer overturns the basis for the vehicle impoundment, no vehicle shall be released to the owner, lessee, or
lienholder of record until all administrative fees and towing and storage fees are paid; and
f. If the administrative hearing officer finds that the village exceeded its authority under this chapter or section 208.7 of the Illinois vehicle code1, the
village shall be liable to the registered owner or lessee of the motor vehicle for the cost of storage fees and reasonable attorney fees, if any.
C. Owner Of Record Liable: If, after the hearing, the hearing officer determines by a preponderance of the evidence that there is probable cause to believe
that the motor vehicle was used, operated or in the physical control of the operator in connection with or during the commission or attempted
commission of any criminal offense set forth in section 6-11-3 of this chapter and no defense exists, the hearing officer shall enter an order finding the
owner of record of the motor vehicle civilly liable to the village for an administrative fee in the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00). The hearing officer
shall order the motor vehicle to remain impounded until the owner, lessee or someone on the owner's or lessee's behalf pays the administrative fee to
the village plus any and all fees to the towing entity or village for the towing and storage of the motor vehicle as the case may be. If, after proper service
of notice, the owner of record or lessee fails to appear at the hearing, the hearing officer shall conduct the hearing in absentia and, if appropriate, enter
a default order in favor of the village, a copy of which default order, including written findings of fact, shall be sent to the registered owner or lessee of
the vehicle via certified mail, return receipt requested, and first class mail, postage prepaid.
If, after the hearing, the hearing officer finds that probable cause does not exist to believe the motor vehicle was used during the commission of a
criminal offense as set forth in section 6-11-3 of this chapter, the hearing officer shall enter an order for the immediate return of the motor vehicle and/or
return of cash bond, if posted, to the owner without assessing any fee.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 215/416
D. Official Record Of Proceedings: All hearings shall be recorded and said recording shall be part of the official record of the proceedings. All findings in
fact, decisions and orders of the hearing officer shall be reduced to writing, signed by the hearing officer and served upon all parties by first class mail,
postage prepaid or personal delivery, within seven (7) business days after the hearing; service shall be complete upon the date of mailing. (Ord. O-29-
16, 11-14-2016)
6-11-8: ADMINISTRATIVE FEE:
A. Any administrative fee imposed shall be a debt due and owing to the village. All fees shall be paid into the general corporate fund of the village. If a
cash bond has been posted the bond shall be applied to the fee imposed. If a vehicle remains impounded when a fee is imposed, and the fee remains
unpaid for a period of thirty (30) days after service of the hearing officer's decision, the village may seek to obtain a judgment on the debt and enforce
such judgment against the motor vehicle or its registered owner as provided by law. Except as may otherwise be provided in this chapter, all motor
vehicles shall continue to be impounded until the administrative fee is paid to the village and any applicable towing and storage fees are paid to the
towing company or to the village, as the case may be, in which case possession of the motor vehicle shall be given to the person who is legally entitled
to possess the motor vehicle, or the motor vehicle is sold, or otherwise disposed of to satisfy a judgment and lien as provided by law. If the
administrative fee and applicable towing and storage fees are not paid within thirty (30) days after the expiration of time in which review of the hearing
officer's determination may be sought, or within thirty (30) days after an action seeking review has been resolved in favor of the village, whichever is
applicable, the motor vehicle shall be deemed unclaimed and shall be disposed of in the manner provided by law for the disposition of unclaimed motor
vehicles under the Illinois vehicle code.
B. In addition to subsection A of this section, the following shall also apply to any fees imposed for administrative and processing costs pursuant to section
6-11-3 of this chapter:
1. All administrative fees and towing and storage charges shall be imposed on the registered owner or lessee of the motor vehicle or the agents of that
lessee or owner.
2. The administrative fees shall be in addition to any other penalties that may be assessed by a court of law for the underlying criminal violations; and
any towing or storage fees, or both, charged by the towing company.
3. The fees shall be uniform for all similarly situated vehicles.
C. Unless stayed by a court of competent jurisdiction, any fine, penalty, or administrative fee imposed under this chapter which remains unpaid in whole or
in part after the expiration of the deadline for seeking judicial review under the administrative review law may be enforced in the same manner as a
judgment entered by a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. O-29-16, 11-14-2016)
6-11-9: VEHICLE POSSESSION AND DISPOSAL:
Except as may otherwise be provided by law or by order of the hearing officer, no owner, lienholder of record, or other person shall be legally entitled to
take possession of a seized and impounded motor vehicle until the bond, administrative fee and/or towing and storage fees have been paid. The foregoing
notwithstanding, whenever a lienholder has commenced foreclosure or repossession proceedings, possession of the motor vehicle shall be given to that
person if the lienholder of record agrees in writing to refund to the village the amount of the net proceeds of any foreclosure sale, less any amounts
necessary to satisfy all other lienholders. Unless a petition for administrative fees has been timely filed, vehicles not retrieved from the towing facility or
storage facility within forty five (45) days after the administrative hearing officer issues a written decision shall be deemed abandoned and disposed of in
accordance with the provision of article II of chapter 4 of the Illinois vehicle code. (Ord. O-29-16, 11-14-2016)
6-11-10: REVIEW OF HEARING OFFICER'S DECISION:
Any party aggrieved by a final decision of the hearing officer may appeal that decision pursuant to any applicable statutes or procedures under the laws of
the state of Illinois. (Ord. O-29-16, 11-14-2016)
Title 7
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
Chapter 1
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
7-1-1: CONSTRUCTION OR REPAIR:
A. Permit Required: It shall be unlawful to construct or lay any pavement on any public street, sidewalk, alley or other public way; or to repair the same
without having first secured a permit therefor. Applications for permits shall be made to the commissioner of streets and public improvements, and shall
state the location of the intended pavement or repair, the extent thereof, and the person who is to do the actual construction work.
B. Bond: Each applicant for a permit to construct, repair or lay any pavement on any street, alley or other public way, shall file a bond, with sureties, to be
approved by the commissioner of streets and public improvements, in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), conditioned to indemnify the
village for any loss or damage resulting from the work undertaken, or the manner of doing the same. (Ord. O-36-04, 9-13-2004)
7-1-2: SPECIFICATIONS FOR PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 216/416
All public improvements shall meet the specifications and details as contained in the publications entitled:
A. "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer Main Construction In Illinois", fifth edition, dated May, 1996, and all revisions thereto as published by the
Illinois Society of Professional Engineers;
B. "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction", dated January 1, 1997, and "Supplemental Specifications And Recurring Special
Provisions", dated January 1, 1998, as published by the Illinois department of transportation; and
C. "Manual Of Procedures For The Administration Of The Sewer Permit Ordinance Of The Metropolitan Water Reclamation District Of Greater Chicago",
adopted April 7, 1994, and as a supplement thereto.
D. "Specification And Details For The Design And Construction Of Public Improvements Within The Village Of Forest Park, Illinois", as prepared by Edwin
Hancock Engineering Company, effective January 1, 1998, with the following modifications:
1. Division I, section 100.01: delete all references to "vitrified clay pipe".
2. Division I, section 101.02: delete all references to "vitrified clay pipe".
3. Division II, section 100.01: delete all references to "vitrified clay pipe".
4. That pages "1 of 2" and "2 of 2" of said manual be corrected to reflect the publications as listed above.
5. That pages "1 of 2" and "2 of 2" of said manual be corrected to reflect the publications as listed above.
The fee for the distribution copies shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) each. (Ord. O-6-98, 2-9-1998)
7-1-3: EXCAVATIONS:
A. Permits Required; Fees: It shall be unlawful for any person to make any excavation in any street, alley or other public place in the village, or to tunnel
under any street, alley or public place in the village, without first having obtained a permit as provided herein. Applications for such excavations and/or
tunneling shall be filed with the director of public health and safety, and shall contain the location of the proposed excavation, size thereof, the purpose,
and the name of the person or organization doing the actual work, together with the name of the person and/or organization for whom the work is to be
done. The permit shall be reviewed and approved (or disapproved) by the director of public health and safety after consultation with the commissioner
of streets and public improvements, or his/her designee as applicable. All such excavations and openings in pavement surfaces and/or landscaped
and/or paved parkways shall be done at the cost of the applicant. (Ord. O-36-04, 9-13-2004; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
The fee for such permits, to be paid before the start of work, shall be as follows:
Alley opening $200.00
Parkway opening 400.00
Street opening 500.00
(Ord. O-36-04, 9-13-2004)
B. Exemptions: This section shall not apply to officers or employees of the village engaged in doing work for the village; nor shall it apply to persons doing
work by contract with the village. (Village code § 6-28)
C. Bond: No permit shall issue until the applicant has filed, with the village, a bond with sufficient sureties in the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00),
conditioned to indemnify the village for any loss, liability or damage that may result from the construction and maintenance of said excavation. (Village
code § 6-29)
D. Restoration: Any person making any excavation or tunnel in or under any public street, alley or other public place in the village shall restore the surface
thereof to its original condition. Said restoration shall be under the supervision of the commissioner of streets and public improvements, and shall be
approved by said commissioner. (Ord. O-36-04, 9-13-2004)
7-1-4: CURB CUTS AND DRIVEWAYS:
A. Definitions:
CURB CUT: A reduction in the height of a public roadway curb that is authorized to provide smooth access between a public roadway and a private
driveway.
DRIVEWAY: A paved surface constructed at grade in the public street right of way, between the curb and the property line, which provides access to off
street parking facilities.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 217/416
B. Purpose And Intent: It is generally recognized that provisions must be made for the access of vehicles to private property. Furthermore, it is the intent of
the village that residential lots improved with single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings, or three-family dwellings (which lots may or may not also
have located thereon a "coach house") that have access to a rear alley, shall use only the rear alley for vehicular access to parking or garage space. In
all other instances when driveways are necessary, it is the intent of the village to allow driveways only when they will not interfere with the rights of the
public in the adjacent street, or interfere with automotive traffic, or eliminate on street parking.
C. Permitted Curb Cuts And Driveways: Upon review and approval of permit applications in compliance with this section, the director of public health and
safety is authorized to approve curb cut and driveway permits only in the following instances:
1. Any project that received site plan approval by the village council, as authorized by section 9-7-1 of this code.
2. Any project that received approval of a planned development as authorized by the village council pursuant to subsection 9-6-5D of this code.
3. Interior residential lots not adjoining an alley, when in compliance with the provisions of this chapter and this code.
4. Corner residential lots, if in the opinion of the director of public health and safety, access from an adjoining alley is not reasonably available, and
when in compliance with the provisions of this section.
5. Lots that have nonconforming curb cuts and driveways as of the effective date hereof, when they are necessary to continue to serve an existing
garage or surface parking area, and when in compliance with the provisions of this section.
6. Any project not in compliance with this section that received approval by the council pursuant to the appeal procedure of subsection J of this section.
D. Permits:
1. Permit Required: No person shall hereafter alter, construct, build or establish any curb cut or driveway over, across or upon any public street or
parkway that is not in compliance with the requirements of this section, without securing a permit for such purpose issued by the director of public
health and safety.
2. Application For Permit: Application for a permit for a curb cut or driveway shall be filed with the director of public health and safety on the form
required by the village, and shall contain all of the information required thereon. The applicant shall also submit plans and specifications for such
driveway.
3. Fees:
a. Permit Fee: The fee for curb cut and driveway permits shall be calculated in accordance with subsection 8-2-3A, new construction, or 8-2-3B,
repairs and alterations, of this code, for one- and two-family dwellings accordingly.
b. Annual Fees: For all curb cuts and driveways now or hereafter maintained, except those used exclusively for religious, charitable, educational or
residential purposes, an annual fee as follows shall be paid each year:
For first 16 feet in width, or fraction thereof $5.00
For each additional 16 feet in width, or fraction thereof $1.00
4. Bond: Before any permit for a curb cut or driveway shall be issued, except those used exclusively for religious, charitable, educational or residential
purposes, the applicant shall file with the village an acceptable surety bond in favor of the village in the penal sum of ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) conditioned upon the faithful observance of the terms and conditions of said permit; and conditioned further to indemnify the village
against all liabilities, actions, causes of actions and expenses assessed against the village for and on account of such driveway for any reason
whatsoever. This bond shall be kept in force throughout the life of said permit for said curb cut or driveway. If, at any time, said bond shall be null and
void, then said permit shall cease.
5. Revocation Of Permits: All permits for curb cuts and driveways, granted pursuant to the provisions of this section shall provide that they may be
revoked at any time without the consent of the grantee, by order of the village council. Upon such revocation, all rights granted thereunder shall
cease, and the sidewalk space, parkways and curbs shall be restored to their former condition, all at the expense of the owner of the property served
by the driveway of the time of such revocation.
E. Supervision: All curb cuts and driveways shall be installed under the supervision of the director of public health and safety.
F. Grades And Curbs: Unless otherwise expressly authorized by the terms of the written permit hereinbefore required, every driveway built across or upon
any sidewalk space or parkway shall conform to the existing sidewalk grade. Where it shall be necessary, in the construction of any driveway, to break
the existing curb for the driveway opening, the curb and gutter shall be completely removed and a new driveway section constructed.
Each such driveway shall be constructed and maintained so as to permit free and unobstructed passage on, over or across the same, and in such
manner as not to interfere with the proper drainage and safe grading of streets. Gradual approaches to the regular sidewalk grade shall be made from
the grade of the driveway. The slope of any driveway, and the approaches thereto, shall not exceed one inch to the foot (1" = 1') in any direction. Each
such driveway shall be so constructed and maintained that its surface, at the point of crossing any sidewalk, shall be flush with the adjoining sections of
such sidewalk.
G. Construction Requirements:
1. Except as authorized by the village council for projects that received site plan or planned development approval, the minimum width of any driveway
shall be eight feet (8') and the maximum width shall be twenty feet (20'), as measured at the property line.
2. Driveways must provide access to a permitted parking structure or hard surface parking area located on private property. No driveway shall be
permitted for the sole purpose of allowing vehicles to park on the public right of way.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 218/416
3. Only one curb cut and driveway shall be permitted on a lot.
4. Residential driveways shall have curb radii not less than two feet (2').
5. No driveway shall be located so as to interfere with intersecting sidewalks, traffic signals, lampposts, fire hydrants or other improvements located in
the public right of way, either existing, or proposed, unless the improvements can be relocated to the satisfaction of the director of public health and
safety at the sole expense of the permit applicant.
H. Repairs And Maintenance: Every person maintaining any driveway in the village shall keep the same in good condition and repair, free and clear of
snow, ice, stone, gravel and other obstructions of any kind.
I. Curb Cut And Driveway Removal: The director of public health and safety may authorize the removal of any unpermitted curb cut and/or driveway that
does not serve an existing parking structure or hard surface parking space located on private property, or that interferes with the rights of the public in
the adjacent street, or unreasonably interferes with automotive traffic, or eliminates on street parking.
J. Appeals:
1. In cases where the applicant has been denied a permit by the director of public health and safety, and the applicant can demonstrate that practical
difficulties exist or unnecessary hardships will result from strict application of the provisions of this section, the applicant may appeal to the village
council, as provided hereinafter.
2. Such an appeal shall be made in writing to the village council by filing a written notice of such appeal with the village clerk, which notice shall set
forth specific grounds for seeking a reversal of the decision of the director of public health and safety. Such notice must be filed within fourteen (14)
days after the date of such written notice of denial by the director of public health and safety. The village clerk shall forthwith set the matter for a
hearing before the village council and shall cause written notice thereof to be provided to the applicant not less than five (5) days prior to such
hearing, such notice to be considered delivered as of the date of mailing such notice to the applicant at the address provided on the application for
permit. At such hearing, the applicant shall bear the burden to show cause, on the grounds specified in the written notice of appeal, why the decision
of the director of public health and safety should not be upheld.
3. The village council may, by ordinance, vary the mandatory provisions of this section, or modify or reverse the decision of the director of public health
and safety in any case that the purpose and intent, as set forth in subsection B of this section, can be advanced. The village council may continue
such hearing from time to time, and its finding on the appeal shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. O-29-09, 4-13-2009)
7-1-5: DUTY OF ABUTTING PROPERTY OWNERS:
The abutting owners of sidewalks shall, at all times, keep the same in good repair at their own expense. (Village code § 6-6)
7-1-6: DEFECTS REPORTED:
It shall be the duty of every village officer or employee, upon becoming aware of any defect in any street, alley or sidewalk, or of any obstruction thereof, to
report the same to the commissioner of streets and public improvements as soon as possible. (Ord. O-36-04, 9-13-2004)
7-1-7: BARRICADES:
A. Any person laying or repairing any pavement on any street, sidewalk or other public way, or making any excavation in the same, shall maintain suitable
barricades to prevent injury to any person or vehicle. Such barricades shall be protected by suitable lights at night.
Any defect in any pavement shall be barricaded to prevent injury, and any person maintaining any opening or excavation shall guard the same by
proper barricades and lights when such opening or excavation shall remain open. (Village code § 6-9)
B. It shall be unlawful to disturb or interfere with a barricade or light, lawfully placed to protect new pavement, excavation or opening in any public street,
alley, sidewalk or public way. (Village code § 6-10)
7-1-8: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
A. Injury To Pavement: It shall be unlawful to walk upon, or drive any vehicle or animal upon, or injure any newly laid street or alley pavement while the
same is protected by a warning sign or barricade; or to knowingly injure any street, sidewalk or alley pavement. (Village code § 6-5)
B. Obstructions: It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, create or maintain any obstruction of any street, alley, sidewalk or other public way, except as
may be specifically authorized by the commissioner of streets and public improvements or the village council. (Ord. O-36-04, 9-13-2004)
C. Burning: It shall be unlawful for any person to burn any leaves, paper, rubbish or other substance upon a public street, sidewalk or alley. (Village code
§ 6-15)
Chapter 2
USE OF PUBLIC WAYS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 219/416
7-2-1: PRIVATE USE:
A. Use Restricted:
1. Unless approved by the village council as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to deposit, place, set or hang out, on, over or upon any public
sidewalk, street or public place, or any utility pole thereon, any goods, wares, merchandise, material, signs, banners or flags (other than the national
emblem).
With approval of the village council, after an application therefor and the issuance and delivery of an acceptable insurance policy protecting the
village from personal injury and/or property damage liability in an amount approved by the village council or, in the alternative, a save harmless and
indemnity agreement, the placing, setting or hanging of a banner, sign or flag on utility poles shall be permitted in assigned areas provided the
attachment does not exceed six feet by thirty one inches (6' x 31") and is used to announce or commemorate a patriotic, community, historical or
governmental activity of a governmental body, not for profit or eleemosynary entity. (Ord. O-14-91, 8-26-1991)
2. Except as provided in subsection B of this section, or unless approved by the village council subject to the approval and authorization of a
nonexclusive license and indemnity agreement, it shall be unlawful for any person to use any street, sidewalk, parkway or other public place or area
for the display, sale or peddling of any goods or merchandise. (Ord. O-40-10, 7-26-2010)
B. Restaurants: The village clerk may issue a license to a restaurant for the use of public sidewalks/bumpouts for tables and chairs subject to the
provisions set forth in title 4, chapter 3, article A of this code. (Ord. O-14-00, 5-28-2000)
C. Parkway Private Landscaping:
1. Permits to perform private landscaping in public parkways shall be made with the department of public health and safety. The permit fee shall be
fifteen dollars ($15.00).
2. Parkway tree planting requests will be reviewed and approved by the director of the department of public works. The trees shall have a minimum
caliper of two inches (2"), be of a recommended species and located at the discretion of the village arborist/forester.
3. Parkways shall have no less than fifty percent (50%) of the area seeded or sodded with turf grass. Driveways, curbs and carriage walks shall be
included when calculating the total parkway area. Low growing ground cover may be permitted as a substitute when conditions do not favor lawn
growth.
4. Parkway planting such as flowers, shrubs and/or ground cover shall conform to the following:
a. Plant types shall be ornamental and harmless to pedestrians and animals. Food plantings shall be prohibited.
b. Plantings shall be set back a minimum two feet (2') from adjacent sidewalks, driveways, curbs and gutters.
c. Planting growth heights shall not exceed twenty four inches (24") above the ground level next to sidewalks, curbs and gutters. Growth heights
adjacent to driveways shall not exceed twenty four inches (24").
d. "Keystone" parkway (street corner intersections) plantings shall be restricted to a minimum setback of one foot (1') from adjacent sidewalks,
planted in ground and have a maximum growth height of eighteen inches (18").
e. Planting bed edging shall be of material designed for landscape purposes.
f. Plantings shall be prohibited in parkways less than six feet (6') wide.
g. Plantings shall be prohibited within twenty five feet (25') of a crosswalk.
h. Public utilities shall not be obstructed.
i. Property owners shall be the only party provided permission under this subsection.
5. Parkway plantings must be properly maintained and aesthetically presentable during all seasons. Plantings will be subject to inspections by the
department of public works. At its sole discretion, the village may remove plants and/or trees that it deems neglected or a hazard, and the public
parkway restored with grass.
6. The village will not be responsible for replacing parkway plantings or treatments that are disturbed by maintenance operations or public
improvements.
7. Requests for installation of parkway treatments will be reviewed by the director of public works. Information describing the type, material, pattern,
colors and limits must be submitted with the application.
8. Parkway treatments shall conform to the following:
a. Treatment areas shall be no larger than fifty percent (50%) of the parkway area.
b. Treatment materials shall be limited to unit brick, concrete and stone pavers, mulches and precast concrete landscape curb sections.
c. Treatment installations shall be in accordance with standard landscape industry practices and on a firm subbase or weed barrier material.
d. Hardscape pavers may be placed adjacent to sidewalks, driveways, curbs and gutters.
e. Mulch beds shall be edged with landscape material designed for this purpose. Mulching shall be set back a minimum two feet (2') from adjacent
sidewalks, driveways, curbs and gutters.
f. Asphalt pavement, cast in place concrete, crushed limestone/gravel, asphalt curbs, wood step pads, wood foot bridges, decorative stone, stone
boulders, tree grates and synthetic turfs shall be prohibited.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 220/416
g. Permits for installation shall be granted only to property owners.
9. Parkway treatments must be properly installed and maintained. Treatments will be subject to inspections by the director of public works. Settled and
neglected treatments will be removed and the public parkway restored with grass.
10. Freestanding parkway planting containers are prohibited.
11. All treatments and containers installed upon any parkway shall be deemed property of the village of Forest Park. The village of Forest Park shall not
be responsible for or liable for any damage or disturbance to treatments or containers by maintenance operations or public improvements.
12. Parkway irrigation system requests will be reviewed and approved by the director of public works. Schematic drawings indicating installation details
and product specifications must be submitted. All underground utilities, points of connection, backflow preventers, valves, sprinklers and controllers
must be shown.
a. Irrigation system installations shall comply with all applicable building codes and installed by a licensed irrigation and sprinkler system contractor.
b. All pipe crossing pavements shall be bored.
c. All surface restorations shall conform to the provisions of this subsection.
d. Parkway irrigation systems installed prior to the adoption of this subsection shall be allowed to remain if kept in proper working order and subject
to village inspection. Compliance with articles contained herein will be required and nonconforming systems will be abandoned.
e. The property owner adjacent to a parkway upon which an irrigation system is installed shall be solely responsible for immediate repair or
maintenance of parkway irrigation systems.
13. No resident may install or maintain any furniture, shelters, grills, fountains, feeders, signage, lighting, flagpoles, monuments, or railings upon any
parkway.
14. Any person violating any of the provisions of this subsection shall be fined as provided in the general penalty in section 1-3-1 of this code for each
offense, and every day that any violation of this subsection shall occur shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. (Ord. O-18-05, 5-9-2005)
7-2-2: POLES AND WIRES:
It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain any poles or wires on or over any public street, alley or other public way without having first secured permission
from the village. (Village Code § 6-13)
7-2-3: OPENINGS:
It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any opening or stairway in any public street, alley, sidewalk or other public way, without a permit from the
village. All openings or stairways, when lawfully erected and maintained, shall be guarded by a suitable strong cover or railing to be approved by the
commissioner of streets and public improvements. Before a permit shall be given by the village to maintain any opening or stairway in any public sidewalk,
street, alley or public way, the applicant shall first deposit with the village clerk a bond, with sufficient sureties, to be approved by the commissioner of
streets and public improvements in the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), conditioned to indemnify the village for any loss, damage or liability which
may result from or be caused by such opening or stairway or arising from the use thereof. (Ord. O-36-04, 9-13-2004)
7-2-4: PARADES, PROCESSIONS AND OPEN AIR MEETINGS:
No parade, procession or open air meeting shall be held upon apublic way or upon any ground abutting upon a public way until a permit in writing therefor
shall be obtained. Application for such parade, procession or open air public meeting shall be made in writing to the village clerk at least thirty (30) days
prior to the event, by the person in charge or control thereof, stating the time, place, route, duration, person or organization in charge and purpose of such
parade, procession or open air meeting. Such application shall be investigated by the chief of police, who shall make a recommendation to the village
council. If the village council shall be informed by the chief of police that such parade, procession or open air public meeting is not to be held for any
unlawful purpose, will not in any manner tend to be a breach of the peace, or impede the orderly flow of vehicular or pedestrian travel, and that such action
will not unnecessarily interfere with the peace and quiet of the village, the village council shall issue such permit to the person making application therefor.
(Ord. O-25-68, 5-13-1968)
7-2-5: RECEPTACLES ON PUBLIC WAYS:
It shall be unlawful to place any receptacles for the collection of building materials and/or debris on any public way in the village without first obtaining a
permit therefor from the village clerk, and paying a permit fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for seventy two (72) hours or less and twenty five dollars ($25.00) for
each twenty four (24) hour period thereafter.
Such receptacles shall be completely enclosed on all sides except the top portion and protected from the public using the streets by barricades lighted
during nighttime hours. Dust or fumes emanating therefrom must be controlled and the area around the receptacles kept free from spillage. (Ord. O-8-90,
3-26-1990)
7-2-6: SUBSIDEWALK SPACE:
A. Permits:
1. Required: No person shall use any space underneath the surface of any street or other public ground in this village, to construct or maintain any
structure thereunder; or disturb the sidewalk on such street, or any other public ground, for the purpose of constructing or maintaining any vault or
structure thereunder; or any coal hole, trap door or other opening therein, without first obtaining a permit from the village council. No such permit
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 221/416
shall be transferred or assigned, nor shall any right or privilege thereunder be transferred or assigned except as hereinafter provided. (Village Code §
6-31)
2. Application: Application for such permit shall be made, in writing, with the village clerk and be accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing the
gross measurements of the vault to be constructed, together with all openings in the surface over the same, and such sketch or diagram shall be
approved by the commissioner of streets and public improvements. (Village Code § 6-32)
3. Bond: Every applicant for such a permit, authorizing the construction or maintenance of any coal hole, trap door or other opening therein, shall file
with the application a bond in the penal sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), with surety to be approved by the village council. Such bond shall
be approved by the village council and conditioned that the person to whom such permit shall be issued, his heirs, successors or assigns, will save
and keep the village free and harmless from any and all loss or damage, or claim of damage, arising from or out of the construction or use of the
space, structure, vault, coal hole, trap door or other openings therein mentioned. (Village Code § 6-33)
Whenever the village council shall be of the opinion that the sureties on any bond given for any permit issued hereunder have become insufficient a
new bond for such permit shall thereupon be filed with sureties to be approved by the commissioner of streets and public improvements. (Village
Code § 6-39)
4. Permit Fees: The fee for a vault, space or structure that contains not more than one hundred (100) square feet, occupied, shall be five dollars
($5.00) and one cent ($0.01) for each additional square foot or fraction thereof over one hundred feet (100'). This fee shall cover the permit for such
space, vault or structure, and for any coal holes, trap doors or other openings connecting with the same. All permits, issued hereunder, shall expire
on April 30 following the date of issuance but shall be subject to renewal from year to year upon payment of a like fee. In case of a transfer of the
premises, the purchaser of such interest shall pay the sum of five dollars ($5.00) as a fee for the issuance of the transfer permit. (Village Code § 6-
34; amd. 2004 Code)
5. Revocation: All permits issued under this section shall be subject to revocation, in whole or in part, by the village council for the violation of the
provisions of this section. Procedures for revocation of licenses are found at section 3-1-6 of this code. (Village Code § 6-35; amd. 2004 Code)
6. Failure To Obtain Permit: If any person, now using any space underneath any street, public alley, sidewalk or public way, shall fail to take out a
permit for such use as herein provided, then the commissioner of public property shall proceed to remove such structure and close the space therein.
(Village Code § 6-37; amd. Ord. O-36-04, 9-13-2004)
B. Obstruction: Every person using the space under any sidewalk in this village shall, at all times, keep such sidewalk in good condition and repair, and
clear and free from all snow, ice, dirt, filth and other obstructions or encumbrances. All such repairing and cleaning shall be in accordance with the
regulations of the commissioner of streets and public improvements. (Village Code § 6-38)
C. Protection For Openings; Supervision: Every opening in every vault, coal hole or aperture in a sidewalk shall be covered with a substantial iron plate,
with a rough surface, to prevent accidents; and the entire construction of such coal holes and vaults be subject to the direction and supervision of the
commissioner of streets and public improvements, or such other person as the mayor and village council may designate. (Village Code § 6-40)
D. Prohibited Acts And Conditions:
1. Injure Public Property: No person shall use the space under any such sidewalk in such a manner as to interfere with any public property. (Village
Code § 6-36)
2. Explosives And Inflammables: No explosive substance, and inflammable oil or substance, shall be kept for any purpose under any sidewalk in this
village, and no aperture shall be ventilated into the streets unless the aperture, or ventilating opening or hole, shall be securely covered, as herein
provided. (Village Code § 6-41)
E. Violations; Penalty: Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be fined as provided in the general penalty in section 1-3-1 of this
code for each offense and every day that any violation of this section shall occur shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. (Village Code § 6-42;
amd. 2004 Code)
7-2-7: COMMERCIAL FILMING AND TAPING ACTIVITIES:
A. Permit Required: Any person seeking to use any public street, public sidewalk, public park, public building or other public right of way for commercial
motion picture or television filming or taping or commercial photography for advertising in publications or related activities shall obtain a permit therefor
from the village clerk pursuant to an application to be filed by the applicant, not less than forty eight (48) hours before the commercial activity is to
begin, on forms furnished by the village clerk for this purpose. The application shall include, but not be limited to, information regarding the applicant
person or company; the representatives or directors thereof who will be in charge of filming, photography or taping activities; the public streets, public
buildings, public parks and public personnel equipment or other facilities required for such activities; the dates and times during which public property
or personnel equipment will be so required; and such other information as shall assist the village clerk in determining that the requested commercial
activities will not be hazardous or otherwise endanger the public health, safety and welfare. The village clerk shall be authorized to establish such
conditions and requirements as he may deem necessary with respect to the issuance of the requested permit to assure that public property and the
health, safety and welfare of the public shall be protected and maintained during such commercial use of public ways, buildings, personnel and
equipment.
B. Liability Insurance Required: The applicant shall furnish the village clerk with a certificate of liability insurance naming the village, its agents, officials and
employees as additional insureds with respect to the particular commercial filming, photography or taping activity for which a permit is sought, in the
general liability amount (and automobile liability amount, if applicable) of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for bodily injury or death to any person or
for damage to any property from any occurrence arising out of or in any way related to the applicant activities within the village. The applicant shall also
submit to the village clerk proof of the appropriate workers' compensation and employer's liability insurance in force with respect to employees of the
applicant.
C. Hold Harmless And Indemnification Agreement: In addition to the insurance requirements, the applicant shall enter into a hold harmless and
indemnification agreement, on the forms as provided by the village clerk, to hold the village harmless, defend and indemnify the village with respect to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 222/416
any loss, judgment, damages, costs and expenses, settlement and compromises, claims and causes of action of every kind or nature arising out of or
in connection with the commercial filming, photography or taping activities within the village for which a permit is issued.
D. Fees And Remuneration: The fee for processing and issuing the permit provided in this section shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). In addition, the cost for
use of police, public safety, public works or other village personnel assigned to the permit activity (whether requested by the applicant or not) shall be at
the rate of twenty five dollars ($25.00) per hour, per person during regular working hours and at the rate of thirty seven dollars fifty cents ($37.50) per
hour, per person for overtime. The rate for use of public property shall be determined by the village clerk, according to the extent of such use, as
follows: for total or disruptive use of a public building during regular operations, five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day plus sixty two dollars fifty cents
($62.50) per hour for each hour or part thereof beyond regular operating hours; for partial, nondisruptive use of such public building, two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00) per day plus thirty one dollars twenty five cents ($31.25) per hour for each hour or part thereof beyond regular operating hours; for
total closure of a public street, park area or right of way, one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day; for partial closure or obstruction of such public street,
park area or right of way, fifty dollars ($50.00) per day. Where village vehicles or equipment are used, the rate for such use shall be established by the
village clerk on a case by case basis, provided that no such public or private vehicles or equipment shall be stored on any park area, sidewalk or public
way, or parked on any street in violation of any parking restrictions.
E. Surety Bond Required: In addition to the foregoing requirements, the applicant shall, as a part of his application, deposit with the village clerk cash or a
surety bond in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) as security for the payment of any damage which may result to such public way, public
park or public building by reason of the applicant's use of the same pursuant to a permit to be issued herein. Any part of said deposit not needed or
used to repair, replace or restore damage so occasioned to public property by the applicant at the end of the permit period shall be returned to the
applicant within ten (10) days after the expiration date.
F. Village Recognition: The village shall be duly identified in the publication of any film, tape or periodical, which includes therein public buildings or public
areas of the village. (Ord. O-5-93, 4-26-1993)
Chapter 3
TREES, SHRUBS AND VEGETATION
7-3-1: PLANTING OF TREES AND SHRUBS:
A. Planting In Parkways; Permit Required: No person shall plant or cause to be planted any tree, plant or shrub in any parkway within the village without
first obtaining a written permit from the commissioner of streets and public improvements. (Village code § 26-3; amd. Ord. O-36-04, 9-13-2004)
B. Prohibited Species: In no case shall any person be allowed to plant any of the following plants, trees or shrubs or any derivation thereof:
Box elder
Catalpa
Cottonwood
Elm - all species
Fast growing or any brittle tree
Fruit tree
Mulberry
Poplar
Silver maple
Soft maple
Tree of heaven
Willow
(Village code § 26-3)
C. Supervision: In all other cases where permission is granted for the planting of any tree, plant or shrub, the planting shall be subject to the supervision of
the commissioner of public property. (Village code § 26-4)
D. Removal: When any person shall plant or cause to be planted any of the plants, trees or shrubs prohibited hereunder, it shall be the duty of the
commissioner of public property to remove such plant, tree or shrub and the expense thereof may be recovered by the village from such person or
persons who planted or caused to be planted said tree and said recovery may be by suit in any court of competent jurisdiction. (Village code § 26-5)
7-3-2: PROHIBITED CONDITIONS:
A. Overhanging Trees: All shade trees now standing on the streets of this village or which shall be hereafter set out or planted therein, and all shade and
other trees standing upon private property, the branches of which extend over the line of the street, shall be pruned and trimmed so that no branch
thereof shall grow or hang over the street or sidewalk less than nine feet (9') above the level of the sidewalk and in case the owner of any such tree or
of the property in front of which such tree stands shall fail to trim or prune the same in accordance with the provisions of this section within twenty four
(24) hours after notice so to do from the commissioner of streets and public improvements, the costs and expenses of such pruning and trimming may
be recovered from such owner by action of debt in the name of the village. (Village code § 26-1; amd. Ord. O-36-04, 9-13-2004)
B. Obstructions; Injury To Property: In case any tree standing upon or overhanging any street in said village shall obscure or prevent any streetlamp from
properly lighting such street or from any cause shall injure the sidewalk of such street under or near such tree, the village shall have the right by notice
in writing, to require the owner or occupant of the lot or parcel of land upon or adjacent to which such tree is standing or growing to prune the same in
such manner as the necessities of the case may require, and in case such tree is standing or growing upon the street to remove the same if in the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 223/416
judgment of the village council such removal is expedient or necessary and if such owner or occupant shall fail or neglect to so prune or remove such
tree, in the manner provided in such notice, within five (5) days after service of such notice, it shall be the duty of the commissioner of streets and
public improvements to so prune or remove such tree, and the expense thereof may be recovered by the village from such owner or occupant by suit.
(Village code § 26-2; amd. Ord. O-36-04, 9-13-2004)
C. Display In Public Buildings: It shall be unlawful to display, for any reason whatsoever, any natural tree or artificial tree having paper or cellophane
boughs and needles in any building used as a place of public assembly in the village. (Ord. O-2-75, 2-22-1975)
7-3-3: DUTCH ELM DISEASE AND EMERALD ASH BORER INFECTED OR DISEASED TREE:
A. No person shall permit or maintain on any lot or parcel of land any elm tree or dead elm tree infected with the fungus known as Dutch elm disease as
determined by analysis. No person shall permit or maintain on any lot or parcel of land any ash tree or dead ash tree infected with emerald ash borer
as determined by analysis.
B. The commissioner of public property is authorized to enter upon any lot or parcel of land to obtain specimens of any elm tree or dead elm tree, or any
ash tree or dead ash tree. It shall be unlawful for any person to prohibit such entry.
C. If any elm tree or dead elm tree is found to be infected with Dutch elm disease, the owner of the lot or parcel of land upon which said elm tree or dead
elm tree is located, shall within ten (10) days' notice remove the same. If any ash tree or dead ash tree is found to be infected with the emerald ash
borer, the owner of the lot or parcel of land upon which said ash tree or dead ash tree is located, shall within ten (10) days' notice remove the same.
Notice shall be in person or by registered mail to the last known address of the owner. In the event the owner fails to remove an infected tree the village
may remove and burn the same or dispose of the same and charge the cost thereof against the owner of the lot or parcel of land. The village also
adopts and incorporates by reference 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-20-12, entitled "removal of infected trees", as part of this chapter. (Ord. O-20-
15, 9-14-2015)
7-3-4: WEEDS:
A. It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee or occupant or agent or employee representing such owner, lessee or occupant having control of any lot of
ground or parcel of land in the village, to allow or maintain on any such lot or parcel, a growth of any grass, thistles, ragweed, noxious weeds or any
weeds to a height of over ten inches (10"), and it shall be the duty of such person to remove such objects. (Ord. O-32-65, 10-25-1965)
B. Upon the failure of any owner, lessee or occupant, or agent or employee representing such owner, lessee or occupant having control of any lot of
ground or parcel of land in the village to remove any growth of grass, thistles, ragweed, noxious weeds or any weeds over ten inches (10") in height,
the village may, upon seven (7) days' notice, post in a conspicuous place on the property with a courtesy copy of said notice sent by regular mail
addressed to the person whose name the last real estate taxes were assessed, remove the growths upon such lot or parcel and charge the cost
thereof to the owner of such lot or parcel of land in the manner provided by law. (Ord. O-58-09, 9-14-2009)
7-3-5: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
A. Any person charged with a violation of this chapter in a citation issued by an employee of the department of public health and safety, detailing the
nature of the violation, shall be fined as provided in the general penalty in section 1-3-1 of this code. (Ord. O-2-95, 2-13-1995; amd. 2004 Code)
B. Absent the failure to satisfy citation, the person charged shall appear at the place, time and date designated on the citation and the superintendent of
the department shall thereupon conduct a hearing. After the hearing by the superintendent of the department, the superintendent shall take the
following action:
1. Dismiss the citation; or
2. Find that there was probable cause for the issuance of the citation and that the original amount for the commission of such violation shall remain the
same; or
3. In the event the violator has not corrected the violation and/or paid the penalty within the time established by the superintendent, proceed to institute
appropriate proceedings against the person cited in the circuit court of Cook County, Illinois. (Ord. O-2-95, 2-13-1995)
Chapter 4
WATER SYSTEM REGULATIONS
7-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall be given the respective definitions set forth below:
COMMERCIAL CUSTOMER: Any customer connecting to the village water system and purchasing water from the village for commercial purposes
whether or not the connection or tap in is to a location zoned for commercial purposes so long as any portion of such location is used for commercial
purposes.
CONNECTION FEE: Charge imposed by the village for connection or tap in to the village water system as set forth in subsection 7-4-4A of this chapter.
CUSTOMER: A person who receives water and sewer service at a location within the village corporate limits.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 224/416
DISCONTINUATION FEE: Charge imposed by the village for discontinuance of village water and sewer service to any customer as set forth in subsection
7-4-10F of this chapter.
INDUSTRIAL CUSTOMER: Any customer connecting to the village water system and purchasing water from the village for industrial purposes whether or
not the connection or tap in is to a location zoned for industrial purposes, so long as any portion of such location is used for industrial purposes; and, any
cemetery located in whole or in part within the village boundaries and purchasing water from the village.
INSTITUTIONAL CUSTOMER: Any customer connecting to the village water system and purchasing water from the village for institutional purposes other
than institutions funded by ad valorem taxes.
MULTI-FAMILY CUSTOMER: Any customer connecting to the village water system and purchasing water from the village for use within any structure used
for residential purposes and containing more than two (2) dwelling units.
NEW APPLICANT: A person who applies for provision of water and sewer service to a location within the village's corporate limits.
PERSON: A natural person, corporation, real estate trust, partnership, association or other legal entity.
RECONNECTION FEE: Charge imposed by the village for reconnection to the village water system after discontinuation of service for any reason for any
period of time as set forth in subsection 7-4-4B of this chapter.
RESIDENTIAL CUSTOMER: Any customer connecting to the village water system and purchasing water from the village for residential purposes within a
structure with one or two (2) dwelling units and institutions funded by ad valorem taxes.
SATISFACTORY CREDIT: Any customer with credit references sufficient to borrow funds from a statewide lending institution.
SENIOR CITIZEN CUSTOMER: Any customer connecting to the village water system at a location utilized as such customer's primary residence and
which location has been granted a senior citizens homestead exemption pursuant to section 15-170 of the property tax code1. (Ord. O-56-01, 12-17-2001)
7-4-2: INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENTS:
All infrastructure necessary for the village's provisions of water and sewer service to a structure within the village shall be constructed and/or installed
according to plans and specifications approved by the village and completed prior to the village's provision of such service to the structure. Provision of
such service shall further be conditioned upon the village's issuance of all required permits and approval of such construction and/or installation after it is
completed and operational. All costs for such infrastructure shall be borne by the new applicant for such structure. Maintenance and repairs of water and
sanitary sewer improvements located between the public main and the private property being served are the responsibility of the property owner. (Ord. O-
56-01, 12-17-2001; amd. Ord. O-04-12, 2-27-2012)
7-4-3: SERVICE REQUIRED:
A. Requirements: No structure within the village shall be certified for occupancy or otherwise occupied unless that structure is connected to the village's
water and sewer service. No structure within the village shall be connected to the village's water and sewer service unless it has applied to the village
for such service pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and the new applicant has satisfied all applicable legal requirements. No person shall make
any connection to the village's waterworks and sewer system without the village's permission. No person shall receive water at and/or dispose of
sewage from any location within the village by any means or source other than the village's waterworks and sewer system.
B. Application For Service: Persons shall apply for village water and sewer service on an application form provided by the village clerk and pursuant to
regulations as from time to time prescribed by the village council. Such regulations shall, without limitation, describe the: 1) infrastructure prerequisites,
construction and installation standards and all other specifications for connection of a structure to the village's waterworks and sewer system; 2) water
meter installation standards and specifications; 3) the procedures employed by the village to determine whether a new applicant has failed to make
prior payments to the village for water and sewer service; and 4) the procedures for establishing satisfactory credit references for a new applicant.
(Ord. O-56-01, 12-17-2001)
7-4-4: CONNECTION FEES:
A. Connection Fee:
1. Connections or tap-ins to the village's water system via a line measuring two inches (2") or less in diameter shall only be made through the use of a
tap or other device acceptable to the village. Such tap or other device shall be installed by authorized village personnel or its designated agent. The
new applicant for such connection or tap-in shall pay the following fee for such installation, as applicable:
Diameter Of Line
Single-Family
Residences
All Other
Structures
1 inch $400.00 $ 700.00
More than 1 inch to 2 inches 500.00 1,000.00
2. Connections or tap-ins to the village's water system via a line measuring more than two inches (2") in diameter shall be made through a tap or other
device acceptable to the village. Such tap or other device shall be installed by a qualified master plumber and that installation shall be inspected by
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 225/416
authorized village personnel. The new applicant for such connection shall pay the following fee for such inspection, as applicable:
Single-family residences $200.00
All other structures 400.00
B. Reconnection Fee: Each new applicant shall pay the Village a minimum fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00), plus all actual costs the Village incurs in
excess of one hundred dollars ($100.00), for the reconnection of a structure within the Village to the Village's waterworks and sewer system if Village
water and sewer service to the structure was discontinued for any reason for any period of time. (Ord. O-56-01, 12-17-2001)
7-4-5: DEPOSIT FOR SERVICE:
A. Deposit Requirements:
1. If, after a review of its records, the Village determines that a new applicant has failed to pay for past Village water and sewer service furnished to the
new applicant at any location, the Village may refuse to provide water and sewer service to the applicant until the applicant pays the past due bill and
agrees to provide a deposit to the Village pursuant to subsection B of this section.
2. If the Village is unable to establish satisfactory credit for an applicant, the Village may refuse to provide water and sewer service to the applicant until
the applicant agrees to provide a deposit to the Village pursuant to subsection B of this section.
3. If, after review of its payment records, it is noted that a customer, during any consecutive twenty four (24) months fails to timely pay any two (2) bills
for Village water and sewer service, the Village may require such customer to pay a deposit to the Village pursuant to subsection B of this section.
B. Deposits:
1. Deposits required pursuant to this chapter shall be approximately the average charge for two (2) months of the Village's provision of water and sewer
service to the new applicant or customer being required to make the deposit. The following deposits are required:
Commercial or industrial customers $250.00
Multi-family customers 30.00
Senior citizen customers 15.00
Residential customers 50.00
2. Deposits must be paid within thirty (30) days of the Village's issuance of a request for the deposit. Such a request shall specify the amount of the
deposit, reason for the request, method and place for payment of the deposit, deadline for payment of the deposit and consequences for
nonpayment of the deposit. A request for a deposit shall be considered issued by the Village when mailed personally or delivered to the new
applicant or customer being required to make the deposit. A request for a deposit shall be dated with the date it is issued.
C. Deposit Adjustments: The Village may adjust the amount of a deposit any time when the character and/or degree of use of the Village's water and
sewer service by the new applicant or customer being required to make the deposit changes or when it is clearly established that such use will
materially change in the immediate future. The Village may make such an adjustment on its own accord or upon the request of the new applicant or
customer being required to make a deposit.
D. Deposit Refund: A deposit shall be refunded after the new applicant or customer making the deposit has timely paid its Village bills for water and sewer
service for a consecutive twelve (12) month period. No deposit shall be refunded until all amounts owed to the Village for water and sewer service by
the customer or new applicant making the deposit have been paid.
E. Use Of Deposit On Disconnection: A deposit may be used to offset any amount due from a customer for Village water and sewer service upon
discontinuance of that service. (Ord. O-56-01, 12-17-2001)
7-4-6: METERS:
All structures connected to the Village's waterworks and sewer system shall be equipped with a meter furnished by the Village but paid for by the customer
receiving such water and sewer service. Such meter shall accurately measure the amount of water provided to the structure by the Village. Procedures for
reading and testing of meters shall be prescribed in regulations promulgated by a designee of the Village Mayor. No person shall tamper in any way with a
meter installed pursuant to this provision. (Ord. O-56-01, 12-17-2001)
7-4-7: WATER RATES AND CHARGES:
A. Water Rates: The following rates for the Village's provision of water and sewer service are established for each one hundred (100) cubic feet of water
transmitted, except industrial/commercial large meter customers, which rate is established for each one thousand (1,000) cubic feet of water
transmitted, based upon meter readings:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 226/416
1. Commercial or industrial customers:
June 1, 2018, through and including May 31, 2019 $ 11.52
2. Multi-family customers:
June 1, 2018, through and including May 31, 2019 9.20
3. Senior citizen customers:
June 1, 2018, through and including May 31, 2019 5.66
4. Residential customers:
June 1, 2018, through and including May 31, 2019 7.31
5. Institutional customers:
June 1, 2018, through and including May 31, 2019 6.66
6. Industrial/commercial large meter customers:
June 1, 2018, through and including May 31, 2019 115.25
B. Minimum Charges: During each billing cycle, a minimum charge will be assessed to all customers as outlined in this subsection. This minimum charge
shall reflect a minimum number of units (cubic feet) multiplied by the effective and applicable rate at the time of the billing cycle:
Commercial/industrial customers Minimum of 6 units (600 cubic feet)
Multi-family customers Minimum of 9 units (900 cubic feet)
Senior citizen customers Minimum of 3 units (300 cubic feet)
Residential customers Minimum of 6 units (600 cubic feet)
Institutional customers Minimum of 6 units (600 cubic feet)
C. Liability For Charges: The owner of any structure connected to the Village's waterworks and sewer system and the customer for that structure (if that
customer is different from the owner) shall be jointly and severally liable for Village charges for the provision of water and sewer service to the structure
and the Village's provision of such service to the structure is conditioned upon such joint and several liability.
D. Water Rate Review: The adequacy of the water service rates shall be reviewed, periodically, to automatically adjust for rate increases imposed and
charged to the Village by the City of Chicago or to reflect a change in local capital costs or operations, maintenance and reserve costs. (Ord. O-15-18,
5-29-2018)
7-4-8: BILLINGS:
A. Billing Cycles: Bills for the Village's provision of water and sewer service shall be issued and mailed at such regular intervals as may be directed by the
Village's Mayor and Village Council or their designee. Payment on such bills shall be due no less than twenty one (21) days after they are mailed to a
customer. Such bills shall be dated with the date on which they are mailed.
B. Estimated Bills: The Village may require a customer to pay an estimated bill for water and sewer service if the Village has been unable to read the
customer's water meter under the following circumstances:
1. The Village has taken appropriate and reasonable measures to read the meter, including, without limitation, attempting to make an appointment with
the customer, scheduling readings for times other than normal business hours, and/or providing postal cards on which the customer may record the
reading and mail it to the Village; or
2. The customer has knowingly and wilfully denied reasonable access to the Village's representative for the purpose of taking an actual reading of the
meter; or
3. The customer has otherwise made an actual reading of the meter unnecessarily difficult; or
4. Circumstances beyond the control of the Village make an actual reading of the meter extremely difficult or impossible.
Estimated bills shall be calculated according to reasonable and commonly accepted standards which shall be specified in regulations promulgated by
the village finance director.
C. Refunds: The village shall pay a customer any amount for which the customer is overcharged for the village's provision of water and sewer service as a
result of an error by the village, either as a credit on the next bill, or if the service to such customer has been discontinued, then by payment directly to
such customer. (Ord. O-56-01, 12-17-2001)
7-4-9: DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 227/416
A. Past Due Bills: The village shall not consider a customer's bill for village water and sewer service, when paid in person, past due unless the payment is
made after the due date printed on the bill. When a customer mails a payment in the full amount of a bill for such service, the village may rely upon the
postmark of the payment to determine whether a bill is past due. The payment shall be considered past due if the payment is postmarked after the due
date printed on the bill. If the postmark is illegible or absent, the customer's payment shall be deemed timely made if the payment is received by the
village not more than two (2) business days after the due date printed on the bill.
B. Late Payment Charges: A customer shall be liable for and pay the village a late payment charge in an amount equal to one and one-half percent (1.5%)
per month on any amount for village water and sewer service which is past due pursuant to subsection 7-4-8A of this chapter. The village shall not
continue to assess a late payment charge on any final bill which has been outstanding for more than twelve (12) months.
C. Liens:
1. Lien On Premises: All water charges are liens upon real estate for which the water is used or supplied whenever the charges become delinquent.
2. Notice Of Lien: Whenever a bill for water service remains unpaid thirty (30) days after it has been rendered, the village clerk shall send a notice to
the customer and owner of the real estate for which the water is supplied that unless the bill is paid, a lien shall be recorded against the real estate. If
the bill remains unpaid for an additional thirty (30) days, the village clerk may file with the recorder of deeds of Cook County, a claim of lien. This
claim shall contain the legal description of the location served, the amount of the unpaid bill, and a notice that the village claims a lien for this amount
as well as for all charges for water served subsequent to the period covered by the unpaid bill or bills and all costs incurred by the village in
connection with such claim.
If the customer of water whose bill is unpaid is not the owner of the real estate being served, and the village clerk has notice of this, a copy of the lien
shall be mailed to the owner of the premises, if the address be known to the village clerk, when the lien is filed. (Ord. O-56-01, 12-17-2001)
7-4-10: DISCONTINUE SERVICE:
A. Reasons To Discontinue Service: The village may discontinue water and sewer service to a customer when the customer fails to do any of the following:
1. Make a deposit or increase a deposit required pursuant to subsection 7-4-5B of this chapter; or
2. Pay a past due bill owed to the village for water and sewer service for more than thirty (30) days after the due date printed on the bill; or
3. Provide the village with access to the customer's meter within ten (10) business days after the village has sent the customer an estimated bill and
the village thereafter makes a written request to the customer for access to the meter.
B. Notice Of Discontinuance:
1. The village may discontinue water and sewer service to a customer, as provided in subsection D of this section, only after it has mailed or personally
delivered to that customer a written notice of discontinuance. In the event no person over the age of thirteen (13) years is present when personal
delivery is attempted, such notice may be posted on the front and rear entrance of the premises being serviced. Any notice required to be mailed or
delivered to a customer prior to discontinuance of service shall be mailed or delivered separately from any bill to that customer.
2. The village shall also mail a copy of the notice described above to a third party designated by a customer, should the customer make a written
request to the village for such third party notice.
C. Hearing On Discontinuance:
1. A customer, or at the customer's request, a duly authorized representative of the customer, shall be given an opportunity to be heard by the village
mayor or his designee, to challenge the village's discontinuance of water and sewer service to the customer or present other reasons for the
continuation of such service to the customer. The customer shall make a request for such hearing in writing, mailed to the village mayor at the village
hall, within ten (10) business days after the mailing or personal delivery to the customer of the notice required by subsection B of this section. Such
request shall state, at a minimum, that the customer seeks such a hearing and the customer's name, address and telephone number.
2. A hearing pursuant to such a request shall be held before the village mayor or his designee, at the village hall, during regular business hours. The
hearing shall be held no less than five (5) business days after the mailing or personal delivery to the customer of a notice stating the date, time and
place of the hearing. Such mailing or personal delivery shall be made to the customer at the address listed in the customer's request for a hearing.
3. At such a hearing, the customer or his duly authorized agent shall be given a reasonable period of time to make any presentation he desires. The
village mayor or his designee shall consider the customer's presentation and shall explain the customer's account and the village's contentions in
connection with that account. The rules of evidence shall not be applied in such hearing.
4. Promptly after the hearing, the village mayor or his designee shall make a written report summarizing matters discussed at such a hearing and his or
her conclusions regarding such discontinuance. A copy of this report shall be mailed or personally delivered to the customer at the address listed in
the customer's request for a hearing. This report shall constitute a "final decision of an administrative agency" pursuant to article III of the Illinois
code of civil procedure2. Such decision shall be subject to judicial review pursuant to said article III of the Illinois code of civil procedure. The report
shall state that the customer has a right to such judicial review of the decision set forth in the report.
D. Procedures For Discontinuance:
1. The village may discontinue water and sewer service to a customer:
a. Not less than ten (10) business days after the mailing of the report described in subsection C of this section, if the customer has properly
requested a hearing pursuant to subsection C of this section; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 228/416
b. Not less than ten (10) business days after the mailing of the notice described in subsection B of this section, if the customer has not properly
requested a hearing pursuant to subsection C of this section.
2. The village shall also attempt to advise the customer that water and sewer service is being discontinued by directing its employee making the
disconnection to contact the customer at the time such service is being discontinued. When the village is unable to discontinue such service during a
call made at the customer's location, the village shall attempt to leave a notice at the location being serviced or billing address informing the
customer that an attempt to discontinue such service has been made and that such service continues to be subject to discontinuance.
3. The village shall make a good faith effort to engage in collection activity with a customer before delivering a notice of discontinuance.
4. The village shall not discontinue service at the meter subsequent to two o'clock (2:00) P.M. unless it is prepared to reconnect the same day. The
village shall not discontinue service on a holiday or weekend day unless it is prepared to reconnect on that same holiday or weekend day.
E. Discontinue Service To Residential Customers With Serious Illness: Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this chapter, discontinuance of village
water and sewer service to residential customers and multi-family customers is prohibited for up to sixty (60) days when discontinuance of such service
will aggravate an existing serious illness of any person who is a permanent resident of the location where such service is rendered and the customer
for such service complies with the following requirements:.
1. The illness must be certified to the village by a registered physician or local board of health. The certification shall be in writing and shall include the
name of the ill person, a statement that he or she is a permanent resident of the premises in question, the name, business address, and telephone
number of the certifying party, the nature of the illness.
2. Initial certification by the certifying party may be by telephone to the village mayor or his or her designee, provided written certification is forwarded to
the village within five (5) business days after verbal certification.
3. Initial certification shall prohibit discontinuance of village water and sewer service to the applicable premises for thirty (30) days. The certification
may be renewed by the customer for such premises for an additional thirty (30) days by providing another certificate to the village. Failure to so
renew the certificate shall entitle the village to initiate procedures for discontinuance of such service.
4. The customer must enter into an agreement with the village for the retirement of the unpaid balance of the account for village water and sewer
service to the customer within the first thirty (30) days and keep the current account current during the period that the unpaid balance is to be retired.
5. In the event village water and sewer service is terminated within fourteen (14) days prior to certification of illness by or for a qualifying resident,
service shall be restored to that residence if a proper certification is thereafter made in accordance with this subsection E.
F. Discontinuance Fee: Each customer shall pay the village a minimum fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00), plus all actual costs the village incurs in
excess of one hundred dollars ($100.00), upon the discontinuance of village water and sewer service to the customer's structure. (Ord. O-56-01, 12-17-
2001)
7-4-11: REVENUES AND ACCOUNTS:
A. Revenues: All revenues and monies derived from the operation of the village's waterworks system shall be deposited in the water account of the water
fund. All such revenues and monies shall be held by the village treasurer separate and apart from his private funds and separate and apart from all
other funds of the village treasurer not more than ten (10) days after receipt of the same, or at such more frequent intervals as may from time to time be
directed by the mayor and village council.
The village treasurer shall receive all such revenues from the village's waterworks system and all other funds and monies incident to the operation of
such system as the same may be delivered to him and deposit the same in the account designated as the water fund of the village.
B. Accounts: The village treasurer shall establish a proper system of accounts and shall keep proper books, records, and accounts in which complete and
correct entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the village's waterworks system, and at regular annual intervals he shall cause to be made
an audit by an independent auditing concern of the books to show the receipts and disbursements of the waterworks system.
In addition to the customary operating statements, the annual audit report shall also reflect the revenues and operating expenses of the waterworks
facilities, including a replacement cost. The financial information to be shown in the audit report shall include the following:
1. Flow data showing total gallons received at the water plant for the current fiscal year.
2. Billing data to show total number of gallons billed per fiscal year.
3. Debt service for the next succeeding fiscal year.
4. Number of users connected to the system.
5. Number of users. (Ord. O-56-01, 12-17-2001)
7-4-12: USE OF WATER WELLS:
A. Potable Water Supply Wells: The following provisions prohibit the use of ground water as a potable water supply by the installation and use of potable
water supply wells or by any other method:
1. Definitions:
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, limited liability company, corporation, associatio n, joint stock company, trust,
estate, political subdivision or any other legal entity or their legal representatives, agents or assigns.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 229/416
POTABLE WATER: Any water used for human or domestic consumption, including, but not limited to, water used for drinking, bathing, swimming,
washing dishes or preparing foods. (Ord. O-31-01, 8-13-2001)
2. Prohibition: The use or attempt to use a potable water supply, groundwater from within the corporate limits of the village by the installation or drilling
of wells or by any other method is hereby prohibited, including at points of withdrawal by the village. Any person violating the provisions of this
subsection shall be fined as provided in the general penalty in section 1-3-1 of this code for each violation. (Ord. O-31-01, 8-13-2001; amd. 2004
Code)
B. Private Wells: No person shall construct, cause to be constructed, operate or maintain a well on any property in the village where such property abuts,
is within one thousand feet (1,000') of, or can be serviced by the water system of the village. (Ord. O-31-01, 8-13-2001)
7-4-13: PROPERTY OWNER'S RIGHTS:
A. Reservation Of Rights: Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the village from pursuing any other legal remedies available to it for obtaining payment for
its provision of water and sewer service.
B. Right Of Entry: All persons with an interest in a property connected to the village's waterworks and sewer system authorize the village to enter that
property for meter readings, repairs, maintenance and discontinuance relating to such system, and the village's provision of water and sewer service to
the property is conditioned upon such authorization.
C. Access To Records: The Illinois environmental protection agency and/or the United States environmental protection agency, or either agency's
authorized representative shall have access to any books, documents, papers and records of the village which are applicable to the village's system of
user charges for the purpose of making audit, examination, excerpts and transcriptions thereof to ensure compliance with the terms of any loan
agreement or grant and rules of any such loan or grant made by or through either agency in regard to the village's waterworks systems. (Ord. O-56-01,
12-17-2001)
7-4-14: USE OF COMBINED SEWER:
A. All nondomestic sources that are tributary to the combined sewer system shall meet the applicable standards of the Illinois environmental protection
agency and the metropolitan water reclamation district of greater Chicago.
B. All owners of combined sewer systems tributary to the village's combined sewer system shall meet the applicable standards of the Illinois environmental
protection agency and the metropolitan water reclamation district of greater Chicago. (Ord. O-19-06, 3-27-2006)
7-4-15: LAWN SPRINKLING RESTRICTIONS:
A. There is hereby established a water usage schedule to commence on May 15 and to remain in effect through September 15 of each year, for the
purpose of regulating the outdoor use of water for sprinkling lawns, gardens and shrubbery as follows:
1. Persons owning or controlling property with an odd numbered street address may use water for outdoor lawn, garden and shrubbery purposes on
odd numbered calendar days;
2. Persons owning or controlling property with an even numbered street address may engage in such outdoor water use on even numbered calendar
days;
3. No outdoor water uses, as set forth therein, shall be undertaken between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) noon to six o'clock (6:00) P.M.
B. For the purposes of this section, the phrases "outdoor use of water", "outdoor purposes", and "outdoor water uses" shall mean the use of water from the
village's municipal potable water system for watering of a lawn, garden or shrubbery employing the use of a hose, pipe, duct, sprinkler or sprinkling
system but shall not include the use of rainwater or recycled water for any of the above named purposes or the watering of plants or shrubbery using
watering cans, buckets or pails.
C. The mayor is hereby authorized to further limit or prohibit the use of water from the village waterworks for the purposes of sprinkling lawns, gardens or
shrubbery, for washing automobiles, for filling residential swimming pools and other similar purposes whenever he has reason to believe that a
shortage of village water may be forthcoming or that there is an actual shortage of village water.
D. The sodding, seeding or laying of new lawns, and the restoration of existing lawns is to be discouraged from May 15 through September 15. However,
residents may sprinkle such new or restored lawn for a period of not more than two (2) weeks, in the event that such installation or restoration of a lawn
is not otherwise practicable or in the event of a demonstrated hardship. (Ord. O-26-15, 10-26-2015)
Chapter 5
RIGHT OF WAY CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
7-5-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 230/416
A. Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and procedures for constructing facilities on rights of way within the village's jurisdiction,
which will provide public benefit consistent with the preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the village rights of way and the
village as a whole.
B. Intent: In enacting this chapter, the village intends to exercise its authority over the rights of way in the village and, in particular, the use of the public
ways and property by utilities, by establishing uniform standards to address issues presented by utility facilities, including, without limitation:
1. Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys, parkways and other public ways and places;
2. Prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions and other conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
3. Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the village's utilities and of other utilities lawfully located in rights of way or public property;
4. Protect against environmental damage, including damage to trees, from the installation of utility facilities;
5. Protect against increased stormwater runoff due to structures and materials that increase impermeable surfaces;
6. Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which facilities are installed;
7. Preserve open space, particularly the tree lined parkways that characterize the village's residential neighborhoods;
8. Prevent visual blight from the proliferation of facilities in the rights of way; and
9. Assure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties adjacent to utility facilities locations.
C. Facilities Subject To This Chapter: This chapter applies to all facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights of way within the
jurisdiction of the village. A facility lawfully established prior to the effective date of this chapter may continue to be maintained, repaired and operated
by the utility as presently constructed and located, except as may be otherwise provided in any applicable franchise, license or similar agreement.
D. Franchises, Licenses, Or Similar Agreements: The village, in its discretion and as limited by law, may require utilities to enter into a franchise, license or
similar agreement for the privilege of locating their facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the village rights of way. Utilities that
are not required by law to enter into such an agreement may request that the village enter into such an agreement. In such an agreement, the village
may provide for terms and conditions inconsistent with this chapter.
E. Effect Of Franchises, Licenses, Or Similar Agreements:
1. Utilities Other Than Telecommunications Providers: In the event that a utility other than a telecommunications provider has a franchise, license or
similar agreement with the village, such franchise, license or similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement and any
lawful renewal or extension thereof.
2. Telecommunications Providers: In the event of any conflict with, or inconsistency between, the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of any
franchise, license or similar agreement between the village and any telecommunications provider, the provisions of such franchise, license or similar
agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
F. Conflicts With Other Chapters: This chapter supersedes all chapters or parts of chapters adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the extent
of such conflict.
G. Conflicts With State And Federal Laws: In the event that applicable federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this chapter, the
utility shall comply with the requirements of this chapter to the maximum extent possible without violating federal or state laws or regulations.
H. Sound Engineering Judgment: The village shall use sound engineering judgment when administering this chapter and may vary the standards,
conditions, and requirements expressed in this chapter when the village so determines. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability of the
village to regulate its rights of way for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. O-61-09, 11-9-2009)
7-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter and unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the words and terms listed shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section. Any term not defined in this section shall have the meaning ascribed to it in 92 Illinois administrative code section 530.30, unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.
AASHTO: American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials.
ANSI: American National Standards Institute.
ASTM: American Society for Testing and Materials.
APPLICANT: A person, company or utility applying for a permit under this chapter.
BACKFILL: The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a trench or pit.
BORE OR BORING: To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the insertion of a pipe or electrical conductor.
BUILDING DEPARTMENT: The building department of the village of Forest Park.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 231/416
CABLE OPERATOR: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(5).
CABLE SERVICE: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(6).
CABLE SYSTEM: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(7).
CARRIER PIPE: The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be transported.
CASING: A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such as: carrier pipes, electrical conductors, and fiber optic devices.
CLEAR ZONE: The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may consist of a
shoulder, a recoverable slope, a nonrecoverable slope, and a clear run out area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and speeds, and
on the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO "Roadside Design Guide".
COATING: Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for protection against external corrosion.
CODE: The municipal code of the village of Forest Park.
CONDUCTOR: Wire carrying electrical current.
CONDUIT: A casing or encasement for wires or cables.
CONSTRUCTION OR CONSTRUCT: The installation, repair, maintenance, placement, alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification or abandonment
in place of facilities.
COVER: The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or conductor.
CROSSING FACILITY: A facility that crosses one or more right of way lines of a right of way.
DISRUPT THE RIGHT OF WAY: For the purposes of this chapter, any work that obstructs the right of way or causes a material adverse effect on the use
of the right of way for its intended use. Such work may include, without limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting; placement (whether temporary
or permanent) of materials, equipment, devices, or structures; damage to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil, and shall not include the
parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not materially obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway.
EMERGENCY: Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the safety of the public using or in the vicinity of the right of way or immediate
maintenance required for the health and safety of the general public served by the utility.
ENCASEMENT: Provision of a protective casing.
EQUIPMENT: Materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other items used to facilitate construction of facilities.
EXCAVATION: The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or laying bare by digging.
EXTRA HEAVY PIPE: Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation.
FACILITY: All structures, devices, objects, and materials (including, but not limited to, track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable, antennas, vaults,
boxes, equipment enclosures, cabinets, pedestals, poles, conduits, grates, covers, pipes, cables, and appurtenances thereto) located on, over, above,
along, upon, under, across, or within rights of way under this chapter. For purposes of this chapter, the term "facility" shall not include any facility owned or
operated by the village.
FREESTANDING FACILITY: A facility that is not a crossing facility or a parallel facility, such as an antenna, transformer, pump, or meter station.
FRONTAGE ROAD: Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land adjacent to the highway where it is precluded by control of access to a highway.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any substance or material which, due to its quantity, form, concentration, location, or other characteristics, is determined by
the village administrator to pose an unreasonable and imminent risk to the life, health or safety of persons or property or to the ecological balance of the
environment, including, but not limited to, explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum products or gases, poisons, etiology (biological)
agents, flammables, corrosives or any substance determined to be hazardous or toxic under any federal or state law, statute or regulation.
HIGHWAY: A specific type of right of way used for vehicular traffic including rural or urban roads or streets. "Highway" includes all highway land and
improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges, drainage structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and appurtenances
necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic.
HIGHWAY CODE: The Illinois highway code, 605 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-101 et seq., as amended from time to time.
HOLDER: A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the ICC pursuant to the Illinois cable and video
competition law, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
ICC: Illinois commerce commission.
IDOT: Illinois department of transportation.
JULIE: The joint utility locating information for excavators utility notification program.
JACKING: Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical means with or without boring.
JETTING: Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to create a cavity ahead of the pipe.
JOINT USE: The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two (2) or more utilities.
MAJOR INTERSECTION: The intersection of two (2) or more major arterial highways.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 232/416
OCCUPANCY: The presence of facilities on, over or under right of way.
OFFICE OF THE MAYOR: The mayor or his or her designee.
PARALLEL FACILITY: A facility that is generally parallel or longitudinal to the centerline of a right of way.
PARKWAY: Any portion of the right of way not improved by street or sidewalk.
PAVEMENT CUT: The removal of an area of pavement for access to a facility or for the construction of a facility.
PERMITTEE: That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to sections 7-5-4 and 7-5-5 of this chapter.
PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PIPELINES: Pipelines carrying crude or refined liquid petroleum products including, but not limited to, gasoline, distillates,
propane, butane, or coal slurry.
PRACTICABLE: That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather than that which is simply convenient.
PRESSURE: The internal force acting radially against the walls of a carrier pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig).
PROMPT: That which is done within a period of time specified by the village. If no time period is specified, the period shall be thirty (30) days.
PUBLIC ENTITY: A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the government, whether at local, state or federal level.
RESTORATION: The repair of a right of way, highway, roadway, or other area disrupted by the construction of a facility.
RIGHT OF WAY OR RIGHTS OF WAY: Any street, alley, other land or waterway, dedicated or commonly used for pedestrian or vehicular traffic or other
similar purposes, including utility easements, in which the village has the right and authority to authorize, regulate or permit the location of facilities other
than those of the village. "Right of way" or "rights of way" shall not include any real or personal village property that is not specifically described in the
previous two (2) sentences and shall not include village buildings, fixtures and other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in
the right of way.
ROADWAY: That part of the highway that includes the pavement and shoulders.
SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying, or furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the
gross charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or
consumption and not for sale.
SECURITY FUND: That amount of security required pursuant to section 7-5-10 of this chapter.
SHOULDER: A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing lateral support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency vehicular
stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.
SOUND ENGINEERING JUDGMENT: A decision(s) consistent with generally accepted engineering principles, practices and experience.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: This term includes, but is not limited to, messages or information transmitted through use of local, toll and wide area telephone
service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer exchange service, private line services, mobile radio services, cellular
mobile telecommunications services, stationary two-way radio, paging service and any other form of mobile or portable one-way or two-way
communications, and any other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber
optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or similar facilities. "Private line" means a dedicated nontraffic sensitive service for a single customer that entitles
the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications channel, or a group of such channels, from one or more specified locations to one or more
other specified locations. "Telecommunications" shall not include value added services in which computer processing applications are used to act on the
form, content, code and protocol of the information for purposes other than transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not include purchase of
telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a component part of the service provided by such provider to the ultimate retail
consumer who originates or terminates the end to end communications. "Telecommunications" shall not include the provision of cable services through a
cable system as defined in the cable communications act of 1984 (47 USC section 521 and following), as now or hereafter amended, or cable or other
programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to the village through an open video system as defined in the rules of the federal
communications commission (47 CFR section 76.1500 and following), as now or hereafter amended.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER: Any person that installs, owns, operates or controls facilities in the right of way used or designed to be used to
transmit telecommunications in any form.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER: Means and includes every person engaged in making sales of telecommunications at retail as defined herein.
TRENCH: A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an underground facility.
UTILITY: The individual or entity owning or operating any "facility" as defined in this chapter.
VENT: A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or vapors from an underground casing.
VIDEO SERVICE: That term as defined in section 21-201(v) of the Illinois cable and video competition law of 2007, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 21-
201(v).
VILLAGE: The village of Forest Park, an Illinois municipal corporation.
VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR: The village administrator or his or her designee.
VILLAGE ENGINEER: The village engineer, the village's consulting engineer, or his or her designee.
WATER LINES: Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 233/416
WET BORING: Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to soften the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material. (Ord. O-61-
09, 11-9-2009)
7-5-3: ANNUAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
Every utility that occupies right of way within the village shall register on January 1 of each year with the village administrator, providing the utility's name,
address and regular business telephone and telecopy numbers, the name of one or more contact persons who can act on behalf of the utility in connection
with emergencies involving the utility's facilities in the right of way and a twenty four (24) hour telephone number for each such person, and evidence of
insurance as required in section 7-5-8 of this chapter, in the form of a certificate of insurance. Failure to register as an occupant of the right of way under
this section shall constitute cause for the village to deny any and all permit applications for further construction or renovation of facilities in the right of way.
(Ord. O-61-09, 11-9-2009)
7-5-4: PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATIONS AND FEES:
A. Permit Required: No person shall construct (as defined in this chapter) any facility on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within any village right
of way which: 1) changes the location of the facility, 2) adds a new facility, 3) disrupts the right of way (as defined in this chapter), or 4) materially
increases the amount of area or space occupied by the facility on, over, above, along, under, across or within the right of way, without first filing an
application with the village administrator and obtaining a permit from the village therefor, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. No permit shall
be required for installation and maintenance of service connections to customers' premises where there will be no disruption of the right of way.
B. Permit Application: All applications for permits pursuant to this chapter shall be filed on a form provided by the village and shall be filed in such number
of duplicate copies as the village may designate. The applicant may designate those portions of its application materials that it reasonably believes
contain proprietary or confidential information as "proprietary" or "confidential" by clearly marking each page of such materials accordingly.
C. Minimum General Application Requirements: The application shall be made by the utility or its duly authorized representative and shall contain, at a
minimum, the following:
1. The utility's name and address and telephone and telecopy numbers;
2. The applicant's name and address, if different than the utility, its telephone and telecopy numbers, e-mail address, and its interest in the work;
3. The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers and e-mail addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with
respect to the application;
4. A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will be put. The scope and
detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature and character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on those matters likely
to be affected or impacted by the work proposed;
5. Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the village:
a. A written traffic control plan demonstrating the protective measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the "Illinois Manual On
Uniform Traffic Control Devices", to prevent injury or damage to persons or property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and
vehicular traffic; and
b. An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of potential emergencies, including, without limitation, construction and hazardous
materials emergencies, and the intended response by the applicant. The intended response shall include notification to the village and shall
promote protection of the safety and convenience of the public. Compliance with ICC regulations for emergency contingency plans constitutes
compliance with this section unless the village finds that additional information or assurances are needed;
6. Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed, including the certification of an engineer that such drawings, plans, and
specifications comply with applicable codes, rules, and regulations;
7. Evidence of insurance as required in section 7-5-8 of this chapter;
8. Evidence of posting of the security fund as required in section 7-5-10 of this chapter;
9. Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of this chapter (see section 7-5-21 of this chapter);
10. The applicant shall certify that it has registered as an occupant of the right of way as required by section 7-5-3 of this chapter;
11. If the application is made by a duly authorized representative of the utility, said representative shall submit documentation that it has the contractual
authority to act on behalf of the represented utility; and
12. Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the village.
D. Supplemental Application Requirements For Specific Types Of Utilities: In addition to the requirements of subsection C of this section, the permit
application shall include the following items, as applicable to the specific utility that is the subject of the permit application:
1. In the case of the installation of a new electric power, communications, telecommunications, cable television service, video service or natural gas
distribution system, evidence that any "certificate of public convenience and necessity" or other regulatory authorization that the applicant is required
by law to obtain, or that the applicant has elected to obtain, has been issued by the ICC or other jurisdictional authority;
2. In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size, design, construction class, and operating pressures;
3. In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the Illinois environmental protection agency, division of public water supplies, have been
satisfied;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 234/416
4. In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land and water pollution requirements of the Illinois environmental protection agency, division
of water pollution control and other local or state entities with jurisdiction, have been satisfied; or
5. In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or types of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure, and the design
standard to be followed.
E. Applicant's Duty To Update Information: Throughout the entire permit application review period and the construction period authorized by the permit,
any amendments to information contained in a permit application shall be submitted by the utility in writing to the village within thirty (30) days after the
change necessitating the amendment.
F. Application Fees: Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar agreement, all applications for permits pursuant to this chapter shall be
accompanied by a fee in the amount of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). No application fee is required to be paid by any electricity utility that is
paying the municipal electricity infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the electricity infrastructure maintenance fee act. (Ord. O-61-09, 11-9-2009)
7-5-5: ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS:
A. Village Review Of Permit Applications: Completed permit applications, containing all required documentation, shall be examined by the village
administrator within a reasonable time after filing. If the application does not conform to the requirements of applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules,
and regulations, the village administrator shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the village administrator is satisfied that
the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this chapter and applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the village
administrator shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable. In all instances, it shall be the duty of the applicant to demonstrate, to the satisfaction
of the village administrator, that the construction proposed under the application shall be in full compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
B. Additional Village Review Of Applications Of Telecommunications Retailers:
1. Pursuant to section 4 of the telephone company act, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 65/4, a telecommunications retailer shall notify the village that it
intends to commence work governed by this chapter for facilities for the provision of telecommunications services. Such notice shall consist of plans,
specifications, and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the purpose and intent of the facilities, and shall be provided by the
telecommunications retailer to the village not less than ten (10) days prior to the commencement of work requiring no excavation and not less than
thirty (30) days prior to the commencement of work requiring excavation. The telecommunications retailer and the village shall reach a mutual
agreement as to which portions of the right of way upon which the facility may be placed, used and constructed, prior to the commencement of any
construction.
2. Upon mutual agreement as to the location of said facilities, where a permit is required for work pursuant to section 7-5-4 of this chapter, the
telecommunications retailer shall submit to the village an application for a permit and any and all plans, specifications and documentation available
regarding the facility to be constructed. Such application shall be subject to the requirements of subsection A of this section.
C. Additional Village Review Of Applications Of Holders Of State Authorization Under The Cable And Video Competition Law Of 2007: Applications by a
utility that is a holder of a state issued authorization under the cable and video competition law of 2007 shall be deemed granted forty five (45) days
after submission to the village, unless otherwise acted upon by the village, provided the holder has complied with applicable village codes, ordinances,
and regulations. (Ord. O-61-09, 11-9-2009)
7-5-6: EFFECT OF PERMIT:
A. Authority Granted; No Property Right Or Other Interest Created: A permit from the village authorizes a permittee to undertake only certain activities in
accordance with this chapter on village rights of way, and does not create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to impinge upon the rights
of others who may have an interest in the rights of way.
B. Duration: No permit issued under this chapter shall be valid for a period longer than six (6) months unless construction is actually begun within that
period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion.
C. Preconstruction Meeting Required: No construction shall begin pursuant to a permit issued under this chapter prior to attendance by the permittee and
all major contractors and subcontractors who will perform any work under the permit at a preconstruction meeting. The preconstruction meeting shall
be held at a date, time and place designated by the village with such village representatives in attendance as the village deems necessary. The
meeting shall be for the purpose of reviewing the work under the permit, and reviewing special considerations necessary in the areas where work will
occur, including, without limitation, presence or absence of other utility facilities in the area and their locations, procedures to avoid disruption of other
utilities, use of rights of way by the public during construction, and access and egress by adjacent property owners.
D. Compliance With All Laws Required: The issuance of a permit by the village does not excuse the permittee from complying with other requirements of
the village and applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations. (Ord. O-61-09, 11-9-2009)
7-5-7: AS BUILT DRAWINGS:
Within sixty (60) days after the completion of construction, the permittee shall furnish the village with one set of as built plans on Mylar, and three (3)
copies thereof on sheets of twenty four inches by thirty six inches (24" x 36") drawing at a scale of one inch (1") to twenty feet (20') and certified to the
village as accurately depicting the location of all facilities constructed pursuant to the permit. (Ord. O-61-09, 11-9-2009)
7-5-8: INSURANCE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 235/416
A. Required Coverages And Limits: Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar agreement, each utility occupying right of way or
constructing any facility in the right of way shall secure and maintain the following liability insurance policies insuring the utility as named insured and
naming the village, and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents, and employees as additional insureds on the policies listed in subsections
A1 and A2 of this section:
1. Commercial general liability insurance, including premises-operations, explosion, collapse, and underground hazard (commonly referred to as "X",
"C", and "U" coverages) and products-completed operations coverage with limits not less than:
a. Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for bodily injury or death to each person;
b. Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for property damage resulting from any one accident; and
c. Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for all other types of liability;
2. Automobile liability for owned, nonowned and hired vehicles with a combined single limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for personal injury
and property damage for each accident;
3. Workers' compensation with statutory limits; and
4. Employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per employee and per accident.
If the utility is not providing such insurance to protect the contractors and subcontractors performing the work, then such contractors and
subcontractors shall comply with this section.
B. Excess Or Umbrella Policies: The coverages required by this section may be in any combination of primary, excess, and umbrella policies. Any excess
or umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying insurance on a following form basis such that when any loss covered by the primary
policy exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella policy becomes effective to cover such loss.
C. Copies Required: The utility shall provide copies of any of the policies required by this section to the village within ten (10) days following receipt of a
written request therefor from the village.
D. Maintenance And Renewal Of Required Coverages: The insurance policies required by this section shall contain the following endorsement:
It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the intention not to renew be stated until thirty (30) days after receipt by
the Village, by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested, of a written notice addressed to the Village Administrator of such intent to
cancel or not to renew.
Within ten (10) days after receipt by the village of said notice, and in no event later than ten (10) days prior to said cancellation, the utility shall obtain
and furnish to the village evidence of replacement insurance policies meeting the requirements of this section.
E. Self-Insurance: A utility may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance coverage and limit requirements required by subsection A of this section. A
utility that self-insures is not required, to the extent of such self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of additional insureds under
subsection A of this section, or the requirements of subsections B, C and D of this section. A utility that elects to self-insure shall provide to the village
evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the insurance coverage and limit requirements required under subsection A of this
section, such as evidence that the utility is a "private self-insurer" under the workers' compensation act.
F. Effect Of Insurance And Self-Insurance On Utility's Liability: The legal liability of the utility to the village and any person for any of the matters that are
the subject of the insurance policies or self-insurance required by this section shall not be limited by such insurance policies or self-insurance or by the
recovery of any amounts thereunder.
G. Insurance Companies: All insurance provided pursuant to this section shall be effected under valid and enforceable policies, issued by insurers legally
able to conduct business with the licensee in the state of Illinois. All insurance carriers and surplus line carriers shall be rated "A-" or better and of a
class size "X" or higher by A.M. Best Company. (Ord. O-61-09, 11-9-2009)
7-5-9: INDEMNIFICATION:
By occupying or constructing facilities in the right of way, a utility shall be deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and hold the village and its elected and
appointed officials and officers, employees, agents and representatives harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims, demands, judgments,
damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of or
result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the utility or its affiliates, officers, employees, agents,
contractors or subcontractors in the construction of facilities or occupancy of the rights of way, and in providing or offering service over the facilities,
whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this chapter or by a franchise, license, or similar agreement; provided, however,
that the utility's indemnity obligations hereunder shall not apply to any injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses or expenses arising out of or
resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach of this chapter by the village, its officials, officers, employees, agents or representatives. (Ord. O-61-
09, 11-9-2009)
7-5-10: SECURITY:
A. Purpose: The permittee shall establish a security fund in a form and in an amount as set forth in this section. The security fund shall be continuously
maintained in accordance with this section at the permittee's sole cost and expense until the completion of the work authorized under the permit. The
security fund shall serve as security for:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 236/416
1. The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements of this chapter;
2. Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the village occasioned by the permittee's failure to comply with any codes, rules, regulations, orders,
permits and other directives of the village issued pursuant to this chapter; and
3. The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims, costs, or expenses that the village may pay or incur by reason of any action or
nonperformance by permittee in violation of this chapter including, without limitation, any damage to public property or restoration work the permittee
is required by this chapter to perform that the village must perform itself or have completed as a consequence solely of the permittee's failure to
perform or complete, and all other payments due the village from the permittee pursuant to this chapter or any other applicable law.
B. Form: The permittee shall provide the security fund to the village in the form, at the permittee's election, of cash, a surety bond in a form acceptable to
the village, or an unconditional letter of credit in a form acceptable to the village. Any surety bond or letter of credit provided pursuant to this subsection
shall, at a minimum:
1. Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice to the village and the permittee;
2. Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by the village of any amounts covered by it; and
3. Shall provide a location convenient to the village and within the state of Illinois at which it can be drawn.
C. Amount: The dollar amount of the security fund shall be sufficient to provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the right of way to at least as
good a condition as that existing prior to the construction under the permit, as determined by the village administrator, and may also include
reasonable, directly related costs that the village estimates are likely to be incurred if the permittee fails to perform such restoration. Where the
construction of facilities proposed under the permit will be performed in phases in multiple locations in the village, with each phase consisting of
construction of facilities in one location or a related group of locations, and where construction in another phase will not be undertaken prior to
substantial completion of restoration in the previous phase or phases, the village administrator may, in the exercise of sound discretion, allow the
permittee to post a single amount of security which shall be applicable to each phase of the construction under the permit. The amount of the security
fund for phased construction shall be equal to the greatest amount that would have been required under the provisions of this subsection for any single
phase.
D. Withdrawals: The village, upon fourteen (14) days' advance written notice clearly stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise withdrawal rights
under this subsection, may withdraw an amount from the security fund, provided that the permittee has not reimbursed the village for such amount
within the fourteen (14) day notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the permittee:
1. Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee hereunder;
2. Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and unpaid;
3. Fails to reimburse the village for any damages, claims, costs or expenses which the village has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of any
action or nonperformance by the permittee; or
4. Fails to comply with any provision of this chapter that the village determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the security fund.
E. Replenishment: Within fourteen (14) days after receipt of written notice from the village that any amount has been withdrawn from the security fund, the
permittee shall restore the security fund to the amount specified in subsection C of this section.
F. Interest: The permittee may request that any and all interest accrued on the amount in the security fund be returned to the permittee by the village, upon
written request for said withdrawal to the village, provided that any such withdrawal does not reduce the security fund below the minimum balance
required in subsection C of this section.
G. Closing And Return Of Security Fund: Upon completion of the work authorized under the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the return of the
security fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit, within a reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to compensate the
village for failure by the permittee to comply with any provisions of this chapter or other applicable law. In the event of any revocation of the permit, the
security fund, and any and all accrued interest therein, shall become the property of the village to the extent necessary to cover any reasonable costs,
loss or damage incurred by the village as a result of said revocation, provided that any amounts in excess of said costs, loss or damage shall be
refunded to the permittee.
H. Rights Not Limited: The rights reserved to the village with respect to the security fund are in addition to all other rights of the village, whether reserved
by this chapter or otherwise authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said security fund shall affect any other
right the village may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the village shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery with respect to any of its rights
which may be infringed or otherwise violated. (Ord. O-61-09, 11-9-2009)
7-5-11: PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION:
A. Village Right To Revoke Permit: The village may revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this chapter for one or more of the following reasons:
1. Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially incomplete statements in the permit application;
2. Noncompliance with this chapter;
3. Permittee's physical presence or presence of permittee's facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights of way presents a
direct or imminent threat to the public health, safety, or welfare; or
4. Permittee's failure to construct the facilities substantially in accordance with the permit and approved plans.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 237/416
B. Notice Of Revocation Or Suspension: The village shall send written notice of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this chapter
stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension and the alternatives available to permittee under this section.
C. Permittee Alternatives Upon Receipt Of Notice Of Revocation Or Suspension: Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from the
village, the permittee shall have the following options:
1. Immediately provide the village with evidence that no cause exists for the revocation or suspension;
2. Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the village, the deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof of such correction to the
village within five (5) working days after receipt of the written notice of revocation; or
3. Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights of way and restore the rights of way to the
satisfaction of the village providing written proof of such removal to the village within ten (10) days after receipt of the written notice of revocation.
The village may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend the time periods provided in this subsection.
D. Stop Work Order: In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation or suspension, the village may issue a stop work order immediately upon
discovery of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within subsection A of this section.
E. Failure Or Refusal Of The Permittee To Comply: If the permittee fails to comply with the provisions of subsection C of this section, the village or its
designee may, at the option of the village: 1) correct the deficiencies; 2) upon not less than twenty (20) days' notice to the permittee, remove the
subject facilities or equipment; or 3) after not less than thirty (30) days' notice to the permittee of failure to cure the noncompliance, deem them
abandoned and property of the village. The permittee shall be liable in all events to the village for all costs of removal. (Ord. O-61-09, 11-9-2009)
7-5-12: CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OR OWNER'S IDENTITY OR LEGAL STATUS:
A. Notification Of Change: A utility shall notify the village no less than thirty (30) days prior to the transfer of ownership of any facility in the right of way or
change in identity of the utility. The new owner of the utility or the facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed by the former owner under
the permit, if any, and applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, including this chapter, with respect to the work and facilities in the right of
way.
B. Amended Permit: A new owner shall request that any current permit be amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a new or
amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to have accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions of the
permit if the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the village's right of way.
C. Insurance And Bonding: All required insurance coverage or bonding must be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer. (Ord. O-61-
09, 11-9-2009)
7-5-13: GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
A. Standards And Principles: All construction in the right of way shall be consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and regulations, and
commonly recognized and accepted traffic control and construction principles, sound engineering judgment and, where applicable, the principles and
standards set forth in the following IDOT publications, as amended from time to time:
1. "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction";
2. "Supplemental Specifications And Recurring Special Provisions";
3. "Highway Design Manual";
4. "Highway Standards Manual";
5. "Standard Specifications For Traffic Control Items";
6. "Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices" (92 Ill. adm. code section 545);
7. "Flagger's Handbook"; and
8. "Work Site Protection Manual For Daylight Maintenance Operations".
B. Interpretation Of Municipal Standards And Principles: If a discrepancy exists between or among differing principles and standards required by this
chapter, the village engineer shall determine, in the exercise of sound engineering judgment, which principles apply and such decision shall be final. If
requested, the village engineer shall state which standard or principle will apply to the construction, maintenance, or operation of a facility in the future.
C. Identification: All personnel working at any construction site in the village on behalf of a utility shall carry identification cards and copies of all required
permits for the execution of said construction. All identification cards shall identify the laborer's employer and the utility by which he or she has been
contracted to perform the construction services. (Ord. O-61-09, 11-9-2009)
7-5-14: TRAFFIC CONTROL:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 238/416
A. Minimum Requirements: The village's minimum requirements for traffic protection are contained in IDOT's "Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control
Devices" and this code.
B. Warning Signs, Protective Devices, And Flaggers: The utility is responsible for providing and installing warning signs, protective devices and flaggers,
when necessary, meeting applicable federal, state, and local requirements for protection of the public and the utility's workers when performing any
work on the rights of way.
C. Interference With Traffic: All work shall be phased so that there is minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
D. Notice When Access Is Blocked: At least forty eight (48) hours prior to beginning work that will partially or completely block access to any residence,
business or institution, the utility shall notify the resident, business or institution of the approximate beginning time and duration of such work; provided,
however, that in cases involving emergency repairs pursuant to section 7-5-20 of this chapter, the utility shall provide such notice as is practicable
under the circumstances.
E. Compliance: The utility shall take immediate action to correct any deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought to the utility's attention
by the village. (Ord. O-61-09, 11-9-2009)
7-5-15: LOCATION OF FACILITIES:
A. General Requirements: In addition to location requirements applicable to specific types of utility facilities, all utility facilities, regardless of type, shall be
subject to the general location requirements of this subsection.
1. No Interference With Village Facilities: No utility facilities shall be placed in any location if the village administrator determines that the proposed
location will require the relocation or displacement of any of the village's utility facilities or will otherwise interfere with the operation or maintenance
of any of the village's utility facilities.
2. Minimum Interference And Impact: The proposed location shall cause only the minimum possible interference with the use of the right of way and
shall cause only the minimum possible impact upon, and interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin said
right of way.
3. No Interference With Travel: No utility facility shall be placed in any location that interferes with the usual travel on such right of way.
4. No Limitations On Visibility: No utility facility shall be placed in any location so as to limit visibility of or by users of the right of way.
5. Size Of Utility Facilities: The proposed installation shall use the smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, power pedestals, and/or
cabinets then in use by the facility owner, regardless of location, for the particular application.
B. Parallel Facilities Located Within Highways:
1. Overhead Parallel Facilities: An overhead parallel facility may be located within the right of way lines of a highway only if:
a. Lines are located as near as practicable to the right of way line and as nearly parallel to the right of way line as reasonable pole alignment will
permit;
b. Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable from the curb with a minimum distance of two feet (2') (0.6 m) behind the face of
the curb, where available;
c. Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement edge as practicable with minimum distance of four feet (4') (1.2 m) outside the
outer shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear zone;
d. No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and
e. Any ground mounted appurtenance is located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right of way line or as near as possible to the right of way line.
2. Underground Parallel Facilities: An underground parallel facility may be located within the right of way lines of a highway only if:
a. The facility is located as near the right of way line as practicable and not more than eight feet (8') (2.4 m) from and parallel to the right of way line;
b. A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a highway only if other locations are impracticable or inconsistent with sound engineering
judgment (e.g., a new cable may be installed in existing conduit without disrupting the pavement); and
c. In the case of an underground power or communications line, the facility shall be located as near the right of way line as practicable and not more
than five feet (5') (1.5 m) from the right of way line and any above grounded appurtenance shall be located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right
of way line or as near as practicable.
C. Facilities Crossing Highways:
1. No Future Disruption: The construction and design of crossing facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of village highways may require
the incorporation of materials and protections (such as encasement or additional cover) to avoid settlement or future repairs to the roadbed resulting
from the installation of such crossing facilities.
2. Cattle Passes, Culverts, Or Drainage Facilities: Crossing facilities shall not be located in cattle passes, culverts, or drainage facilities.
3. Ninety Degree Crossing Required: Crossing facilities shall cross at or as near to a ninety degree (90°) angle to the centerline as practicable.
4. Overhead Power Or Communication Facility: An overhead power or communication facility may cross a highway only if:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 239/416
a. It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ICC's rules entitled, "construction of electric power and communication lines" (83 Ill. adm.
code 305);
b. Poles are located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right of way line of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and
c. Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided.
5. Underground Power Or Communication Facility: An underground power or communication facility may cross a highway only if:
a. The design materials and construction methods will provide maximum maintenance free service life; and
b. Capacity for the utility's foreseeable future expansion needs is provided in the initial installation.
6. Markers: The village may require the utility to provide a marker at each right of way line where an underground facility other than a power or
communication facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall identify the type of facility, the utility, and an emergency phone number. Markers may
also be eliminated as provided in current federal regulations (49 CFR section 192.707 (1989)).
D. Facilities To Be Located Within Particular Rights Of Way: The village may require that facilities be located within particular rights of way that are not
highways, rather than within particular highways.
E. Freestanding Facilities:
1. The village may restrict the location and size of any freestanding facility located within a right of way.
2. The village may require any freestanding facility located within a right of way to be screened from view.
F. Facilities Installed Aboveground: Aboveground facilities may be installed only if:
1. No other existing facilities in the area are located underground;
2. New underground installation is not technically feasible; and
3. The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest protection of aesthetic
qualities of the area being traversed without adversely affecting safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to, self-supporting armless, single
pole construction with vertical configuration of conductors and cable. Existing utility poles and light standards shall be used wherever practicable; the
installation of additional utility poles is strongly discouraged.
G. Facility Attachments To Bridges Or Roadway Structures:
1. Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway structures only where the utility has demonstrated that all other means of
accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means shall include, but are not limited to, underground, underwater, independent poles, cable
supports and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from the bridge or roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are
volatile, flammable, corrosive, or energized, especially those under significant pressure or potential, present high degrees of risk and such
installations are not permitted.
2. A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a facility installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data demonstrating the
impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or disapproval of an application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway structure will be based
upon the following considerations:
a. The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and property in the
event of damage to or failure of the facility;
b. The type, length, value, and relative importance of the highway structure in the transportation system;
c. The alternative routings available to the utility and their comparative practicability;
d. The proposed method of attachment;
e. The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the proposed facility;
f. The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting;
g. The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and
h. The public benefit expected from the utility service as compared to the risk involved.
H. Appearance Standards:
1. The village may prohibit the installation of facilities in particular locations in order to preserve visual quality.
2. A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features visible to the right of
way user or to adjacent residents and property owners, and if it does not impair the aesthetic quality of the lands being traversed. (Ord. O-61-09, 11-
9-2009)
7-5-16: CONSTRUCTION METHODS AND MATERIALS:
A. Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Construction Methods:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 240/416
1. Boring Or Jacking:
a. Pits And Shoring: Boring or jacking under rights of way shall be accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance specified by the village
engineer from the edge of the pavement. Pits for boring or jacking shall be excavated no more than forty eight (48) hours in advance of boring or
jacking operations and backfilled within forty eight (48) hours after boring or jacking operations are completed. While pits are open, they shall be
clearly marked and protected by barricades. Shoring shall be designed, erected, supported, braced, and maintained so that it will safely support all
vertical and lateral loads that may be imposed upon it during the boring or jacking operation.
b. Wet Boring Or Jetting: Wet boring or jetting shall not be permitted under the roadway.
c. Borings With Diameters Greater Than Six Inches: Borings over six inches (6") (0.15 m) in diameter shall be accomplished with an auger and
following pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the outside diameter of the following pipe by more than one inch (1") (25 mm).
d. Borings With Diameters Six Inches Or Less: Borings of six inches (6") or less in diameter may be accomplished by either jacking, guided with
auger, or auger and following pipe method.
e. Tree Preservation: Any facility located within the drip line of any tree designated by the village to be preserved or protected shall be bored under or
around the root system.
2. Trenching: Trenching for facility installation, repair, or maintenance on rights of way shall be done in accord with the applicable portions of section
603 of IDOT's "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction".
a. Length: The length of open trench shall be kept to the practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipe/line testing. Only one-half (1/2) of
any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless special permission is obtained from the village administrator.
b. Open Trench And Excavated Material: Open trench and windrowed excavated material shall be protected as required by chapter 6 of the "Illinois
Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices". Where practicable, the excavated material shall be deposited between the roadway and the trench as
added protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the paved portion of the roadway. Where right of way width does not allow
for windrowing excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated material shall be hauled to an off road location.
c. Drip Line Of Trees: The utility shall not trench within the drip line of any tree designated by the village to be preserved.
3. Backfilling:
a. Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the installation of facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth, and length using methods and
materials in accordance with IDOT's "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction". When excavated material is hauled away or is
unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be used.
b. For a period of three (3) years from the date construction of a facility is completed, the utility shall be responsible to remove and restore any
backfilled area that has settled due to construction of the facility. If so ordered by the village engineer, the utility, at its expense, shall remove any
pavement and backfill material to the top of the installed facility, place and properly compact new backfill material, and restore new pavement,
sidewalk, curbs, and driveways to the proper grades, as determined by the village engineer.
4. Pavement Cuts: Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair shall be permitted on a highway only if that portion of the highway is closed to traffic.
If a variance to the limitation set forth in this subsection A4 is permitted under section 7-5-21 of this chapter, the following requirements shall apply:
a. Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled and compacted as soon as practicable with granular material of CA-6 or CA-10 gradation, as
designated by the village engineer.
b. Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as soon as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous mixture shall be provided
immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the village.
c. All saw cuts shall be full depth.
d. For all rights of way which have been reconstructed with a concrete surface/base in the last seven (7) years, or resurfaced in the last three (3)
years, permits shall not be issued unless such work is determined to be an emergency repair or other work considered necessary and unforeseen
before the time of the reconstruction or unless a pavement cut is necessary for a JULIE locate.
5. Encasement:
a. Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be continuous either by
one piece fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by the village.
b. The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right of way line. No aboveground vent pipes shall be located
in the area established as clear zone for that particular section of the highway.
c. In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement shall be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or village approved jointed
pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be omitted only if pipe is installed prior to highway construction and carrier pipe is continuous or
mechanical joints are of a type approved by the village. Bell and spigot type pipe shall be encased regardless of installation method.
d. In the case of gas pipelines of sixty (60) psig or less, encasement may be eliminated.
e. In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines with installations of more than sixty (60) psig, encasement may be eliminated only if:
1) extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future maintenance or repair and 2) cathodic protection of the pipe is provided.
f. If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that construction does not disrupt
the right of way.
6. Minimum Cover Of Underground Facilities: Cover shall be provided and maintained at least in the amount specified in the following table for
minimum cover for the type of facility:
Type Of Facility Minimum Cover
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 241/416
Electric lines 30 inches (0.8 m)
Communication, cable or video service lines 24 inches (0.6 m, as determined by village)
Gas or petroleum products 30 inches (0.8 m)
Water line Sufficient cover to provide freeze protection
Sanitary sewer, storm sewer, or drainage line Sufficient cover to provide freeze protection
B. Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Facilities:
1. Electric Power Or Communication Lines:
a. Code Compliance: Electric power or communications facilities within village rights of way shall be constructed, operated, and maintained in
conformity with the provisions of 83 Illinois administrative code part 305 (formerly general order 160 of the Illinois commerce commission) entitled
"rules for construction of electric power and communication lines", and the national electrical safety code.
b. Overhead Facilities: Overhead power or communication facilities shall use single pole construction and, where practicable, joint use of poles shall
be used. Utilities shall make every reasonable effort to design the installation so guys and braces will not be needed. Variances may be allowed if
there is no feasible alternative and if guywires are equipped with guy guards for maximum visibility.
c. Underground Facilities:
(1) Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing, provided that special consideration is given to boring in order to minimize damage when
crossing improved entrances and side roads.
(2) If a crossing is installed by boring or jacking, encasement shall be provided between jacking or bore pits. Encasement may be eliminated only
if: a) the crossing is installed by the use of "moles", "whip augers", or other approved methods which compress the earth to make the opening
for cable installation or b) the installation is by the open trench method which is only permitted prior to roadway construction.
(3) Cable shall be grounded in accordance with the national electrical safety code.
d. Burial Of Drops: All temporary service drops placed between November 1 of the prior year and March 15 of the current year, also known as snow
drops, shall be buried by May 31 of the current year, weather permitting, unless otherwise permitted by the village. Weather permitting, utilities
shall bury all temporary drops, excluding snow drops, within ten (10) business days after placement.
2. Underground Facilities Other Than Electric Power Or Communication Lines: Underground facilities other than electric power or communication lines
may be installed by:
a. The use of "moles", "whip augers", or other approved methods which compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe;
b. Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between the ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway;
c. Open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway construction; or
d. Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is not possible by other means.
3. Gas Transmission, Distribution And Service: Gas pipelines within rights of way shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in a village approved
manner and in conformance with the federal code of the office of pipeline safety operations, department of transportation, part 192 - transportation of
natural and other gas by pipeline: minimum federal safety standards (49 CFR section 192), IDOT's "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge
Construction", and all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
4. Petroleum Products Pipelines: Petroleum products pipelines within rights of way shall conform to the applicable sections of ANSI standard code for
pressure piping (liquid petroleum transportation piping systems ANSI-B 31.4).
5. Water Lines, Sanitary Sewer Lines, Stormwater Sewer Lines Or Drainage Lines: Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, and drainage
lines within rights of way shall meet or exceed the recommendations of the current "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer Main Construction
In Illinois".
6. Ground Mounted Appurtenances: Ground mounted appurtenances to overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a right of way, shall
be provided with a vegetation free area extending one foot (1') (305 mm) in width beyond the appurtenance in all directions. The vegetation free area
may be provided by an extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy duty plastic or similar material approved by the village engineer. With the
approval of the village administrator, shrubbery surrounding the appurtenance may be used in place of vegetation free area. The housing for ground
mounted appurtenances shall be painted a neutral color to blend with the surroundings.
C. Materials:
1. General Standards: The materials used in constructing facilities within rights of way shall be those meeting the accepted standards of the
appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT's "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction", the requirements of the Illinois
commerce commission, or the standards established by other official regulatory agencies for the appropriate industry.
2. Material Storage On Right Of Way: No material shall be stored on the right of way without the prior written approval of the village administrator.
When such storage is permitted, all pipe, conduit, wire, poles, cross arms, or other materials shall be distributed along the right of way prior to and
during installation in a manner to minimize hazards to the public or an obstacle to right of way maintenance or damage to the right of way and other
property. If material is to be stored on right of way, prior approval must be obtained from the village.
3. Hazardous Materials: The plans submitted by the utility to the village shall identify any hazardous materials that may be involved in the construction
of the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities.
D. Operational Restrictions:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 242/416
1. Construction operations on rights of way may, at the discretion of the village, be required to be discontinued when such operations would create
hazards to traffic or the public health, safety, and welfare. Such operations may also be required to be discontinued or restricted when conditions are
such that construction would result in extensive damage to the right of way or other property.
2. These restrictions may be waived by the village administrator when emergency work is required to restore vital utility services.
3. Unless otherwise permitted by the village, the hours of construction are between nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. Central Standard Time and seven o'clock
(7:00) P.M. Central Standard Time.
E. Location Of Existing Facilities: Any utility proposing to construct facilities in the village shall contact JULIE and ascertain the presence and location of
existing aboveground and underground facilities within the rights of way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The village will make its permit
records available to a utility for the purpose of identifying possible facilities. When notified of an excavation or when requested by the village or by
JULIE, a utility shall locate and physically mark its underground facilities within forty eight (48) hours, excluding weekends and holidays, in accordance
with the Illinois underground facilities damage prevention act1. (Ord. O-61-09, 11-9-2009)
7-5-17: VEGETATION CONTROL:
A. Electric Utilities; Compliance With State Laws And Regulations: An electric utility shall conduct all tree trimming and vegetation control activities in the
right of way in accordance with applicable Illinois laws and regulations, and additionally, with such local franchise or other agreement with the village as
permitted by law.
B. Other Utilities; Tree Trimming Permit Required: Tree trimming that is done by any other utility with facilities in the right of way and that is not performed
pursuant to applicable Illinois laws and regulations specifically governing same, shall not be considered a normal maintenance operation, but shall
require the application for, and the issuance of, a permit, in addition to any other permit required under this chapter.
1. Application For Tree Trimming Permit: Applications for tree trimming permits shall include assurance that the work will be accomplished by
competent workers with supervision who are experienced in accepted tree pruning practices. Tree trimming permits shall designate an expiration
date in the interest of assuring that the work will be expeditiously accomplished.
2. Damage To Trees: Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for cancellation of the
tree trimming permit and for assessment of damages. The village will require compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees removed
without authorization. The formula developed by the International Society of Arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the compensation
for damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The village may require the removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical pruning
would leave them in an unacceptable condition.
C. Specimen Trees Or Trees Of Special Significance: The village may require that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of
special significance. The required measures may consist of higher poles, side arm extensions, covered wire or other means.
D. Chemical Use:
1. Except as provided in the following subsection, no utility shall spray, inject or pour any chemicals on or near any trees, shrubs or vegetation in the
village for any purpose, including the control of growth, insects or disease.
2. Spraying of any type of brush killing chemicals will not be permitted on rights of way unless the utility demonstrates to the satisfaction of the village
administrator that such spraying is the only practicable method of vegetation control. (Ord. O-61-09, 11-9-2009)
7-5-18: REMOVAL, RELOCATION, OR MODIFICATIONS OF UTILITY FACILITIES:
A. Notice: Within ninety (90) days following written notice from the village, a utility shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily or permanently
disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any utility facilities within the rights of way whenever the corporate authorities have
determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration, is reasonably necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance, or installation of any
village improvement in or upon, or the operations of the village in or upon, the rights of way.
B. Removal Of Unauthorized Facilities: Within thirty (30) days following written notice from the village, any utility that owns, controls, or maintains any
unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the rights of way shall, at its own expense, remove all or any part of such facilities or
appurtenances from the rights of way. A facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in the following circumstances:
1. Upon expiration or termination of the permittee's license or franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;
2. If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant of a license or franchise, if required;
3. If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance of a required permit in violation of this chapter; or
4. If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not permitted by the permittee's license or franchise.
C. Emergency Removal Or Relocation Of Facilities: The village retains the right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within the rights of way of
the village, as the village may determine to be necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If circumstances
permit, the municipality shall attempt to notify the utility, if known, prior to cutting or removing a facility and shall notify the utility, if known, after cutting
or removing a facility.
D. Abandonment Of Facilities: Upon abandonment of a facility within the rights of way of the village, the utility shall notify the village within ninety (90)
days. Following receipt of such notice the village may direct the utility to remove all or any portion of the facility if the village administrator determines
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 243/416
that such removal will be in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare. In the event that the village does not direct the utility that
abandoned the facility to remove it, by giving notice of abandonment to the village, the abandoning utility shall be deemed to consent to the alteration
or removal of all or any portion of the facility by another utility or person. (Ord. O-61-09, 11-9-2009)
7-5-19: CLEANUP AND RESTORATION:
The utility shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and terrain and other property within ten (10) days after any portion of the rights of way are
disturbed, damaged or destroyed due to construction or maintenance by the utility, all to the satisfaction of the village. This includes restoration of
entrances and side roads. Restoration of roadway surfaces shall be made using materials and methods approved by the village engineer. Such cleanup
and repair may be required to consist of backfilling, regrading, reseeding, resodding, or any other requirement to restore the right of way to a condition
substantially equivalent to that which existed prior to the commencement of the project. The time period provided in this section may be extended by the
village administrator for good cause shown. All pavement repairs shall be done in the presence of a village inspector. Repairs done without inspection are
not permitted and will require replacement. Plans for restoration and repair of all sites shall be required at the filing of the permit application for assessment
by the village administrator. (Ord. O-61-09, 11-9-2009)
7-5-20: MAINTENANCE AND EMERGENCY MAINTENANCE:
A. General: Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights of way, including screening and landscaping, are to be maintained by or
for the utility in a manner satisfactory to the village and at the utility's expense.
B. Emergency Maintenance Procedures: Emergencies may justify noncompliance with normal procedures for securing a permit:
1. If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the right of way, the utility shall take immediate steps to provide all necessary protection
for traffic on the highway or the public on the right of way including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If a hazard does not exist on the
traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is such as to require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in repair operations, adequate
signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on the shoulder in such an emergency will only be permitted when no other means of access to the facility
is available.
2. In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible, notify the village administrator or his or her duly authorized agent of the emergency, informing
him or her as to what steps have been taken for protection of the traveling public and what will be required to make the necessary repairs. If the
nature of the emergency is such as to interfere with the free movement of traffic, the Forest Park police department shall be notified immediately.
3. In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand to complete repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least inconvenience to the traveling
public.
C. Emergency Repairs: The utility must file in writing with the village a description of the repairs undertaken in the right of way within forty eight (48) hours
after an emergency repair. (Ord. O-61-09, 11-9-2009)
7-5-21: VARIANCES:
A. Request For Variance: A utility requesting a variance from one or more of the provisions of this chapter must do so in writing to the village administrator
as a part of the permit application. The request shall identify each provision of this chapter from which a variance is requested and the reasons why a
variance should be granted.
B. Authority To Grant Variances: The village administrator shall decide whether a variance is authorized for each provision of this chapter identified in the
variance request on an individual basis.
C. Conditions For Granting Of Variance: The village administrator may authorize a variance only if the utility requesting the variance has demonstrated
that:
1. One or more conditions not under the control of the utility (such as terrain features or an irregular right of way line) create a special hardship that
would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable, given the public purposes to be achieved by the provision; and
2. All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that would conform with the provision from which a variance is requested are
impracticable in relation to the requested approach.
D. Additional Conditions For Granting Of A Variance: As a condition for authorizing a variance, the village administrator may require the utility requesting
the variance to meet reasonable standards and conditions that may or may not be expressly contained within this chapter but which carry out the
purposes of this chapter.
E. Right To Appeal: Any utility aggrieved by any order, requirement, decision or determination, including denial of a variance, made by the village
administrator under the provisions of this chapter shall have the right to appeal to the village council, or such other board or commission as it may
designate. The application for appeal shall be submitted in writing to the village clerk within thirty (30) days after the date of such order, requirement,
decision or determination. The village council shall commence its consideration of the appeal at the council's next regularly scheduled meeting
occurring at least seven (7) days after the filing of the appeal. The village council shall timely decide the appeal. (Ord. O-61-09, 11-9-2009)
7-5-22: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to fine in accordance
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 244/416
with the penalty provisions of this code. There may be times when the village will incur delay or other costs, including third party claims, because the utility
will not or cannot perform its duties under its permit and this chapter. Unless the utility shows that another allocation of the cost of undertaking the
requested action is appropriate, the utility shall bear the village's costs of damages and its costs of installing, maintaining, modifying, relocating, or
removing the facility that is the subject of the permit. No other administrative agency or commission may review or overrule a permit related cost
apportionment of the village. Sanctions may be imposed upon a utility that does not pay the costs apportioned to it. (Ord. O-61-09, 11-9-2009)
7-5-23: ENFORCEMENT:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional or further remedies that the village may have for enforcement of this chapter. (Ord. O-
61-09, 11-9-2009)
Chapter 6
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY CONSTRUCTION IN RIGHTS-OF-WAY
7-6-1: PURPOSES AND SCOPE:
A. Purposes: The purposes of this chapter are to:
1. Establish regulations, standards, and procedures for the siting and collocation of small wireless facilities on rights-of-way within the Village's
jurisdiction, or outside the rights-of-way on property zoned by the Village exclusively for commercial or industrial use, in a manner that is consistent
with the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act1 while minimizing the visual impacts associated with small wireless facilities; and
2. Encourage creative approaches in locating and designing small wireless facilities that blend in with the surroundings of such facilities.
B. Goals: The goals of this chapter are to:
1. Encourage the collocation of small wireless facilities while minimizing the total number of wireless support structures throughout the Village;
2. Encourage the joint-use of new and existing wireless support structures;
3. Encourage small wireless providers to locate small wireless facilities, to the extent feasible, at locations where the adverse visual impact on the
neighborhoods of the Village is significantly minimized;
4. Encourage small wireless providers to configure small wireless facilities in ways that minimize the adverse visual impact of the wireless support
structures; and
5. Enhance the ability of the small wireless service provider to provide such services to the community quickly, effectively, and efficiently.
C. Interpretation: The provisions of this chapter shall be interpreted and applied in order to comply with the provisions of the Small Wireless Facilities
Deployment Act, 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 835/1, et seq.
D. Conflicts With Other Ordinances: This chapter supersedes all ordinances or parts of ordinances adopted prior hereto, that are in conflict herewith, to the
extent of such conflict.
E. Conflicts With State And Federal Laws: In the event that applicable Federal or State laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this chapter,
the wireless provider shall comply with the requirements of this chapter to the maximum extent possible without violating Federal and State laws or
regulations. (Ord. O-21-18, 7-23-2018)
7-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
ANTENNA: Communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless services.
APPLICABLE CODES: Building, Fire, Electrical, Plumbing, or Mechanical Codes adopted by a recognized national code organization or local amendments
to those codes, including the National Electric Safety Code.
APPLICANT: Any person who submits an application and is a wireless provider.
APPLICATION: A request submitted by an applicant to the Village for a permit to collocate small wireless facilities, and a request that includes the
installation of a new utility pole for such collocation, as well as any applicable fee for the review of such application.
COLLOCATE OR COLLOCATION: To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or replace wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support structure
or utility pole.
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: Cable service, as defined in 47 USC 522(6), as amended; information service, as defined in 47 USC 153(24), as
amended; telecommunications service, as defined in 47 USC 153(53), as amended; mobile service, as defined in 47 USC 153(53), as amended; or
wireless service other than mobile service.
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDER: A cable operator, as defined in 47 USC 522(5), as amended; a provider of information service, as defined in
47 USC 153(24), as amended; a telecommunications carrier, as defined in 47 USC 153(51), as amended; or a wireless provider.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 245/416
FCC: The Federal Communications Commission of the United States.
FEE: A one-time charge.
HISTORIC DISTRICT OR HISTORIC LANDMARK: A building, property, or site, or group of buildings, properties, or sites that are either: a) listed in the
National Register of Historic Places or formally determined eligible for listing by the Keeper of the National Register, the individual who has been delegated
the authority by the Federal agency to list properties and determine their eligibility for the National Register, in accordance with section VI.D.1.a.i through
section VI.D.1.a.v of the Nationwide Programmatic Agreement codified at 47 CFR part 1, appendix C; or b) designated as a locally landmarked building,
property, site, or historic district by an ordinance adopted by the Village pursuant to a preservation program that meets the requirements of the Certified
Local Government Program of the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office or where such certification of the preservation program by the Illinois State
Historic Preservation Office is pending.
LAW: A Federal or State Statute, common law, code, rule, regulation, order, or local ordinance or resolution.
MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY: A small wireless facility that is no larger in dimension than twenty four inches (24") in length, fifteen inches (15") in width,
and twelve inches (12") in height, and that has an exterior antenna, if any, no longer than eleven inches (11").
MUNICIPAL UTILITY POLE: A utility pole owned or operated by the Village in public rights-of-way.
PERMIT: A written authorization required by the Village to perform an action or initiate, continue, or complete a project.
PERSON: An individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, association, trust, or other entity or organization.
PUBLIC SAFETY AGENCY: The functional division of the Federal government, the State, a unit of local government, or a special purpose district located
in whole or in part within this State, that provides or has authority to provide firefighting, police, ambulance, medical, or other emergency services to
respond to and manage emergency incidents.
RATE: A recurring charge.
RIGHT-OF-WAY: The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, public sidewalk, alley, or utility easement dedicated for compatible use.
Right-of-way does not include Village-owned aerial lines.
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY: A wireless facility that meets both of the following qualifications: a) each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more
than six (6) cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an
imaginary enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic feet; and b) all other wireless equipment attached directly to a utility pole associated with the facility is
cumulatively no more than twenty five (25) cubic feet in volume. The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the calculation of
equipment volume: electric meter, concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based enclosures, grounding equipment, power
transfer switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other services.
UTILITY POLE (OR POLE): A pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part by a communications service provider, and for electric distribution,
lighting, traffic control, or a similar function.
WIRELESS FACILITY: Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network,
including: a) equipment associated with wireless communications; and b) radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup
power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration. Wireless facility includes small wireless facilities. Wireless facility
does not include: a) the structure or improvements on, under, or within which the equipment is collocated; or b) wireline backhaul facilities, coaxial or fiber
optic cable that is between wireless support structures or utility poles or coaxial, or fiber optic cable that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to or directly
associated with an antenna.
WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER: Any person authorized to provide telecommunications service in the State that builds or installs wireless
communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, wireless support structures, or utility poles and that is not a wireless services provider but is
acting as an agent or a contractor for a wireless services provider for the application submitted to the Village.
WIRELESS PROVIDER: A wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless services provider.
WIRELESS SERVICES: Any services provided to the general public, including a particular class of customers, and made available on a nondiscriminatory
basis using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile, provided using wireless facilities.
WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER: A person who provides wireless services.
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE: A freestanding structure, such as a monopole; tower, either guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or other existing or
proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless facilities. Wireless support structure does not include a utility pole. (Ord. O-21-
18, 7-23-2018)
7-6-3: REGULATION OF SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES:
A. Permitted Use: Small wireless facilities shall be classified as permitted uses and subject to administrative review, except for applications including
requested variations from the requirements of this chapter as specified herein, and not subject to zoning review or approval if they are collocated: 1) in
rights-of-way in any zoning district, or 2) outside rights-of-way in property zoned exclusively for commercial or industrial use.
B. Permit Required: No person shall place, construct, reconstruct or modify a small wireless facility within the Village without a permit. An applicant shall
obtain one or more permits from the Village to collocate a small wireless facility. An application shall be received and processed, and permits issued
shall be subject to the following conditions and requirements:
1. Application Requirements: A wireless provider shall provide the following information to the Village, together with the Village's Small Wireless
Facilities Permit Application, as a condition of any permit application to collocate small wireless facilities on a utility pole or wireless support structure:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 246/416
a. Site specific structural integrity and, for a Municipal utility pole, make-ready analysis prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is defined in
section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989;
b. The location where each proposed small wireless facility or utility pole would be installed and photographs of the location and its immediate
surroundings depicting the utility poles or structures on which each proposed small wireless facility would be mounted or location where utility
poles or structures would be installed. This shall include a photo simulated depiction of the completed facility;
c. Specifications and drawings prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is defined in section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of
1989, for each proposed small wireless facility covered by the application as it is proposed to be installed, to include dimensional details of small
wireless facilities and mounting hardware used to attach equipment to the utility pole or small wireless support structure;
d. The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and all other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility;
e. A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of each small wireless facility covered by the application, if approved;
f. Certification that the collocation complies with the collocation requirements and conditions stated in section 7-6-4 of this chapter, to the best of the
applicant's knowledge;
g. In the event that the proposed small wireless facility is to be attached to an existing pole owned by an entity other than the Village, the wireless
provider shall provide legally competent evidence of the consent of the owner of such pole to the proposed collocation;
h. In the event that the proposed small wireless facility is to be attached to an existing pole owned by the Village, the wireless provider shall be
required to enter into a pole usage agreement pursuant to subsection B2e of this section.
i. Specific designation of any proposed small wireless facility as an "eligible facility request", as that term is defined in the Federal
Telecommunications Act, 42 USC section 1455.
j. All other documentation and materials identified in section 7-5-4, "Permit Required; Applications And Fees", of this title.
2. Application Process: The Village shall process applications as follows:
a. The first completed application shall have priority over applications received by different applicants for collocation on the same utility pole or
wireless support structure.
b. An application to collocate a small wireless facility on an existing utility pole or wireless support structure, or replacement of an existing utility pole
or wireless support structure, shall be processed on a nondiscriminatory basis and shall be deemed approved if the Village fails to approve or deny
the application within ninety (90) days after the submission of a completed application.
However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the Village in writing
of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than seventy five (75) days after the submission of a completed application.
The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the 90th day after submission of the complete application or the 10th day after the receipt of
the deemed approved notice by the Village. The receipt of the deemed approved notice shall not preclude the denial of the permit request within
the time limits as provided under this section.
c. An application to collocate a small wireless facility that includes the installation of a new utility pole shall be processed on a nondiscriminatory
basis and deemed approved if the Village fails to approve or deny the application within one hundred twenty (120) days after the submission of a
completed application.
However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the Village in writing
of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than one hundred five (105) days after the submission of a completed
application.
The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the 120th day after submission of the complete application or the 10th day after the receipt of
the deemed approved notice by the Village. The receipt of the deemed approved notice shall not preclude the Village's denial of the permit request
within the time limits as provided under this section.
d. The Village shall deny an application which does not meet the requirements of this chapter, including but not limited to sections 7-6-4 and 7-6-13
of this chapter.
If the Village determines that applicable codes, ordinances, or regulations that concern public safety, or the collocation requirements and
conditions stated in section 7-6-4 of this chapter require that the utility pole or wireless support structure be replaced before the requested
collocation, approval shall be conditioned on the replacement of the utility pole or wireless support structure at the cost of the provider.
The Village shall document the basis for a denial, including the specific Code provisions or application conditions on which the denial is based, and
send the documentation to the applicant on or before the day the Village denies an application.
The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the Village and resubmit the revised application once within thirty (30) days after notice of
denial is sent to the applicant without paying an additional application fee. The Village shall approve or deny the revised application within thirty
(30) days after the applicant resubmits the application or it is deemed approved. Failure to resubmit the revised application within thirty (30) days
of denial shall require the applicant to submit a new application with applicable fees, and recommencement of the Village's review period. The
applicant must notify the Village in writing of its intention to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, which may be
submitted with the revised application.
Any review of a revised application shall be limited to the deficiencies cited in the denial. However, this revised application does not apply if the
cure requires the review of a new location, new or different structure to be collocated upon, new antennas, or other wireless equipment associated
with the small wireless facility.
e. Within thirty (30) days after an approved permit to collocate a small wireless facility on a Municipal utility pole, the Village and the applicant shall
enter into a Master Pole Attachment Agreement provided by the Village for the initial collocation on a Municipal utility pole by the applicant. For
subsequent approved permits to collocate on a small wireless facility on a Municipal utility pole, the Village and the applicant shall enter into a
License Supplement of the Master Pole Attachment Agreement.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 247/416
3. Completeness Of Application: Within thirty (30) days after receiving an application, the Village shall determine whether the application is complete
and notify the applicant. If an application is incomplete, the Village must specifically identify the missing information. An application shall be deemed
complete if the Village fails to provide notification to the applicant within thirty (30) days after all documents, information and fees specifically
enumerated in the Village's permit application form are submitted by the applicant to the Village.
Processing deadlines are tolled from the time the Village sends the notice of incompleteness to the time the applicant provides the missing
information.
4. Tolling: The time period for applications may be further tolled by:
a. An express written agreement by both the applicant and the Village; or
b. A local, State, or Federal disaster declaration, or similar emergency that causes the delay.
5. Consolidated Applications: An applicant seeking to collocate small wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the Village shall be allowed, at the
applicant's discretion, to file a consolidated application and receive a single permit for the collocation of up to twenty five (25) small wireless facilities
if the collocations each involve substantially the same type of small wireless facility and substantially the same type of structure.
If an application includes multiple small wireless facilities, the Village may remove small wireless facility collocations from the application and treat
separately small wireless facility collocations for which incomplete information has been provided or that do not qualify for consolidated treatment or
that are denied. The Village may issue separate permits for each collocation that is approved in a consolidated application.
6. Duration Of Permits: The duration of a permit shall be for a period of not less than five (5) years, and the permit shall be renewed for equivalent
durations unless the Village makes a finding that the small wireless facilities or the new or modified utility pole do not comply with the applicable
Village ordinances or any provision, condition or requirement contained in this chapter.
If the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act is repealed as provided in section 90 therein, renewals of permits shall be subject to the applicable
Village Code provisions or regulations in effect at the time of renewal.
7. Means Of Submitting Applications: Applicants shall submit applications, supporting information and notices to the Village by personal delivery at the
Village's designated place of business, or by regular mail postmarked on the date due or by any other commonly used means, including electronic
mail. (Ord. O-21-18, 7-23-2018)
7-6-4: COLLOCATION REQUIREMENTS AND CONDITIONS:
A. Public Safety Space Reservation: The Village may reserve space on Municipal utility poles for future public safety uses, but a reservation of space may
not preclude the collocation of a small wireless facility unless the Village reasonably determines that the Municipal utility pole cannot accommodate
both uses.
B. Installation And Maintenance: The wireless provider shall install, maintain, repair, and modify its small wireless facilities in safe condition, and good
repair and compliance with the requirements and conditions of this chapter. The wireless provider shall ensure that its employees, agents or
contractors that perform work in connection with its small wireless facilities are adequately trained and skilled in accordance with all applicable industry
and governmental standards and regulations. The wireless provider shall maintain each small wireless facility or small wireless support structure under
their control to the standards imposed by the Village under this chapter at the time of the granting of its permit. Such maintenance shall include, but
shall not be limited to, maintenance of the paint, structural integrity, and landscaping. If the small wireless provider fails to maintain the small wireless
facility or small wireless support structure, the Village may undertake the maintenance at the expense of the small wireless provider, or terminate the
provider's permit at the Village's sole option.
C. No Interference With Public Safety Communication Frequencies: The wireless provider's operation of the small wireless facilities shall not interfere with
the frequencies used by a public safety agency for public safety communications.
A wireless provider shall install small wireless facilities of the type and frequency that will not cause unacceptable interference with a public safety
agency's communications equipment.
Unacceptable interference will be determined by and measured in accordance with industry standards and the FCC's regulations addressing
unacceptable interference to public safety spectrum or any other spectrum licensed by a public safety agency.
If a small wireless facility causes such interference, and the wireless provider has been given written notice of the interference by the public safety
agency, the wireless provider, at its own expense, shall remedy the interference in a manner consistent with the abatement and resolution procedures
for interference with public safety spectrum established by the FCC, including 47 CFR 22.970 through 47 CFR 22.973 and 47 CFR 90.672 through 47
CFR 90.675.
The Village may terminate a permit for a small wireless facility based on such interference if the wireless provider is not in compliance with the Code of
Federal Regulations cited in the previous paragraph. Failure to remedy the interference as required herein shall constitute a public nuisance.
D. Exceptions For Antenna And Support Equipment: The wireless provider shall not collocate small wireless facilities on Village utility poles that are part of
an electric distribution or transmission system within the communication worker safety zone of the pole or the electric supply zone of the pole.
However, the antenna and support equipment of the small wireless facility may be located in the communications space on the Village utility pole and
on the top of the pole, if not otherwise unavailable, if the wireless provider complies with applicable codes for work involving the top of the pole.
For purposes of this subparagraph, the terms "communications space", "communication worker safety zone", and "electric supply zone" have the
meanings given to those terms in the National Electric Safety Code as published by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.
E. Compliance With Other Codes: The wireless provider shall comply with all applicable codes and local code provisions, or regulations that concern
public safety.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 248/416
F. Compliance With Other Standards: The wireless provider shall comply with generally applicable written stealth, concealment, and aesthetic standards
that are set forth in section 7-6-13 of this chapter.
G. Alternate Placements: Except as provided in this section, a wireless provider shall not be required to collocate small wireless facilities on any specific
utility pole, or category of utility poles, or be required to collocate multiple antenna systems on a single utility pole. However, with respect to an
application for the collocation of a small wireless facility associated with a new utility pole, the Village may propose that the small wireless facility be
collocated on an existing utility pole or existing wireless support structure within one hundred feet (100') of the proposed collocation, which the
applicant shall accept if it has the right to use the alternate structure on reasonable terms and conditions, and the alternate location and structure does
not impose technical limits or additional material costs as determined by the applicant.
If the applicant refuses a collocation proposed by the Village, the applicant shall provide written certification describing the property rights, technical
limits, or material cost reasons the alternate location does not satisfy the criteria in this paragraph.
H. Height Limitations: The maximum height of a small wireless facility shall be no more than ten feet (10') above the utility pole or wireless support
structure on which the small wireless facility is collocated.
New or replacement utility poles or wireless support structures on which small wireless facilities are collocated may not exceed the higher of:
1. Ten feet (10') in height above the tallest existing utility pole, other than a utility pole supporting only wireless facilities, that is in place on the date the
application is submitted to the Village, that is located within three hundred feet (300') of the new or replacement utility pole or wireless support
structure and that is in the same right-of-way within the jurisdictional boundary of the Village, provided the Village may designate which intersecting
right-of-way within three hundred feet (300') of the proposed utility pole or wireless support structures shall control the height limitation for such
facility; or
2. Forty five feet (45') above ground level.
I. Height Exceptions: If an applicant proposes a height for a new or replacement pole in excess of the above height limitations on which the small wireless
facility is proposed for collocation, the applicant shall apply for a variation in conformance with procedures, terms and conditions set forth in section 9-
10-6, "Variations", of this Code.
J. Contractual Design Requirements: The wireless provider shall comply with requirements that are imposed by a contract between the Village and a
private property owner that concern design or construction standards applicable to utility poles and ground-mounted equipment located in the right-ofway.
K. Ground-Mounted Equipment Spacing: The wireless provider shall comply with section 7-5-15, "Location Of Facilities", of this title concerning the
location of ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way. If an applicant proposes a facility to be located in the public right-of-way which would
not comply with the requirements of section 7-5-15 of this title, the applicant shall apply for a variation in conformance with procedures, terms, and
conditions set forth in section 9-10-6, "Variations", of this Code.
L. Undergrounding Regulations: The wireless provider shall comply with section 7-5-15, "Location Of Facilities", of this title concerning the location of
facilities in the right-of-way and prohibiting certain above-ground facilities. If an applicant proposes an above-ground facility to be located in the public
right-of-way which would not comply with the requirements of section 7-5-15 of this title, the applicant shall apply for a variation in conformance with
procedures, terms, and conditions set forth in section 9-10-6, "Variations", of this Code.
M. Collocation Completion Deadline: Collocation for which a permit is granted shall be completed within one hundred eighty (180) days after issuance of
the permit, unless the Village and the wireless provider agree to extend this period or a delay is caused by make-ready work for a Village utility pole or
by the lack of commercial power or backhaul availability at the site, provided the wireless provider has made a timely request within sixty (60) days
after the issuance of the permit for commercial power or backhaul services, and the additional time to complete installation does not exceed three
hundred sixty (360) days after issuance of the permit. Otherwise, the permit shall be void unless the Village grants an extension in writing to the
applicant.
N. Cooperation With Other Small Wireless Service Providers: As a condition of any permit for installation of a new pole, small wireless support structure, or
other above-ground facility granted pursuant to this chapter, permittees shall be required to cooperate with other small wireless providers in collocating
additional small wireless facilities on poles and small wireless support structures owned by the permittee, provided that such proposed additional small
wireless provider has been issued permits for that location by the Village as described herein. All permittees shall exercise good faith in collocating
other small wireless providers regarding sharing of the permitted site, provided that such shared use does not give rise to a substantial technical level
of impairment of the ability to provide the permitted use (i.e., significant interference in broadcast or reception capabilities as opposed to a competitive
conflict or financial burden). Such good faith shall include sharing technical information to evaluate the feasibility of sharing utility poles or small
wireless infrastructure. In the event that a dispute arises as to whether a permittee has exercised good faith in accommodating other users, the Village
may require a third-party technical study at the expense of the applicant, the permittee, or both. (Ord. O-21-18, 7-23-2018)
7-6-5: APPLICATION FEES:
Application fees are imposed as follows:
A. Applicant shall pay an application fee of six hundred fifty dollars ($650.00) for an application to collocate a single small wireless facility on an existing
utility pole or wireless support structure, and three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) for each small wireless facility addressed in a consolidated application
to collocate more than one small wireless facility on existing utility poles or wireless support structures.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 249/416
B. Applicant shall pay an application fee of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each small wireless facility addressed in an application that includes the
installation of a new utility pole for such collocation.
C. Notwithstanding any contrary provision of State law or local ordinance, applications pursuant to this section shall be accompanied by the required
application fee. Application fees shall be non-refundable.
D. The Village shall not require an application, approval or permit, or require any fees or other charges from a communications service provider authorized
to occupy the rights-of-way, for:
1. Routine maintenance;
2. The replacement of wireless facilities with wireless facilities that are substantially similar, the same size, or smaller if the wireless provider notifies the
Village at least ten (10) days prior to the planned replacement and includes equipment specifications for the replacement of equipment consistent
with subsection 7-6-3B1d of this chapter; or
3. The installation, placement, maintenance, operation or replacement of micro wireless facilities suspended on cables that are strung between existing
utility poles in compliance with applicable Safety Codes.
Wireless providers shall secure a permit from the Village to work within rights-of-way for activities that affect traffic patterns or require lane closures.
(Ord. O-21-18, 7-23-2018)
7-6-6: EXCEPTIONS TO APPLICABILITY:
Nothing in this chapter authorizes a person to collocate small wireless facilities on:
A. Property owned by a private party, property owned or controlled by the Village or another unit of local government that is not located within rights-ofway,
or a privately owned utility pole or wireless support structure without the consent of the property owner;
B. Property owned, leased, or controlled by a park district, forest preserve district, or conservation district for public park, recreation or conservation
purposes without the consent of the affected district, excluding the placement of facilities on rights-of-way located in an affected district that are under
the jurisdiction and control of a different unit of local government, as provided by the Illinois Highway Code; or
C. Property owned by a rail carrier registered under section 18c-7201 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, Metra Commuter Rail or any other public commuter rail
service, or an electric utility as defined in section 16-102 of the Public Utilities Act, without the consent of the rail carrier, public commuter rail service, or
electric utility. The provisions of this chapter do not apply to an electric or gas public utility or such utility's wireless facilities if the facilities are being
used, developed and maintained consistent with the provisions of subsection (i) of section 16-108.5 of the Public Utilities Act.
For the purposes of this subsection, "public utility" has the meaning given to that term in section 3-105 of the Public Utilities Act. Nothing in this chapter
shall be construed to relieve any person from any requirement: 1) to obtain a franchise or a State-issued authorization to offer cable service or video
service or 2) to obtain any required permission to install, place, maintain, or operate communications facilities other than small wireless facilities subject
to this chapter. (Ord. O-21-18, 7-23-2018)
7-6-7: PRE-EXISTING AGREEMENTS:
Existing agreements between the Village and wireless providers that relate to the collocation of small wireless facilities in the right-of-way, including the
collocation of small wireless facilities on Village owned utility poles, that are in effect on June 1, 2018, remain in effect for all small wireless facilities
collocated on the Village's utility poles pursuant to applications submitted to the Village before June 1, 2018, subject to applicable termination provisions
contained therein. Agreements entered into after June 1, 2018, shall comply with this chapter. (Ord. O-21-18, 7-23-2018)
7-6-8: ANNUAL RECURRING RATE:
A wireless provider shall pay to the Village an annual recurring rate to collocate a small wireless facility on a Village owned utility pole located in a right-ofway
that equals: a) two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year or b) the actual, direct, and reasonable costs related to the wireless provider's use of space on
the Village utility pole. If the Village has not billed the wireless provider actual and direct costs, the fee shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00) payable on
the first day after the first annual anniversary of the issuance of the permit or notice of intent to collocate, and on each annual anniversary date thereafter.
(Ord. O-21-18, 7-23-2018)
7-6-9: OBSOLESCENCE, ABANDONMENT, AND REMOVAL:
Any small wireless facility that is no longer needed or is not operational shall be reported immediately by the small wireless provider to the Village
Administrator. Any obsolete or nonoperational small wireless facilities shall be removed within ninety (90) days following notice to the Village. A small
wireless facility that is not operated or removed for a continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned. The owner of the facility
shall remove the small wireless facility within ninety (90) days after receipt of written notice from the Village notifying the wireless provider of the
abandonment. The notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, by the Village to the owner at the last known address of the
wireless provider. If the small wireless facility is not removed within ninety (90) days of such notice, the Village may remove or cause the removal of such
facility pursuant to the terms of its pole attachment agreement for Municipal utility poles, or through whatever actions are provided for abatement of
nuisances or by other law for removal and cost recovery. A wireless provider shall provide written notice to the Village if it sells or transfers small wireless
facilities within the jurisdiction of the Village. Such notice shall include the name and contact information of the new wireless provider. (Ord. O-21-18, 7-23-
2018)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 250/416
7-6-10: DISPUTE RESOLUTION:
The Circuit Court of Cook County, Illinois shall have exclusive jurisdiction to resolve all disputes arising under the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment
Act. Pending resolution of a dispute concerning rates for collocation of small wireless facilities on Municipal utility poles within the right-of-way, the Village
shall allow the collocating person to collocate on its poles at annual rates of no more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year per Municipal utility pole,
with rates to be determined upon final resolution of the dispute. (Ord. O-21-18, 7-23-2018)
7-6-11: INDEMNIFICATION:
A wireless provider shall indemnify and hold the Village harmless against any and all liability or loss from personal injury or property damage resulting from
or arising out of, in whole or in part, the use or occupancy of the Village improvements or right-of-way associated with such improvements by the wireless
provider or its employees, agents, or contractors arising out of the rights and privileges granted under this chapter and the Small Wireless Facilities
Deployment Act. A wireless provider has no obligation to indemnify or hold harmless against any liabilities and losses as may be due to or caused by the
sole negligence of the Village or its employees or agents. A wireless provider shall further waive any claims that they may have against the Village with
respect to consequential, incidental, or special damages, however caused, based on the theory of liability. (Ord. O-21-18, 7-23-2018)
7-6-12: INSURANCE:
The wireless provider shall carry, at the wireless provider's own cost and expense, the following insurance:
A. Property insurance for its property's replacement cost against all risks;
B. Workers' compensation insurance, as required by law; and
C. Commercial general liability insurance with respect to its activities on the Village improvements or rights-of-way to afford minimum protection limits
as set forth in section 7-5-8, "Insurance", of this title.
The wireless provider shall include the Village as an additional insured on the commercial general liability policy and provide certification and
documentation of inclusion of the Village in a commercial general liability policy prior to the collocation of any wireless facility. (Ord. O-21-18, 7-23-2018)
7-6-13: STEALTH, CONCEALMENT AND AESTHETIC STANDARDS:
A. Purpose: The purposes of this section are to:
1. Provide a variety of locations and options for wireless providers while minimizing the negative visual impacts associated with small wireless facilities;
2. Encourage creative approaches in locating and designing small wireless facilities that blend in with the surroundings of such facilities;
3. Provide standards that comply with the Telecommunications Act of 1996 ("the Telecommunications Act") and the Small Wireless Facilities
Deployment Act2; the provisions of this section are not intended, and shall not be interpreted, to prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting personal
wireless services as defined in the Telecommunications Act; and
4. Administer the provisions of this chapter in such a manner as not to unreasonably discriminate between providers of functionally equivalent personal
wireless services, as defined in the Telecommunications Act.
B. Design And Concealment Standards: Site location and development of small wireless facilities shall preserve the existing character of the surrounding
buildings and landscape to the extent consistent with the function of the proposed small wireless facilities. All small wireless support infrastructure and
poles shall be integrated through location and design to blend in with the existing characteristics of the site to the extent practical. Existing on-site
vegetation shall be preserved or improved, and disturbance to the existing topography shall be minimized unless such disturbance would result in less
adverse visual impact to the surrounding area. The following provisions establish design and concealment standards for small wireless facilities.
1. Building Attachment: Small wireless facilities may be mounted to a building if the antennas do not interrupt the building's architectural theme. To the
extent possible all small wireless facilities shall be concealed within a structure that is architecturally compatible with the existing rooftop. Rooftop
additions shall be concealed on all sides.
a. Small wireless facilities attached to the side or roof of buildings shall employ a symmetrical, balanced design for all facade mounted antennas.
Subsequent deployments will be required to ensure consistent design, architectural treatment, and symmetry when placing antennas on the
structure's exterior with any existing small wireless facilities on the same side of the structure.
b. The interruption of architectural lines or horizontal or vertical reveals is prohibited unless demonstrated to be unavoidable.
c. New architectural features such as columns, pilasters, corbels, or other ornamentation that conceal antennas may be used if it complements the
architecture of the existing building.
d. Small wireless facilities shall utilize the smallest mounting brackets necessary in order to provide the smallest offset from the building.
e. Skirts or shrouds shall be utilized on the sides and bottoms of antennas in order to conceal mounting hardware, create a cleaner appearance, and
minimize the visual impact of the antennas. Exposed conduit, cabling, and wiring are prohibited.
f. Small wireless facilities shall be painted and textured to match the adjacent building surfaces.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 251/416
g. All installations of small wireless facilities shall have permission from the pole/structure owner to install facilities on such structure.
2. Signs:
a. Small wireless facilities replicating a sign shall be subject to the requirements of title 8, chapter 6, "Signs", of this Code. A sign permit is required
unless the small wireless facilities are placed entirely within an existing sign.
b. All antennas shall be completely screened by the facade of the sign.
c. All cables and conduit to and from the sign shall be routed from within the building wall or structure upon which the sign is mounted. Cable
coverings may be allowed on the exterior of the building wall in limited circumstances in situations where they are minimally visible and concealed
to match the adjacent building surfaces.
3. Existing Or Replacement Utility Poles: An existing utility pole may be replaced or altered to accommodate small wireless facilities and related
equipment subject to the following requirements:
a. Conforming To Design Standard: Replacement utility poles shall conform to any design standard for the surrounding zoning district, subdivision, or
planned development, including, but not limited to, historic districts as defined herein and planned unit developments as described in title 9,
chapter 6, "Planned Unit Developments", of this Code. The replacement pole shall look substantially the same as existing poles in the surrounding
zoning district, subdivision, or planned unit development.
b. Variations; No Design Standard Identified: When no design standard is identified for a particular zoning district, subdivision, or planned unit
development, replacement poles shall match the height, width, color, and material of the original or adjacent poles. The maximum height of any
new or replacement pole shall not exceed limits specified in subsection 7-6-4H of this chapter, subject to any variation requested pursuant to
subsection 7-6-4I of this chapter. The Village may, likewise, approve minor variations of up to fifty percent (50%) of the pole width or thirty inches
(30"), whichever is greater, when housing equipment within the pole base.
c. Pole Removal: Replacement poles shall be located as close as possible to the existing pole to be replaced, and the replaced pole shall be
removed.
d. Internal Equipment And Cabling: Wherever compatible with the pole design and technologically feasible, all equipment and cabling shall be
internal to the replacement street lighting or traffic signal standard or otherwise camouflaged to appear to be an integrated part of a utility pole. If
equipment or cabling is not proposed to be placed internal to the replacement pole, a concealment element plan shall be submitted in accordance
with the provisions of subsection C of this section.
e. No Illumination: Small wireless facilities shall not be illuminated.
f. Generators And Backup Battery: Generators are not permitted for small wireless facilities. All proposed battery backups must be requested through
the submittal of a concealment element plan in accordance with the provisions of subsection C of this section.
g. Cabinet Location And Dimensions: The equipment cabinet for small wireless facilities shall be the smallest amount of cabinet enclosure necessary
to enclose the equipment. Disconnect switches may be located outside of the primary equipment cabinet.
h. Flush-Mounting And Pole-Top Antennas: In situations when interior concealment is demonstrated to not be possible, the small wireless facility
shall, to the full extent permitted under the State Electrical Code and the utilities' requirements, be flush-mounted on the subject pole, which means
mounting directly to the pole with little to no gap other than that which may be required for the screws/bolts, or located at the top of the pole.
Canisters attached to the top of a pole shall not exceed the diameter of the pole unless technically required and then shall not be more than fifty
percent (50%) greater than the diameter of the pole.
i. Antenna Design: Where an enclosure is proposed to house an antenna, the antenna shall be located in an enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic
feet in volume, or in case of an antenna that has exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an enclosure of no
more than six (6) cubic feet. No more than four (4) antennas are permitted on a single pole and with a total volume not to exceed twenty four (24)
cubic feet.
j. Material And Color: If interior concealment described in subsection B3d of this section is not possible, the small wireless facility shall to the
maximum extent feasible match the color of the pole and shall be non-reflective.
4. New Poles:
a. In areas of the Village in which above-ground facilities are allowed in the public right-of-way pursuant to section 7-5-15, "Location Of Facilities", of
this title, the installation of a new pole for the purpose of locating small wireless facilities is permitted only when the applicant establishes that:
(1) The small wireless facility cannot be located on a site outside of the public right-of-way such as a public park, public property, or in or on a
building whether by roof or panel-mount or separate structure; and
(2) The small wireless facility cannot be located on an existing pole within the public right-of-way.
b. The applicant shall establish the foregoing requirements by submission of competent documentary evidence that:
(1) No existing towers or structures are located within the geographic area required to meet the applicant's engineering plans;
(2) Existing utility poles, towers, base stations, or small wireless support structures are not of sufficient height to meet the applicant's engineering
requirements;
(3) Existing utility poles, towers, base stations, or small wireless support structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support the
applicant's proposed small wireless facility;
(4) The applicant's proposed small wireless facility would cause electromagnetic interference with the existing utility poles, towers, base stations,
or small wireless facilities, or the existing utility poles, towers, base stations, or small wireless facilities would cause interference with the
applicant's proposed small wireless facility;
(5) The fees, costs and contractual provisions required by the owners of the existing utility poles, towers, base stations, or small wireless support
structures to share existing space, or to adapt existing structures for sharing space are unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower development
are presumed to be unreasonable;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 252/416
(6) There are other limiting factors which render existing utility poles, towers, base stations, or small wireless support structures unsuitable; and
(7) Reasonable efforts to develop an alternative location on an existing utility pole, tower, or small wireless support structure have been made.
c. Any proposed new utility pole or small wireless support structure proposed by an applicant shall comply with a preferred concealment technique as
described in subsection B3 of this section, or an approved concealment element plan as provided in subsection C of this section.
5. Ground-Mounted Equipment Standards; ADA Compliance Required: To allow full use of the public right-of-way by pedestrians, bicycles and other
users, all ground-mounted equipment other than poles or wireless support structures shall be housed underground in a vault meeting the Village's
construction standards. The location of wireless support structures, replacement poles, and/or any new poles shall comply with the Americans With
Disabilities Act (ADA), Village construction standards, and State and Federal regulations in order to provide a clear and safe passage within the
public right-of-way.
6. Maximum Noise Levels: No small wireless facilities or related equipment shall be operated to produce noise levels above forty (40) decibels as
measured from the nearest property line to which the small wireless facility is located.
7. Advertising Prohibited: No lettering, symbols, images, or trademarks large enough to be legible to pedestrian or vehicular users of the right-of-way or
other persons occupying the space in the immediate area of the small wireless facility, utility pole, or small wireless support structure shall be placed
on or affixed to any utility pole, small wireless support structure, or small wireless facility other than as required by Federal Communications
Commission regulations or other applicable law. Small wireless facilities concealed within signs or billboards shall not be construed to be in violation
of this prohibition.
C. Concealment Element Plan:
1. Concealment Element Plan Required: Applications for proposed small wireless facility installations which do not conform to a preferred concealment
technique as identified in subsection B3 of this section shall submit a concealment element plan. The plan shall include the design of the screening,
fencing, or other concealment technology for a base station, pole, or equipment structure, and all related transmission equipment or facilities
associated with the proposed small wireless facility.
2. Purpose Of Concealment Element Plan, Generally: Concealment element plans should seek to minimize the visual obtrusiveness of proposed small
wireless facilities using methods including, but not limited to, integrating the installation with architectural features or building design components,
utilization of coverings or concealment devices of similar material, color and texture, or the appearance thereof, as the surface or background against
which the small wireless facility will be seen or on which it will be installed. Other concealment element approaches may include, but not be limited
to, use of street furniture concealment products such as trash cans, benches, information kiosks, or other types of enclosures reasonably compatible
to conceal ground level equipment. Additionally, the use of a concealment support or device, such as a clock tower, steeple, flagpole, tree,
wayfinding sign, decorative pole with banner, art work, street sign, or other applicable concealment structure may be approved.
3. Review Of Concealment Element Plan: Where a small wireless facility is proposed that does not comply with a preferred concealment technique as
specified in subsection B3 of this section, a concealment element plan shall be subject to Village review and approval in conformance with the
procedures, terms and conditions set forth in section 9-10-6, "Variations", of this Code. (Ord. O-21-18, 7-23-2018)
Title 8
BUILDING REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
BUILDING CODES AND REGULATIONS
8-1-1: BUILDING CODES ADOPTED:
A. International Building Code:
1. Code Adopted; Amendments: The international building code, 2009 edition, as published in February 2009 by the International Code Council, Inc., is
adopted as the building code of the village of Forest Park, Cook County, Illinois, for the control of properties, buildings and structures as herein
provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the international building code, 2009 edition, are referred
to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this subsection, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes as follows:
Section 101.1 Title (page 1), insert in blank "the village of Forest Park".
Section 101.4.1 Gas (page 1), delete "international fuel gas code" and insert "fuel gas code as adopted by the village of Forest Park".
Section 101.4.2 Mechanical (page 1), delete "international mechanical code" and insert "mechanical code as adopted by the village of Forest
Park".
Section 101.4.3 Plumbing (page 1), delete "international plumbing code" and insert "plumbing code as adopted by the village of Forest Park".
Section 101.4.4 Property Maintenance Code (page 1), delete "international property maintenance code" and insert "property maintenance code as
adopted by the village of Forest Park".
Section 101.4.5 Fire Prevention (page 1), delete "international fire code" and insert "fire code as adopted by the village of Forest Park".
Section 102.2 Other Laws, add the following:
When there are conflicts between this code and any other code or standard adopted or referenced by this code or other village of Forest Park
codes, the stricter of the requirements shall apply.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 253/416
Section 102.6 Existing Structures (page 2), replace "international property maintenance code and international fire code with property maintenance
code and fire code adopted by the village of Forest Park".
Section 103 (page 1-4), delete "department building safety" and insert "department of public health and safety".
Section 103.1 Creation Of Enforcement Agency (page 1-4) shall read:
"The department of public health and safety shall be responsible for the inspection and enforcement of this code. The director public health and
safety shall be known as the building official."
Section 103.2 Appointments (page 1), delete, "The code official shall be appointed by the chief appointing authority of the jurisdiction" and insert
"The code official shall be hired in accordance with the standard procedures of the village of Forest Park".
Section 103.3 Deputies (page 1-5), amend the last sentence to read:
"For the maintenance of existing properties, see the property maintenance code".
Section 107.2.2 Plan Submittals, insert the following:
The construction plans shall provide adequate information and details to show compliance with the code. The plans shall:
1. Be on suitable material.
2. Be on a scale which is legible.
3. Show all dimensions, heights, room sizes.
4. Show the location of all building equipment.
5. Include a floor plan for all floors levels or stories.
6. Include a reflected ceiling plan and roof plan.
7. Include a wall, door, window and a finish schedule.
8. Include all design loads.
9. Include all appropriate details.
10. Include all details showing energy conservation.
11. Include a description of the use of all areas.
12. Include all appropriate elevations.
13. Include all calculations.
14. Include information on the building mechanical, plumbing, electric and fire protection and suppression systems.
15. Include details for all stairs, guard rails and hand rails.
16. Include details showing all details and dimensions showing accessibility.
17. Include details and information showing compliance with all Forest Park codes, ordinances and amendments.
18. The final approved plan shall be submitted as a PDF file or there will be an additional fee to create this file, see the fee schedule for the fee.
Section 108.2 Violation Penalties, add the following sentence:
All penalties shall be as established by the village of Forest Park fee schedule.
Section 108.3 Temporary Power (page 6), delete "ICC electrical code" and insert "electrical code as adopted by the village of Forest Park".
Section 109.2 Fees (page 6), add the following sentence:
All fees shall be as established by the village of Forest Park fee schedule.
Section 111.5 Partial Occupancy (page 8) shall be inserted and read as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 254/416
"The building official is authorized to issue a partial occupancy for the installation of machines, equipment, furniture or other items required
before the commencement of business. The portion of the building or structure that is to be occupied must meet all health and safety standards
and requirements."
Section 113 (page 8), delete entire section and insert:
"In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and
interpretation of this code, the commissioner of public health and safety shall be the governing authority. The commissioner of public health and
safety shall adopt rules or procedures for conducting business".
All requests for appeals shall be submitted to the building official within thirty (30) days of the plan review or inspection. All appeals shall be
submitted in writing with an explanation of the basis for the appeal.
The building official shall review the appeal to determine the validity and correct application of the related code requirements. After the building
official has determined the validity of the appeal, it shall be forwarded to the International Code Council for an interpretation of the code section.
The interpretation of the International Code Council shall be used as the basis for the final decision of the appeal.
Any appeals of the application of any local amendments to the adopted codes shall be made by the building official.
The person or entity requesting the appeal has the ability to appeal the decision of the building official to the entire village board.
Section 406.1.4 Separation (page 4-29) shall be amended to read as follows:
"1. The private garage shall be separated from the dwelling unit and its attic by means of a minimum 5/8 inch type 'X" gypsum board applied to
the garage side. Garages beneath habitable rooms shall be separated from all habitable rooms above by walls and a floor ceiling assembly
including beams and columns not less than 5/8 inch type 'X" gypsum board or equivalent. Door openings between the garage and residence
shall be equipped with solid wood doors not less than 13/8 inches in thickness, solid or honeycomb core steel doors not less than 13/8 inches
thick, or 20 minute fire-rated doors. Doors shall be equipped with an U.L. approved self closer. There shall be a six inch high curbing provided at
the common walls between the garage and the habitable space, or the garage floor shall be constructed not less than six inches below the
adjoining floor. Opening from a garage directly into a room used for sleeping purposes shall not be permitted."
Section 501.2.1, add the following:
Tenant Identification: "All buildings with multiple tenants or units shall have signs in the corridor across from the elevator door. This direction
signage shall indicate the direction to each number tenant space. All tenant spaces shall have a sign, which indicates the tenant space number.
The signs shall be constructed of durable materials, be permanently installed and be readily visible. Letters and numbers shall contrast with the
background and shall be a minimum of 2 inches in height".
Section 503 and table 503, delete type IIIA, IIIB, IV, VA and VB construction types.
Sections 602.3 (Type III Construction), 602.4 (Type IV Construction) and 602.5 (Type V Construction), delete these section in their entirety. These
types of construction are not allowed.
Delete sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.11 and insert:
All new buildings of any group shall require an automatic sprinkler system.
Exception: Detached structures, which comply with all of the following, do not require automatic fire sprinklers:
1. Less than five hundred (500) square feet in area.
2. Single story.
3. Not used as a dwelling or sleeping unit.
4. Not an high hazard group.
5. Not used for high hazard products or hazardous materials.
6. No basements.
7. Minimum separation to other buildings 20 feet.
When a building has a change of use or is renovated and all of the following conditions occurs, it shall have a complete automatic sprinkler
system.
1. The wall and ceiling finish for more than 75% of the walls and ceilings is removed.
2. New walls are constructed which equal more than 75% of the existing wall and ceiling surface. The square footage of both sides is used
when both sides of the wall are exposed to the building interior.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 255/416
3. The building renovation exceeds 75% of the replacement cost of the building. The Dodge report or the Means report are used to establish
construction and replacement costs.
4. The building or space has a total of more than 2,500 square feet.
Add new section:
Section 903.3.7 Outside Sprinkler Alarm Devices. The outside alarm device for fire sprinkler systems shall be a horn strobe in a location
approved by the fire department.
Add new section:
Section 903.3.8 Floor Plans. When any building has multiple risers on any floor a floor layout for the sprinkler system showing all sprinkler zones
shall be provided at the main sprinkler riser.
Add new section:
Section 903.3.9 Electric Vaults. The main service electric vault shall not require sprinkler protection with the following conditions:
1. The room shall be enclosed with two hour fire rated walls, floor and floor/ceiling assemblies. All doors shall have a 11/2 hour fire rating with
closers.
2. All other penetrations shall maintain the two hour fire rating.
3. The room shall not be used for storage.
4. The room shall have a floor drain.
This area without sprinkler will not eliminate any sprinkler design alternatives which would apply to a fully sprinklered building.
Section 905.3.8 Standpipes Where Required, add the new section:
When the fire department hose lay from where the fire department establishes operations to any point in the building exceeds 150 feet a class I
standpipe system is required.
Section 907.2.24, add the following:
Systems Out Of Service: Fire alarm systems shall be maintained in service at all times. Systems shall not be out of service for more than forty
eight (48) hours for maintenance or repair.
Section 916, add the following section:
Carbon Monoxide Detectors
Section 916.1 Definitions
Carbon Monoxide Alarm An electrical device, which meets the requirements of UL standard 2034 for detecting and warning individuals of the
presence of carbon monoxide.
Carbon Monoxide Monitor An electrical device for detecting and warning individuals of the presence of carbon monoxide. These devices do
not meet UL standard 2034 because they detect and alarm smaller quantities of carbon monoxide than UL 2034 allows.
Section 916.2 General
1. Carbon monoxide alarms where required by this code shall meet the current UL standard 2034 or its equivalent. Carbon monoxide alarms
shall be installed per the requirements of NFPA 720.
2. Carbon monoxide monitors where allowed by this code shall be installed and maintained per the manufacturer's recommendations.
3. All carbon monoxide monitor wiring must be in its own raceway.
Section 916.3 Where Required - Living Spaces
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 256/416
1. Carbon monoxide alarms are required in any building with sleeping facilities that relies on combustion of fossil fuel for heat, ventilation, hot
water, or fireplace within the building, and for buildings with attached garages.
a. Exception No. 1 Sleeping facilities in existing buildings built under and in full compliance with the codes in force at the time of construction
or alteration thereof and that have been properly maintained and continually occupied as originally permitted.
b. Exception No. 2 Carbon monoxide alarms may be replaced by carbon monoxide monitors where individuals, whose age, pregnancy or
chronic health conditions make them adversely susceptible to low levels of carbon monoxide.
2. In buildings with multi-sleeping facilities, with completely separate fossil fueled steam or hot water heating appliances are located in an area
completely separated from the sleeping quarters, the carbon monoxide alarm does not need to be in the sleeping area but must have one alarm
in the fossil fueled appliances area.
3. Existing buildings, with sleeping facilities, that are renovated or altered and the work would normally require a city permit to accomplish, after
adoption of this ordinance shall be required to install a carbon monoxide alarm per this ordinance.
4. Existing buildings with sleeping facilities that replace a furnace or hot water heater with a fossil fueled furnace or hot water heater or install a
fireplace shall be required to install a carbon monoxide alarm per this ordinance.
Section 1009.9 Spiral Stairways (page 232), amend the first paragraph to read as follows:
"Spiral stairways are not permitted to be used as a component of means of egress within a dwelling unit. Spiral stairways (in other than
dwellings) are permitted to be used as a component of means of egress from a space not more than 250 square feet in area and serving not
more than five occupants, or from galleries, catwalks and gridirons in accordance with section 1014.6".
Section 1013.2 Height (page 236), delete exception number 3.
Section 1612.3, date of flood study not applicable.
Section 1801.3, add the following new section:
Wood Footings And Foundations: The use of wood footing and foundation systems is not allowed.
Section 3410.2, insert date of original code adoption.
Chapter 35 Referenced Standards.
ICC, delete the following codes:
International private sewage disposal code - 2009.
International urban-wildland interface code - 2009.
International plumbing code, all references to the international plumbing code shall be changed to the Illinois plumbing code - 2004.
NFPA, all volumes of the national fire code with referenced standards and not the recommended practices. The most current edition on the date of
adoption of this ordinance.
The following appendices or sections of the appendices shall be adopted: D, H105, H106, I and J.
(Ord. O-23-10, 5-24-2010)
B. International Residential Code:
1. Code Adopted; Amendments: The international residential code, 2009 edition, as published February 2009 by the International Code Council, Inc., is
adopted as the residential construction code of the village of Forest Park, Cook County, Illinois, for the control of properties, buildings and structures
as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the international residential code, 2009 edition,
are referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this subsection, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes as follows:
Section R101.1 Title (page 1) - Insert in blank "the village of Forest Park".
Section R103 (page 1) - Delete "department building safety" and insert "department of public health and safety".
Section R103.1 Creation Of Enforcement Agency (page 1) shall read:
"The department of public health and safety shall be responsible for the inspection and enforcement of this code. The director public health and
safety shall be known as the building official."
Section R103.2 Appointments (page 1) - Delete, "The code official shall be appointed by the chief appointing authority of the jurisdiction" and insert
"The code official shall be hired in accordance with the standard procedures of the village of Forest Park".
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 257/416
Section R105.2 Work Exempt From Permit (page 3) - Amend "Building" by deleting items number 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 9 and 10.
Section R108.2 Fees - Add the following sentence:
All fees shall be as established by the village of Forest Park fee schedule.
Section R112 Board Of Appeals - Delete the entire section see the appeal requirements in the building code.
Section R301.2(1) Climatic And Geographic Design Criteria (page 24) shall be amended to read as follows:
Ground
Snow
Load
Wind
Speed
(mph)
Seismic
Design
Category
Subject To Damage From
Winter
Design
Weathering Temp.
Frost
Line Depth Termite Decay
25 psf 90 mph Zone B Severe 42" Moderate to heavy Slight to moderate -4°F
Ice Shield Under-layment Required Flood Hazard Air Freezing Index Mean Annual Temp
Yes Refer to FIRM 2000 45°F
Section R302.5.1 Opening Protection shall have the following added:
Doors shall be equipped with an U.L. approved self closer. There shall be a six inch high curbing provided at the common walls between the
garage and the habitable space, or the garage floor shall be constructed not less than six inches below the adjoining floor. Opening from a
garage directly into a room used for sleeping purposes shall not be permitted.
Table 302.6 - Change 1/2 inch gypsum to 5/8th type X gypsum.
Add the following to the row:
"from habitable rooms above garage (ceiling, walls, beams and columns)".
Section R303.3 Bathroom (page 53) shall be amended to read:
"Bathrooms, water closets and similar rooms shall be mechanically vented to the exterior (directly or with duct work) using wall louvers or roof
caps with insect screens. Vent discharge shall be directly to the exterior of the building. The minimum ventilation rate shall be 50 cfm for
intermittent ventilations or 20 cfm for continuous ventilation."
Section R303.3 Bathrooms (page 53) - Delete exemptions.
Section R311.2 - Insert the following:
"All single family detached dwellings shall have a minimum of two separate means of egress doors. The overhead garage door can not be one
of the required egress doors".
Section R313 shall be changed as follows:
Section R313.2 One And Two Family Automatic Fire Systems - Delete the exception and add the following:
"Additions
1. Any structure where the footprint of the building is increased by more than 50% over a three year period".
Section R313.3.2.1 - Add the following:
"Sprinklers shall be installed in attached garages to protect common wall ceilings and openings. The location and coverage shall be determined
by the fire code official".
Chapter 11 Energy Conservation - Delete the chapter in its entirety and insert the international energy conservation code per the Illinois law.
Section G2412.9 - Add the following:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 258/416
"Multi family detached buildings shall have separate gas meter and piping system for each dwelling unit and public area".
Chapters 25 through chapter 32 - Delete in their entirety and insert the Illinois plumbing code.
Chapters 34 through chapter 43 - Delete in their entirety and insert the electric code as adopted by the village of Forest Park.
Chapter 43 Referenced Standards.
ICC - Delete the following codes:
International private sewage disposal code - 2003.
International plumbing code - All references to the international plumbing code shall be changed to the Illinois plumbing code - 2004.
The following appendices or sections of the appendices shall be adopted: A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, J, K.
(Ord. O-30-10, 5-24-2010)
C. International Mechanical Code:
1. Code Adopted; Amendments: The international mechanical code, 2009 edition, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., is adopted as
the mechanical code of the village of Forest Park in the state of Illinois, for the control of properties, buildings and structures as herein provided; and
each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the international mechanical code, 2009 edition, are referred to,
adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this subsection, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes as follows:
Section 101.1 Title (page 1): Insert in blank "the village of Forest Park".
Section 103 (page 2): Delete "department of inspection" and insert "department of public health and safety".
Section 103.1 General (page 2) shall read:
"The department of public health and safety shall be responsible for the inspection and enforcement of this code. The director public health and
safety, or his designee shall be the code official responsible for the enforcement of this code."
Section 103.2 Appointments (page 2): Delete, "The code official shall be appointed by the chief appointing authority of the jurisdiction" and insert
"The code official shall be hired in accordance with the standard procedures of the village of Forest Park".
Section 106.6.2 Fees: Insert the village of Forest Park fee schedule.
Section 108.4 Violation Penalties: Insert the penalties from the village of Forest Park fee schedule.
Section 109 Means Of Appeal: Delete the entire section. See the section on appeals in the building code.
Chapter 15 Referenced Standards.
ICC: Delete the following codes:
International private sewage disposal code - 2009.
International urban-wildland interface code - 2009.
International plumbing code: All references to the international plumbing code shall be changed to the Illinois plumbing code - 2004.
NFPA: All volumes of the national fire code with referenced standards and not the recommended practices. The most current edition on the date of
adoption of this ordinance.
The following appendices or sections of the appendices shall be adopted: A, B and C.
(Ord. O-28-10, 5-24-2010)
D. International Fuel Gas Code:
1. Code Adopted; Amendments: The international fuel gas code, 2009 edition, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., is adopted as the
fuel gas code of the village of Forest Park, Cook County, Illinois, for the control of properties, buildings and structures as herein provided; and each
and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the international fuel gas code, 2009 edition, are referred to, adopted and
made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this subsection, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes as follows:
Section 101.1 Title (page 1): Insert in blank "the village of Forest Park".
Section 103 (page 2): Delete "department of inspection" and insert "department of public health and safety".
Section 103.1 General (page 2) shall read:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 259/416
"The department of public health and safety shall be responsible for the inspection and enforcement of this code. The director public health and
safety, or his designee shall be the code official responsible for the enforcement of this code."
Section 103.2 Appointments (page 2): Delete, "The code official shall be appointed by the chief appointing authority of the jurisdiction" and insert
"The code official shall be hired in accordance with the standard procedures of the village of Forest Park;"
Section 106.6.2 Fees: Insert the village of Forest Park fee schedule.
Section 108.4 Violation Penalties: Insert the penalties from the village of Forest Park fee schedule.
Section 109 Means Of Appeal: Delete the entire section. See the section on appeals in the building code.
Section 401.6: Add the following:
Multi family building and multi tenant commercial and industrial building shall have separate gas meter and piping system for each dwelling unit,
public area and tenant space.
Chapter 15 Referenced Standards.
ICC: Delete the following codes:
International private sewage disposal code - 2009.
International urban-wildland interface code - 2009.
International plumbing code: All references to the international plumbing code shall be changed to the Illinois plumbing code - 2004.
NFPA: All volumes of the national fire code with referenced standards and not the recommended practices. The most current edition on the date of
adoption of this ordinance.
The following appendices or sections of the appendices shall be adopted: A, B and C.
(Ord. O-27-10, 5-24-2010)
E. International Fire Code:
1. Code Adopted; Amendments: The international fire code, 2009 edition, as published in February 2009 by the International Code Council, Inc., is
adopted as the fire code of the village of Forest Park, Cook County, Illinois, for the control of properties, buildings and structures, fire hazards and
hazardous materials as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the international fire code,
2009 edition, are referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this subsection, with the additions, insertions, deletions and
changes as follows:
Section 101.1 Title (page 1): Insert in blank "the village of Forest Park".
Section 102.4 Application Of The Building Code: Add the following:
or the international existing building code.
Section 102.5 Historic Buildings: Add the following:
or the international existing building code.
Section 102.10: Add the following:
Other laws add the following: When there are conflicts between this code and any other code or standard adopted or referenced by this code or
other village of Forest Park codes, the stricter of the requirements shall apply.
Section 103.2 Appointment (page 2) shall read:
"The fire chief or his designate shall be the fire code official."
Section 202 Definition Of Fire Apparatus Access Road: Delete the term public street from the definition.
Delete sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.11 and insert:
All new buildings of any group shall require an automatic sprinkler system.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 260/416
Exception: Detached structures, which comply with all of the following, do not require automatic fire sprinklers:
1. Less than five hundred (500) square feet in area.
2. Single story.
3. Not used as a dwelling or sleeping unit.
4. Not an high hazard group.
5. Not used for high hazard products or hazardous materials.
6. No basements.
7. Minimum separation to other buildings 20 feet.
When a building has a change of use or is renovated and all of the following conditions occurs, it shall have a complete automatic sprinkler
system.
1. The wall and ceiling finish for more than 75% of the walls and ceilings is removed.
2. New walls are constructed which equal more than 75% of the existing wall and ceiling surface. The square footage of both sides is used
when both sides of the wall are exposed to the building interior.
3. The building renovation exceeds 75% of the replacement cost of the building. The Dodge report or the Means report are used to establish
construction and replacement costs.
4. The building or space has a total of more than 2,500 square feet.
Add new section:
Section 903.3.7 Outside Sprinkler Alarm Devices: The outside alarm device for fire sprinkler systems shall be a horn strobe in a location
approved by the fire department.
Add new section:
Section 903.3.8 Floor Plans: When any building has multiple risers on any floor a floor layout for the sprinkler system showing all sprinkler zones
shall be provided at the main sprinkler riser.
Add new section:
Section 903.3.9 Electric Vaults: The main service electric vault shall not require sprinkler protection with the following conditions:
1. The room shall be enclosed with two hour fire rated walls, floor and floor/ceiling assemblies. All doors shall have a 11/2 hour fire rating with
closers.
2. All other penetrations shall maintain the two hour fire rating.
3. The room shall not be used for storage.
4. The room shall have a floor drain.
This area without sprinkler will not eliminate any sprinkler design alternatives which would apply to a fully sprinklered building.
Section 905.3.8 Standpipes Where Required: Add the new section:
When the fire department hose lay from where the fire department establishes operations to any point in the building exceeds 150 feet a class I
standpipe system is required.
Section 907.2.24: Add the following:
Systems Out Of Service: Fire alarm systems shall be maintained in service at all times. Systems shall not be out of service for more than forty
eight (48) hours for maintenance or repair.
Section 1009.9 Spiral Stairways (page 130): Amend the first paragraph to read as follows:
"Spiral stairways are not permitted to be used as a component of means of egress within a dwelling unit. Spiral stairways (in other than
dwellings) are permitted to be used as a component of means of egress from a space not more than 250 square feet in area and serving not
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 261/416
more than five occupants, or from galleries, catwalks and gridirons in accordance with section 1014.6."
Section 1013.2 Height (page 135): Delete exception number 3.
Section 3204.2.9.6.1: Insert:
This applies to the municipality in its entirety.
Section 3206.2.4.4: Insert:
This applies to the municipality in its entirety.
Section 3506.2: Insert:
This applies to the municipality in its entirety.
Section 3804.2: Insert:
This applies to the municipality in its entirety.
Section 4603.5 Standpipes: Change 50 feet to 40 feet.
Section 4603.6.6: Group R-2 change automatic or manual to automatic and manual and change 16 dwelling units to ten (10) or more dwelling
units.
Delete exception #2
Section 4604.5.2 Exit Stair Illumination: All means of egress stairs in building which require emergency illumination shall have emergency
illumination in the means of egress stairways.
ICC: Delete the following codes:
International urban-wildland interface code - 2009.
International plumbing code: All references to the international plumbing code shall be changed to the Illinois plumbing code - 2004.
NFPA: All volumes of the national fire code with referenced standards and not the recommended practices. The most current edition on the date
of adoption of this ordinance.
The following appendices shall be adopted: A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, J.
(Ord. O-26-10, 5-24-2010)
F. International Existing Building Code:
1. Code Adopted; Amendments: The international existing building code, 2009 edition, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., is adopted
as the existing building code of the village of Forest Park, Cook County, Illinois, for the control of properties, buildings and structures as herein
provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the international existing building code, 2009 edition, are
referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes as follows:
Section 101.1 Title (page 1): Insert in blank "the village of Forest Park".
Section 103 (page 3): Delete "department of building safety" and insert "department of public health and safety".
Section 103.1 General (page 3) shall read:
"The department of public health and safety shall be responsible for the inspection and enforcement of this code. The director public health and
safety, or his designee shall be the code official responsible for the enforcement of this code."
Section 103.2 Appointments (page 3): Delete, "The code official shall be appointed by the chief appointing authority of the jurisdiction" and insert
"The code official shall be hired in accordance with the standard procedures of the village of Forest Park".
Section 108.2 Fees: Insert the village of Forest Park fee schedule.
Section 112 Means Of Appeal: Delete entire section. See the section on appeals in the building code.
Section 113.4 Violation Penalties: Insert the penalties from the village of Forest Park fee schedule.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 262/416
Section 1301.10: Add the following:
The assigned point value for the building shall not change or affect the local amendments in any of the adopted codes. A point value which
indicates code compliance without the required fire protection systems is not applicable and does not demonstrate code compliance.
NFPA: All volumes of the national fire code with referenced standards and not the recommended practices. The most current edition on the date of
adoption of this ordinance.
(Ord. O-24-10, 5-24-2010)
G. International Energy Conservation Code:
1. Code Adopted; Amendments: The international energy conservation code, 2009 edition, as published in February 2009 by the International Code
Council, Inc., is adopted as the energy conservation code of the village of Forest Park, Cook County, Illinois, for the control of properties, buildings
and structures as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the international energy
conservation code, 2009 edition, are referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this subsection, with the additions, insertions,
deletions and changes as follows:
Section 101.1 Title: Insert in blank "the village of Forest Park".
Chapter 104 Referenced Standards.
ICC: Delete the following codes:
International private sewage disposal code - 2009.
International plumbing code: All references to the international plumbing code shall be changed to the Illinois plumbing code - 2004.
(Ord. O-25-10, 5-24-2010)
H. International Property Maintenance Code:
1. Code Adopted; Amendments: The international property maintenance code, 2009 edition, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., is
adopted as the property maintenance code of the village of Forest Park in the state of Illinois, for the control of properties, buildings and structures as
herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the international property maintenance code, 2009
edition, are referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this subsection, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes as
follows:
Section 101.1 Title (page 1): Insert in blank "the village of Forest Park".
Section 103 (page 2): Delete "department of property maintenance inspection" and insert "department of public health and safety".
Section 103.1 General (page 2) shall read:
"The department of public health and safety shall be responsible for the inspection and enforcement of this code. The director public health and
safety, or his designee shall be the code official responsible for the enforcement of this code."
Section 103.2 Appointments (page 2): Delete, "The code official shall be appointed by the chief appointing authority of the jurisdiction" and insert
"The code official shall be hired in accordance with the standard procedures of the village of Forest Park."
Section 103.5 Fees: Insert the village of Forest Park fee schedule.
Section 106.4 Violation Penalties: Insert the penalties from the village of Forest Park fee schedule.
Section 111 Means Of Appeal: Delete entire section. See the section on appeals in the building code.
Section 302.4 Weeds: Insert 10 inches.
Section 404 Overcrowding: Delete the entire section and insert the following:
Section 404.5: Dwelling units shall not be occupied by more than permitted by the minimum area requirements of table 404.5.
Table 404.5
Minimum Area Requirements
Space
Minimum Area In Square Feet
1-2 Occupants 3-5 Occupants 6 Or More Occupants
Living rooma,b No requirements 120 150
Dining rooma,b No requirements 80 100
Bedrooms Shall comply with section 404.4
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 263/416
a. See section 404.5.2 for combined living room/dining room spaces.
b. See section 404.5.1 for limitations on determining the minimum occupancy area for sleeping purposes.
Section 404.5.1 Sleeping Area: The minimum occupancy area required by table 404.5 shall not be included as a sleeping area in determining the
minimum occupancy area for sleeping purposes. All sleeping areas shall comply with section 404.4.
Section 404.5.2: Combined living room and dining room spaces shall comply with the requirements of table 404.5 if the total area is equal to that
required for separate rooms if the space is located so as to function as a combination living room/dining room.
Section 602.2 Insect Screens: Insert April 1 and November 1.
Section 602.3: Insert October 1 to April 1.
Section 602.4: Insert October 1 to April 1.
Chapter 15 Referenced Standards.
ICC: Delete the following codes:
International plumbing code: All references to the international plumbing code shall be changed to the Illinois plumbing code - 2004.
International zoning code - 2009.
NFPA: All volumes of the national fire code with referenced standards and not the recommended practices. The most current edition on the date of
adoption of this ordinance.
The following appendices or sections of the appendices shall be adopted: A.
(Ord. O-29-10, 5-24-2010)
I. National Electric Code:
1. Code Adopted: The national electric code, 2008 edition, as published by the National Fire Protection Association, Inc., is adopted as the electric
code of the village of Forest Park in the state of Illinois, for the control of properties, buildings and structures electric systems as herein provided; and
each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the national electric code, 2008 edition, are referred to, adopted and
made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this subsection, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes as follows:
A certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the village clerk of the village of Forest Park, being marked and designated as the
NFPA 70 national electrical code, 2008 edition, as published by the National Fire Protection Association be and is hereby adopted as and shall be
known as the electrical code of the village of Forest Park, governing installations of electric conductors and equipment within or on public or private
building or other structures, including mobile homes, recreational vehicles, and floating buildings; and other premises such as yards, carnival,
parking, and other lots and industrial substations; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the NFPA 70
national electrical code, 2008 edition, are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes prescribed in this chapter. It shall be mandatory that all equipment, material, devices, and appliances covered by
the provisions of this code shall be tested and listed by a standard testing laboratory, of nationally accepted stature, which performs services equal
to, or greater than, in those performed by the Underwriters Laboratories, Inc. In those instances where it is impossible to receive such a listing or
label, the department of code administration shall make the determination of acceptability.
a. Definitions: As used in this subsection:
CODE OFFICIAL: The director of public health and safety or other designated authority charged with the administration and enforcement of this
code, or a duly authorized representative.
ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR: Any person, firm, or corporation engaged in the business of installing or altering by contract, electrical equipment
for the utilization of electricity supplied for light, heat, or power, not including apparatus, conductors, or other equipment installed for, or by, public
utilities, including common carriers which are under the jurisdiction of the Illinois commerce commission for use in their operation as public utilities;
but the term "electrical contractor" does not include employees employed by any person, firm, or corporation to supervise such work.
ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT: Conductors and equipment installed for the utilization of the electricity supplied for light, heat, or power, but does not
include radio apparatus or equipment for wireless reception of sounds and signals, and does not include apparatus, conductors and other
equipment installed for, or by, public utilities, including common carriers, which are under the jurisdiction of the Illinois commerce commission for
use in their operation as public utilities.
OWNER-OCCUPANT: Any person who is the owner and occupant of a single-family detached residence, not being used for any rental purposes,
where specific electrical work is to be done.
b. Department Of Code Administration: The department of public health and safety is responsible for enforcing the rules and regulations relating to
the installation and alteration and use of all electrical equipment, as herein provided.
c. Permits Required:
(1) Any person, firm or corporation installing or altering electrical equipment shall apply to the department of code administration for an electrical
permit. Electrical plans and specifications for proposed installation or alteration of multiple-family dwellings, commercial or industrial, must be
submitted to the department of public health and safety for approval and shall be sealed by a registered architect or professional engineer. The
approved plans shall be available on the job site at all times.
(2) Permits for work performed under this code may be issued only to registered electrical contractors or to the owner-occupant of single-family
detached residences doing their own work, except that all service installations and upgrades shall be done by registered electrical contractors.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 264/416
Electrical contractors shall furnish bona fide proof of their current electrical contractor's registration. Owners shall satisfy the prequalification
provisions of the city prior to being granted a permit.
(3) Work on rental property by other than registered and bonded contractors is not permitted.
(4) Contractors should apply for and secure permits rather than require the owner to do it.
(5) Homeowners that are issued a permit and that enlist the services of a contractor for help or assistance are required to use a registered and
bonded contractor.
(6) Permits for service upgrades or new services will only be issued to registered electric contractors.
(7) Work shall be defined as the installation of new conduit, tube, pipe, wiring system, replacement of wire within existing pipe, conduit or tubes,
installation of new wire or the replacement or enlargement of the service. It shall not include the replacement of a switch, receptacle or fixture.
d. Inspections Required:
(1) Electrical Work Inspected: Electrical work shall be inspected prior to being concealed or covered and upon completion. Failure to receive an
approved required inspection shall result in the uncovering or opening up for inspection at the direction of the code official. All safety and code
compliance of work performed shall be the continuing responsibility of the permit applicant. A final inspection approval is required by the village
of Forest Park. The permit shall be responsible for ensuring that a final inspection is completed by the village of Forest Park appropriate
inspector immediately upon completion of the permitted project. A permit which does not show any inspection to confirm continuing work for over
a six (6) month period, shall be considered expired. A renewal fee may be paid to extend the permit prior to its expiration.
(2) Service Installation Inspection: When a temporary or permanent service is installed, the applicant shall request an inspection. The code official
shall then notify the local utility upon approval of the work.
(3) Notice Of Approval: The department of public health and safety shall be notified eight (8) regular working hours in advance for service,
underslab, rough and final inspection. When the work has been approved, a notice of approval will be posted on or in the building.
(4) Required Electric Inspections: The following inspections are required and this text is to be used as a guide. There are potentially more
inspections to be performed however they are too numerous to list, so be sure to consult with the electric inspector and/or code official prior to
assuming or acting in such a manner as to conceal any work without approvals being provided.
Underground: Open trench - prepour - before backfill and/or concrete is poured. All conduits installed and properly supported.
A safe and hazard free means of access shall be provided to perform the electric underground inspections. A dry means shall be provided for
foot traffic to perform the electric underground inspections.
Service: Complete. Meter trim, main panel, service entrance conductors, grounding conductors, bonding conductors, bonding bushings, ground
rod, ground identification tags, conduit(s), conduit supports.
If the water meter is not installed at the time of service inspection, conduit shall be installed for water ground and cable shall be installed in said
conduit coiled up ready for installation when the water meter is installed.
A safe and hazard free means of access shall be provided to perform the electric service inspection. Basements shall be free of standing water
and mud. If this is not possible, a dry means shall be provided for foot traffic to perform the electric inspection.
Ceiling: Before ceiling tile or other ceiling finishes are applied (industrial and commercial).
Rough-In: A rough-in inspection is required after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place and all components to be concealed are
complete. No wires installed.
All conduit(s) shall be installed including the required conduit(s) for low voltage installations.
Final: All electric work complete and all devices connected, installed and functional.
All appliances are to be installed and functional.
Panels shall be labeled legibly and directory shall be affixed to the panel cover.
e. Reinspection Fees: Reinspection fees will be charged for any inspection that is not ready at seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. for A.M. inspections and
twelve o'clock (12:00) noon for P.M. inspections.
f. Adoption Of Local Utility Company Information And Requirements For The Supply Of Electric Service:
(1) Installations, Alterations And Use Of Equipment: The provisions of the rules and regulations regarding the installations, alterations, and use of
electrical equipment as last adopted by the electrical supply company now supplying the village are hereby made a part of this subsection. A
copy of such rules and regulations shall be on file in the department of code administration.
(2) Adoption Of Metering Sequences And Location Of Metering Equipment: The provisions of the rules and regulations regarding the installation,
alteration, and use of metering equipment as last adopted by the local utility company now supplying the city and identified as operating
instruction are, hereby, made a part of this subsection; a copy of such rules and regulations being now on file in the office of the department of
public health and safety.
g. Service Capacity And Equipment; All Occupancies:
(1) Minimum Service Capacity: The minimum service capacity for each dwelling unit shall be a one hundred (100) amp service with a minimum
twenty (20) branch circuit panel. Four (4) spaces for branch circuits shall be provided for future use. Split bus and tandem breakers are
prohibited. Panel schedules and load calculations shall be required for each installation.
(2) Means Of Disconnection: Where the disconnecting means is installed within a building it shall be located within five feet (5') of the point where
such conduit enters the building.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 265/416
(3) Service Entrance Conductors: Service entrance conductors shall be continuous (without splice), from service head to meter fitting and service
disconnecting means. Duplex service entrance conductors shall have an ampacity of two (2) #1 and one #2 copper conductors when one
service riser is used in an overhead installation. All single-family and duplex dwellings requiring separate riser installation shall have a minimum
service capacity of three (3) #3 copper conductors.
Note: Revision of services not requiring a change in service panel may continue the use of tandem breakers. All other revisions will conform to
new service requirements.
(4) Service Risers: Service risers shall be steel rigid metal conduit from service head to disconnecting means. Electrical metallic tubing may be
used for temporary services. Service risers shall be a minimum of one and one-fourth inches (11/4") in size and a minimum of two and one-half
inches (21/2") in size when used as a support for the service drop. Roof plates shall not be used as a service drop support.
(5) Panels: Panels shall be installed in each occupancy in newly constructed buildings. Each service main breaker must be marked so it is easily
identified as to which unit is being served, twenty (20) circuit minimum.
(6) Fittings: There shall be no junction or outlet boxes in a service run. Weathertight fittings shall be used in service runs from service head to
meter cabinets. Revision of services shall conform to new service requirements.
h. Grounding:
(1) Services shall be grounded to a metallic cold water pipe and to a supplementary electrode, as provided by the national electrical code. Where
this supplementary electrode is a ground rod, the rod shall be minimum five-eighths inch by eight feet (5/8" x 8') one piece copper clad or
stainless clad rod driven to a depth of at least nine feet six inches (9'6"). Where ground rods are used, there shall be one rod installed for
services up to four hundred (400) amps and two (2) rods installed for services larger than four hundred (400) amps with spacing between rods
as per the national electrical code. Ground rods for four hundred (400) amp and larger will be three-fourths inch by ten feet (3/4" x 10') long.
(2) Grounding to building fire sprinkler systems is prohibited.
(3) The grounding electrode conductor shall be an insulated copper conductor. This conductor shall be routed to avoid physical damage to the
conductor, and connected to street side of water meter. No projections of the ground rod shall be left above to present a hazard. Connection to
the ground rod shall be made using a listed direct burial "acorn" type connector (revised pipe clamp connectors should not be used on ground
rods).
(4) A bonding conductor shall be installed around the water meter and shutoff valves on all services.
(5) An equipment bonding jumper shall be used to connect the grounding terminal of a grounding type receptacle to a grounded box (NEC 250-
146, deleting exceptions A through D).
(6) Electrical continuity at service equipment where concentric or eccentric knockouts are used shall be assured by the use of bonding type
(grounding) buildings.
(7) All raceways in other than residential occupancies shall contain an insulated grounding conductor sized in accordance with the national
electrical code and bonded to all metallic boxes, wiring devices, motors, utilization equipment, and all devices requiring grounding.
(8) Spas, hot tubs, hydromassage bathtub pumps and equipment shall be bonded to the nearest continuous metallic cold water pipe. Their
dedicated circuits shall be GFCI.
i. Wiring Methods:
(1) The following wiring methods shall be prohibited. Delete the following articles:
Article 320 armored cable.
Article 322 flat cable assemblies: type FC.
Article 324 flat conductor cable: type FCC.
Article 326 integrated gas spacer cable: type IGS.
Article 328 medium voltage cable: type MV.
Article 330 metal clad cable: type MC.
Article 332 mineral insulated, metal sheathed cable: type MI.
Article 334 nonmetallic sheathed cable: types NM, NMC and NMS.
Article 336 power and control tray cable: type TC.
Article 338 service entrance cable: type SE and USE.
Article 340 underground feeder and branch circuit cable: type UF.
Article 352 rigid nonmetallic conduit: type RNC.
Article 353 high density polyethylene conduit: type HDPE.
Article 354 nonmetallic underground conduit with conductors: type NUCC.
Article 356 liquidtight flexible nonmetallic conduit: type LNFC.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 266/416
Article 360 flexible metallic tubing: type FMT.
Article 362 electrical nonmetallic tubing: type ENT.
Article 370 cablebus.
Article 378 nonmetallic wireways.
Article 382 nonmetallic extensions.
Article 388 surface nonmetallic raceways.
Article 394 concealed knob and tube wiring.
Article 396 messenger supported wiring.
Article 398 open wiring on insulators.
Article 604 manufactured wiring systems.
Chapter 9 table 5A.
Open wiring on insulators.
Delete the use of aluminum wiring throughout the code.
(2) When electric services are upgraded in existing residential occupancies, all new wiring in exposed areas shall be installed in conduit. Existing
flexible wiring methods concealed in walls may be exposed for a maximum of eighteen inches (18") in exposed areas in order to connect to the
new wiring system. Existing electrical systems which are of inadequate capacity shall be replaced with a new system or shall be supplemented
with new wiring and equipment, as necessary, to meet the requirements of these guidelines.
j. Outlet Boxes:
(1) An outlet box shall be installed for all types of outlets. All outlet boxes shall be metal and they shall provide at least the minimum free space for
the maximum number of wires indicated in the national electrical code. Boxes shall not be less than one and one-half inches (11/2") in depth
unless it would be impossible, owing to the construction of the building. Boxes shall be fitted with covers and/or plates to form a complete
enclosure. Unused and open knockouts shall be securely closed.
(2) All boxes shall be fully accessible in a manner to permit inspection or modification of wiring contained therein without removing any portion of
the structure of finished surfaces.
(3) All outlet boxes shall be independently and solidly supported from the structure. Raceways entering boxes shall not be construed as proper
support, nor shall the box be the support for the raceway.
(4) A four inch (4") square box shall be used with suitable flush cover as outlet demands. Should it be impossible, owing to construction of the
building, a single gem box with the depth not less than one and one-half inches (11/2") may be used, provided not more than one raceway
enters. Ganging of gem boxes is prohibited in new construction.
(5) A four inch (4") octagon box, minimum depth one and one-half inches (11/2"), may be used in unfinished basements or garages for lights,
commercial or industrial lighting, when using a four inch (4") porcelain light receptacle or swivel type cover with rigid conduit stem to the light
bulb socket, provided that not more than two (2) knockouts are used. A factory made assembly consisting of an octagon box may be used for
paddle fans where specifically designed for that purpose.
k. Fixtures And Outlets Required; Residential Occupancies:
(1) The minimum number of outlets for connection of permanent lighting fixtures and convenience receptacles in residential buildings shall be as
follows: a light shall be installed directly over every kitchen sink, bathroom lavatory, and utility sink in addition to the general lights in the room.
Stairways, halls, passageways, corridors, garages, patios, basements, and rooms accessible by more than entry or exit shall have a ceiling light
or outlet controlled by three-way or four-way switches, one lighting outlet for each three hundred (300) square feet, or fraction thereof, in
basements or cellars.
(2) All outlet receptacles shall be three (3) pole ground type and shall be installed so that no point along the floor line in any wall space is more
than six feet (6'), measured horizontally, from an outlet in that space including any wall space two feet (2') wide or greater, and the wall space
occupied by fixed panels in exterior walls. The receptacle outlets shall, insofar as practicable, be spaced equal distances apart. Floor
receptacles may be installed in each hallway, foyer, or stair landing. Outside receptacles shall be watertight (GFCI protected and the proper
cover over the cord connection) and approved receptacle to meet load requirement.
(3) Not less than one fixture or wall receptacle in each room shall be controlled by a wall switch adjacent to entry doors.
(4) An outside light fixture controlled by an interior switch or by photocell shall be installed at each entrance and porch.
(5) Garages, attached or detached, shall have switch controlled interior lighting. At least one easily accessible GFCI receptacle shall be provided in
each garage.
(6) Each clothes closet or storage area of six (6) square feet, or larger, shall have a ceiling light. Walk-in closets shall have a light controlled by a
wall switch.
(7) All new construction shall have at least one general lighting circuit for each five hundred (500) square feet of area, or fraction thereof.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 267/416
(8) Smoke detectors shall be installed in each sleeping room, outside of each separate sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of the bedrooms and
on each additional story of the dwelling, including basements and cellars but not including crawl spaces and uninhabitable attics.
(9) Carbon monoxide detectors in hallways by the bedrooms.
l. Conductors:
(1) The use of aluminum conductors is prohibited.
Exception: This shall not apply to temporary exterior overhead and direct burial wiring on construction sites covered by a current electrical
permit.
(2) All conductors shall be insulated and of a type approved for the purpose for which they are used.
Exception: Uninsulated conductors may be placed in the earth for purposes of forming a grounding grid.
(3) Conductors installed in raceways which are in concrete slabs or walls in direct contact with earth, fill, or are otherwise subject to excessive
moisture, shall have not less than type THWN, MTW, and AWM insulation.
(4) Connections of conductors to terminal parts shall be mechanically and electrically secure without damaging the conductors and shall be made
by means of pressure connectors (including set screw type), or splices to flexible leads either soldered, brazed, or welded, except that #8 AWG
or smaller conductors may be connected by means of clamps or screws with terminal plates having upturned lugs. Terminals for more than one
conductor shall be so listed.
(5) Conductors shall be so spliced or joined as to be mechanically and electrically secure. Joints must be soldered with a fusible metal or alloy,
brazed, or welded, unless an approved splicing device is used. Insulation piercing type splicing devices shall be prohibited. All splices and joints
and the free ends of conductors shall be covered with an insulation equal to that on the conductors. If the power supply wires to individual
fixtures are cut, then each separate free conductor (pigtail), a minimum length of six inches (6") each, shall be provided and such splices shall
conform to this section.
m. Overcurrent Protection:
(1) Except as may be specifically approved by the electrical inspector, each occupancy shall be provided with fuse or circuit breaker type branch
circuit overcurrent devices for the number of circuits as required to serve the minimum loads stated herein, except that for single-family
dwellings, the minimum shall not be less than one circuit for every three hundred fifty (350) square feet, or fraction thereof, of floor areas. The
floor area shall be computed from the outside dimensions of the building or area involved, including one-half (1/2) the area of basement,
enclosed porches, garages, and breezeways.
(2) Disconnects shall be installed within sight for all fractional horsepower motors, paddle fans, and water heating equipment. In commercial
occupancies, disconnects shall be installed for all water equipment.
(3) On new installations for buildings with new existing four hundred (400) amp or larger services, the permit applicant shall include load and fault
current calculations to show methods utilized which will ensure that the available fault current will not exceed the ratings of all devices and
equipment.
n. Underground Service:
(1) All detached structures requiring electrical service shall be served by underground conductors installed in an approved manner and shall be
protected against physical damage with a minimum three-fourths inch (3/4").
All existing residential garages must contain a minimum of one 15-amp circuit, with one lamp holder, one wall switch, and one GFCI receptacle.
All detached garages and/or outbuildings shall be supplied by an underground feeder only, using PVC or rigid conduit using minimum three (3)
no. 12 conductors, one of the three (3) shall be a green or bare conductor, the ground conductor shall be case grounded to the metal junction
box at each end, to ensure that the electric system of the garage or outbuilding is sufficiently grounded.
In addition, all new attached or detached garages shall have a separate circuit and one lamp holder per stall plus one ceiling receptacle located
for use of each electric door operator per door opening sized for automobiles.
o. Raceways Or Conduit:
(1) Approved Raceways: All interior installations or alterations shall be approved metal raceways. All raceways exposed to the weather shall be
rigid steel metal conduit with approved boxes and fittings. Rigid aluminum conduit can only be used by special written permission from the code
official.
(2) Raceways In Concrete: Rigid steel metal conduit, PVC coated steel conduit, floor duct, and PVC schedule 40 to 80 are the only acceptable
raceway types for use in concrete slabs if the slab is in any manner resting on, or contacting, the earth. Any permanently exposed risers
emerging from the concrete base or slab shall be rigid steel metal conduit.
(3) Underground Raceways: Rigid steel metal conduit, PVC coated steel conduit, and PVC schedule 40 or 80 are the only acceptable raceways
types for use underground. Direct burial cable methods shall be prohibited.
(4) Raceway Fittings: All raceway fittings, locknuts, bushings, couplings, or connectors shall provide secure mechanical and electrical joints.
(5) Bushings: Where a raceway enters a box or other fitting, an insulating bushing shall be used to protect the wires from abrasion unless the
design of the box or fitting is such as to afford equivalent protection.
(6) Classified Areas: Intermediate metal conduit shall not be allowed in hazardous classified areas.
(7) Temporary Services: Electrical metallic tubing shall be allowed for temporary services.
(8) Fasteners: All raceways shall be securely fastened by means of an approved electrical fastener to the building structure at least every ten feet
(10') and within three feet (3') of every box.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 268/416
p. Electric Signs: All wiring for permanent freestanding electrical signs and billboards shall be installed underground.
q. Conflicts With Other Provisions: When the provisions of this subsection conflict with any other provision of the village of Forest Park code
regulating the same subject matter, the more stringent or restrictive provision shall apply.
2. Amendments:
a. Requirements Service Upgrade Or Revision a/o Panel Upgrade Or Revision: All existing Greenfield, BX, Romex, knob & tube and the like entering
the new panel(s) shall be removed and replaced with properly sized, approved wire and installed in an approved conduit system.
(1) Removal and replacement of the above materials shall be taken back to a point where an approved spliced connection can be made without
the removal of finished walls or ceilings.
(2) All current service bonding and grounding codes shall apply to service and/or panel upgrades or revisions.
b. All panels for installations other than residential shall be bolt on breakers and absolutely no aluminum or clad materials shall be utilized. All bus
bars and the like shall be copper. All panel boards or distribution centers shall have a main breaker in each panel as well as any other required
disconnecting means. In all cases, panel boards, whether primary or secondary, shall have an internal main breaker sized accordingly.
All panel board installations that are installed below grade to a concrete or masonry wall shall be fastened to a moisture resistant sheet of plywood
or approved equivalent.
c. Notching:
(1) Floor joists, ceiling joist, roof truss, shall not be notched for any electrical installation of materials, equipment or "devices".
(2) Floor joists and/or ceiling joists may be drilled for the purpose of inserting a conduit system, however, it shall be noted that a minimum of two
inches (2") of wood shall be remaining on the bottom of said floor joists and/or ceiling joists when the conduit system installation is complete.
Any drilling shall be done in complete compliance with the specifications, plans and direction of the manufacturers' design engineer and such
documentation shall be provided to the code official as necessary. If, during any inspection review, any floor joists and/or ceiling joists are found
to be less than two inches (2") of wood remaining on the bottom of said construction materials, it shall be the responsibility of the electrical
contractor, or person(s) for which an electrical permit has been issued, to replace any floor joists and/or ceiling joists to the original construction
standards as set forth by the building codes as adopted by the village of Forest Park.
d. Requirements For Exit Lights And Emergency Lights:
(1) All exit signs and/or fixtures shall be a combination type, one hundred twenty (120) volt and a totally self-contained battery operated unit. All
new and replacement installations of exit signs devices shall be of LED type fixtures. All exit signs shall be internally illuminated units, which
shall consist of an approved LED illumination device, which shall operate one hundred twenty (120) volts and shall be capable of being operated
from the internal battery unit.
All exit signs, emergency egress lighting and the associated battery backup systems, are to be defined as components of emergency lighting
systems.
All circuit breakers utilized for the emergency system shall either be in a separate sub panel or an isolated, bottom right location, of the service
panel.
Lock out clamp on the breaker is mandatory.
Any wires that are associated with any current that supplies electric energy to any of the so defined emergency system shall be independently
piped from the source of power to the termination point. No other wires can occupy that raceway or any of its components except by written
permission of the building code official of the city.
(2) All exit signs and emergency lighting systems shall be battery operated, self contained units with a minimum of one and one-half (11/2) hour
operating period and shall be maintained at all times to provide this requirement.
(3) All wiring systems and/or circuiting installed for the purpose of the emergency system shall be installed in a separate conduit system and shall
be completely independent and separate system and shall not intermingle with any other circuiting and/or wiring system that does not pertain to
the said emergency system.
(4) There shall be a separated identified neutral conductor installed for each emergency lighting circuit and/or connected to any other electrical
device other than the dedicated emergency lighting circuit.
(5) The minimum size of the branch circuit conductors for the entire emergency lighting system and to include the exit lighting system shall be #12
AWG gauge wires size minimum.
(6) Breakers shall be used as the branch circuit protection device(s) of the emergency lighting system.
(7) All branch circuit breakers or branch circuit fuse devices installed for the branch circuit wiring and/or circuiting of the emergency systems shall
not exceed fifteen (15) amperes.
110.8 Wiring Methods. The provisions of the 2008 version of the national electrical code (NFPA 70) for this section are adopted and are further
amended by the adoption of the additional following language:
110.8 Wiring Methods.
(A) All branch circuit conductors shall be connected to receptacles, switches, by the means of a screw terminal(s) that are designed and/or
manufactured with the said device.
The insertion and/or installation of any conductor into the screw-less terminals of any electrical device shall not be the accepted method of
connection and/or installation of the conductor and will not be permitted.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 269/416
(B) All branch circuit conductors shall be "made up" and/or spliced in such a manner as to provide a single conductor to be connected and/or
installed to any electrical device screw terminal as the terminal(s) so designed and manufactured on receptacles, switches, fixtures, etc.
Note: In a typical wiring installation the branch circuit conductor and/or the grounded neutral conductor is required to be cut and/or have open ends
at the device, the conductors shall be spliced in such a manner as to provide a "pigtail" to properly attach and/or install the branch circuit conductor
and/or the grounded neutral conductor to the said device.
(C) The continuity of any branch circuit conductor including any identified grounded neutral conductor shall not depend upon device connections,
such as lamp holders, receptacles, etc., where the removal of such devices would interrupt the continuity.
(D) No more than one (1) conductor shall be connected and/or installed to a single screw terminal on any electrical device.
110.9 Interrupting Rating (Circuit Breakers). The provisions of the 2008 version of the national electrical code (NFPA 70) for this section are adopted
and are further amended by the adoption of the additional following language:
110.9 Interrupting Rating (Circuit Breakers).
(A) All circuit breakers shall be fully sized in dimensions and for proper insertion into the panel board, as set forth by the switchboard and panel
board manufacturer and as listed by a recognized laboratory. Substitution in a space designed or previously occupied by a lesser number shall
not be approved; (this includes tandem or duplex circuit breakers.)
(B) The application and/or installation of connecting more than one (1) conductor to a circuit breaker terminal or a fuse holder terminal shall not
be approved.
(C) In wiring installation where it is required to install parallel sets of conductors, each conductor shall be connected and/or attached to a lug or
terminal so designed or sized as to accept not more than one (1) conductor.
(D) Commercial/Industrial: All branch circuit breakers including circuit breakers used for feeders and/or sub-feeders shall be of the bolt on type.
(E) Exception: Existing residential dwellings that may conduct and/or convert a portion of said dwelling for day care services, may be permitted
to utilize the existing wiring system and related branch circuiting in said dwelling, provided that said systems is in full compliance with other
sections of this code, including bringing all existing non-complying systems to current requirements.
210.8 Ground-Fault Circuit-Interrupter Protection For Personnel. The provisions of the 2008 version of the national electrical code (NFPA 70) for this
section are adopted and are further amended by the adoption of the additional following language:
210.8 Ground Fault Circuit-Interrupter Protection For Personnel. GFCI protection for personnel - Note: All GFCI circuits shall be limited to
being contained within the room or space of which they are required.
210.8(A)(1) shall further require that when a GFCI or any receptacle protected by a GFCI circuit is installed, it shall not be within 24" of a tub,
shower or whirlpool fixture unless separated by walls.
210.8(A)(6) shall be further modified to require when there are three or more outlets/receptacles along any kitchen counter top, the outlets shall be
wired in such a fashion as to provide a minimum of two separate circuits and such circuits shall be located at alternating locations along the
counter top.
210.11(C) Dwelling Units. The provisions of the 2008 version of the national electrical code (NFPA 70) for this section are adopted and are further
amended by the adoption of the additional following language:
210.11(C) Dwelling Units.
(3) Bathroom Branch Circuits.
In addition to the number of branch circuits required by other parts of this section, each and every residential bathroom shall have a separate 20-
ampere circuit per bathroom to supply bathroom receptacle outlet(s). Such circuits shall have no other outlets.
General lighting for residential bathrooms shall be independent from GFCI or AFCI protected circuits.
Exception: Lights approved for the purpose directly over spas, whirlpools, steam rooms, showers, bathtubs and the like are required and shall
be permitted to be supplied by the GFCI protected receptacle outlet circuit from the load side.
(4) Four 20 amp appliance branch circuits shall be added to the dwelling unit kitchen. One for each of the following:
1. Refrigerator, 2. Microwave 3. Disposal and 4. Dishwasher. These circuits shall not be connected to any other power-consuming device.
Note: Where additional refrigeration equipment (such as freezers, wire coolers etc.) is installed, an additional dedicated twenty - (20) amp
rated circuit shall be installed for each appliance.
(5) All permanently installed automatic dishwashers shall be "hard" wired with the use of electrical metallic tubing and a minimum of three
eighths (3/8") trade size flexible metal conduit, which said flexible conduit shall not exceed six feet (6') in length.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 270/416
Each permanently installed automatic dishwasher shall have an approved disconnecting means for the purpose of disconnecting the
ungrounded conductors. The disconnecting means shall be a minimum of twenty (20) ampere rated. There shall be a green ground wire
installed in this wiring system.
The disconnecting means shall be installed on the wall of the building structure or on the wall within the circuit and in the immediate vicinity of
the automatic dishwasher appliance as approved by the building code official and/or electrical inspector. Disconnecting means installed within
the cabinet and the immediate vicinity of the automatic dishwasher shall be mounted on a vertical wall. Disconnecting means mounted
horizontally (bottom of said cabinet) will not be accepted.
Disconnect switch for garbage disposal shall be no more than three (3) feet from centerline of disposal unit. A listed "button" type switch may be
used on the backsplash if no wall space is available with the approval of the building official or electrical inspector.
(6) Laundry equipment (such as electric dryers) and electric cooking appliances (such as stoves, ranges, cook tops) that require two hundred
and twenty (220/240) volts for operations shall be installed on separate and dedicated branch circuits. Said dedicated circuit(s) shall not be
connected to and/or serve any other electrical device, appliance, and/or equipment. Said circuit shall be independently piped from source to
termination.
Note: The tapping of conductors and/or alteration or de-rating of any dedicated two hundred and twenty (220/240) volt circuit conductor for the
purpose of supplying electricity to operate any one hundred and twenty (120) volt device shall not be permitted and will not be accepted.
An identified neutral conductor shall be installed with all branch circuit conductors that operate at one hundred and twenty (120) or two hundred
and forty (240) volts between conductors and said neutral conductor shall be sized equal to the rating of said branch circuit conductors.
210.52(D) Bathrooms. Amend this section as follows:
210.52(D) Bathrooms And Powder Rooms.
(1) In dwelling units, at least one wall receptacle outlet shall be installed in bathrooms and powder rooms adjacent to the basin location.
(2) An approved exhaust fan shall be installed in each bath-room. The plumbing and/or building inspector - having jurisdiction shall approve the
methods of exhausting the bathroom to outside air.
Note - Each bathroom and/or rooms that are required to be ventilated by an electrically operated mechanical means (such as by the use of an
approved exhaust fan) shall be controlled by a wall switch. The switching device shall not control and/or operate any other device than the
mechanical exhaust device and/or system. The light of the same unit shall be switched separately.
(3) Switches to control the proper operation of the exhaust fan(s) and/or receptacles shall not be located and/or installed immediately adjacent to
and/or directly over any sink and shall not be located and/or installed within two (2) feet of shower stalls, bath tubs, whirlpools, etc.
210.52(E) Dwelling Units. The provisions of the 2008 version of the national electrical code (NFPA 70) for this section are adopted and are further
amended by the adoption of the additional following language:
210.52(E) Outdoor Outlets.
(1) A minimum of one (1) switched out of door weatherproofed duplex receptacle shall be installed and suitably located at the exterior, front and in
the rear of a single family dwelling, apartment unit and/or apartment complex, condominium, townhouse, multifamily structures, etc. In all
screened/three season or other recreational rooms attached to any building there shall be GFCI protection for all outlets, interior or exterior.
Note: Weatherproofed duplex receptacles installed on the front and rear of an apartment unit and/or apartment complex or condominium for
general maintenance purposes may not be required to be switched.
(2) A minimum of one (1) out of door weatherproofed duplex receptacle shall be installed and suitably located on the exterior of any directly
connected porch, patio, balcony, sun room, screened porch or any similar type structure.
210.70(A)(2)(d) Add new section as follows:
210.70(A)(2)(d) Basement Illumination.
(i) A minimum of one (1) switched lighting fixture shall be installed in the immediate area of the top and bottom stair tread of all staircases that
lead to any basement areas.
(ii) The switch devices that are required to control both upper and lower lighting fixtures shall be installed at readily accessible locations of the
staircase.
Note: Said lighting fixtures as noted above may be relocated because of the stair case layout where it may be necessary to provide sufficient
illumination on the general stair tread areas as deemed necessary by the building code official and/or the electrical inspector.
(iii) Panel boards that are installed in basement areas shall have a minimum of one (1) lighting fixture installed within three feet (3') of the panel
board cover. Such light shall not be placed upon the other circuits within the basement. It can be placed upon the circuit for the required outlet at
the panel.
(iv) A minimum of one (1) lighting fixture shall be installed within four feet (4') of the furnace and/or heating systems that are installed in
basement areas.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 271/416
(v) A minimum of one (1) lighting fixture shall be installed over any laundry tub or laundry equipment that is located and/or installed in any
basement area.
Note: In installations where the lighting fixture (as required above) are located in areas where the illumination is obstructed by ducts, beams,
etc., said lighting fixtures may require relocation and/or lighting fixtures may be required as per the electrical inspector approval.
(vi) In addition to the lighting fixtures as required there shall be additional lighting installed to provide a minimum of one (1) foot candle of
illumination per square foot throughout the entire basement area.
(vii) The entire basement lighting scheme shall not be connected to one (1) individual circuit or phase. The lighting fixtures shall be evenly
divided and/or separated as to be connected to more than one (1) individual circuit and on different phases.
210.70(E) Add new section as follows:
210.70(E) Outdoor Lighting Fixtures.
(1) A minimum of one (1) out of door weatherproofed lighting fixture shall be installed on the exterior of the structure at each of the front, rear
and side entrances to any single family dwelling, condominium, apartment unit and/or complex, townhouse type structure and multifamily type
structure. They shall be switched from within the main building structure of the dwelling complex, apartment unit or townhouse etc.
(2) A minimum of one (1) switched out of door weatherproofed lighting fixture shall be installed on the exterior of all structures such as patios,
balconies, sun rooms and screened in porch for the purpose of providing illuminations in the immediate area of the entrance and/or exit to these
areas.
(3) Switching devices that are required for these exterior lighting fixtures shall be in a readily accessible location, within the building not to
exceed two (2) feet from the entrance and/or exit areas of the residential structure.
Note: Where the switching device(s) is installed in rooms and/or areas that may be subject to weather conditions it shall be installed in a
weatherproofed enclosure. And - out of doors lighting fixtures that are installed in an apartment unit and/or apartment complex, condominium, or
a multi-family type structure may not be required to be switched providing that said lighting fixtures are controlled by a photo cell or timing device
and the circuit(s) originate from a public panel board.
210.70(F) Add new section as follows:
210.70(F) Fixtures Over Sinks.
(1) A switched lighting fixture is required and shall be installed over any kitchen sink(s), bathroom sink(s), etc.
Note: A switching device that is installed and/or manufactured in any lighting fixture shall not be approved as the required switching
arrangement.
(2) An approved switching device to control the operation of said lighting fixtures shall be located and/or installed in the wall a minimum of twelve
(12) inches and a maximum of twenty-four (24) inches from the end line of any kitchen and/or bathroom sink(s).
(3) Switches to control the operation of lighting fixtures and/or any other electrically operated device shall not be located and/or installed within
two feet (2) of shower stalls, bath tubs, whirlpools, etc.
210.70(G) Add new section as follows:
210.70(G) Commercial/Industrial Outlets.
(1) In all commercial and industrial buildings, a minimum of one switched lighting fixture shall be required for any office, ware-house area, sales
area, etc.
Note: Where an office and/or warehouse area has more than one entrance and/or exit, three way switching shall be installed.
Exception: Switched lighting fixtures may not be required providing sufficient illumination is maintained from unswitched lighting fixtures that are
served from dedicated night lighting circuits. Said lighting circuit shall have a lock out device installed on the circuit breaker.
(2) All switching devices installed in any commercial and/or industrial structure, shall be a minimum of twenty (20) ampere rated.
210.70(H) Add new section as follows:
210.70(H) Special Use Rooms. In all utility rooms, furnace rooms, refrigeration equipment rooms, areas housing electrical equipment, fire pump
rooms, emergency generators, mechanical system rooms, etc. the lighting circuit serving said rooms shall be on a separate circuit from all other
circuits in said rooms.
210.70(I) Add new section as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 272/416
210.70(I) Potential Sleeping Quarters. In all residential applications, any rooms, bonus rooms, loft or spare room that can be easily utilized as a
sleeping room, whether temporary or permanent other than walk in closets of less than 70 square feet, as deemed by a code official shall comply
with all applicable codes including smoke alarm protection.
210.70(J) Add new section as follows:
210.70(J) Central Vacuum Systems. Central vacuum systems electrical contact points providing power to vacuum attachments shall be 24 volts
or less.
210.70(K) Add new section as follows:
210.70(K) Switched Receptacles. Switched receptacles in residential applications shall be identified at the receptacle with a factory installed
marking.
Prior to any service work being performed, contact Commonwealth Edison or your electrical energy supplier for their rules and regulations.
Figure 230.1 Services. The provisions of the 2008 version of the national electrical code (NFPA 70) for this section are adopted and are further
amended by the adoption of the additional following language:
Figure 230.1 Services. The load on any service entrance conductor, main service disconnect switchgear and panel boards shall not exceed
eighty (80) percent of the rating of the service entrance conductor or the main service disconnect means, switchgear or panel boards.
A 100 amp service shall have 3 #3 copper conductors installed in 11/4 inch heavy wall with a #8 copper ground in 1/2 inch EMT.
A 200 amp service shall have 3 #2-0 copper conductors installed in 2 inch heavy wall with a #4 copper ground in 3/4 inch EMT.
230.2 Services. Amend this section as follows:
230.2 Services. Where more than one set of service conductors is permitted by approval of the authority having jurisdiction, or in any existing prior
to the adoption of the code, a permanent plaque and/or diagram mounted in a plexiglas enclosure shall be installed at each service drop or lateral
or at each service equipment location designating all other services on or in that building or structure.
(A) Special Conditions. Additional services shall be permitted to supply the following:
(1) Fire pumps.
(2) Emergency systems.
(3) Legally required standby systems.
(4) Optional standby systems.
(5) Parallel power production systems.
(6) Systems designed for connection to multiple sources of supply for the purpose of enhanced reliability.
(B) Special Occupancies. By special permission, additional services shall be permitted for either of the following:
(1) Multiple occupancy buildings where there is no available space for service equipment accessible to all occupants.
(2) A single building or other structure sufficiently large to make two or more services necessary.
(C) Capacity Requirements. Additional services shall be permitted under any of the following:
(1) Where the capacity requirements are in excess of 2,000 amperes at a supply voltage of 600 volts or less.
(2) Where the load requirements of a single-phase installation are greater than the serving agency normally supplies through one service.
(3) By special permission.
(D) Different Characteristics. Additional services shall be permitted for different voltages, frequencies, or for different uses, such as for different
rate schedules.
(E) Identification. Where a building or structure is supplied by more than one service, or any combination of branch circuits, feeders, and
services, a permanent plaque or directory shall be installed at each service disconnect location denoting all other services, feeders, and branch
circuits supplying that building or structure and the area served by each. See 225.37.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 273/416
(F) Multiple Services. No single family residential occupancy or property shall have more than one (1) service installed. No exceptions.
(Ord. O-31-10, 5-24-2010)
J. Illinois Plumbing Code:
1. Code Adopted: The current edition of the Illinois state plumbing code (77 Ill. adm. code 890) promulgated by the Illinois department of public health
is hereby adopted as the plumbing code of the village of Forest Park, to establish regulations for the minimum control of plumbing materials and
fixtures, and for the design, construction and installation of plumbing systems in the village, and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
conditions, and terms of the Illinois state plumbing code, promulgated by the Illinois department of public health are hereby referred to, adopted, and
made a part hereof, as if fully set forth in this section as amended by the local amendments set forth in subsection J2 of this section.
2. Amendments:
Required Use Of WaterSense Products. Pursuant to 17 Ill. admin. code 3730.307(c)(4) and subject to the Illinois plumbing code (77 Ill. admin.
code 890) and the lawn irrigation contractor and lawn sprinkler system registration code (77 Ill. admin. code 892), be it hereby ordained that in the
village of Forest Park, all new and replacement plumbing fixtures and irrigation controllers installed after September 30, 2015 shall bear the
WaterSense label (as designated by the U.S. environmental protection agency WaterSense program), when such labeled fixtures are available.
(Ord. O-27-15, 10-26-2015)
K. Illinois Accessibility Code:
1. Code Adopted: The Illinois accessibility code, 1997 edition, as published in 1997 by state of Illinois, is adopted as the accessibility code of the village
of Forest Park in the state of Illinois, for the control of accessibility to buildings and structures as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the Illinois accessibility code, 1997 edition, are referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully
set out in this subsection. (Ord. O-22-10, 5-24-2010)
8-1-2: RESERVED:
(Ord. O-23-10, 5-24-2010)
8-1-3: BUILDING CODE VIOLATIONS:
The provisions of the state of Illinois, designated as 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-31.1 et seq., entitled "building code violations", as from time to time
amended, is hereby adopted by reference, and any person charged with a building code violation pursuant to any applicable village ordinance or state law
may be prosecuted under and in accordance with the provisions thereof. (Ord. O-14-99, 6-14-1999)
8-1-4: HABITABLE BUILDINGS:
It shall be unlawful to maintain, occupy or use any building, structure, or part thereof, that has been erected, or altered, in violation of the provisions of the
building code of the village. No building or structure shall be occupied unless it is in a safe and habitable condition, as prescribed by this code. (Village
code § 10-4)
8-1-5: CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS AND PROCESSES:
Nothing in this Code shall be construed to prevent the use of any material, or method of construction, whether or not specifically provided for in this Code.
If, upon presentation of plans, methods of analysis, test data or other necessary information to the Director of Public Health and Safety, the Director of
Public Health and Safety is satisfied that the proposed material or method of construction, complies with the specific provisions of, or conforms to the
intent of this Code. (Village Code § 10-5; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
8-1-6: CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE:
A. Required:
1. The ownership or interest in any structure or building shall not be sold or transferred unless the seller furnishes the buyer with a certificate of
compliance based on an inspection of said structure made within four (4) months of the date of any contract for sale or transfer of ownership or
interest.
2. The certificate of compliance must state that the building complies with all applicable building and zoning regulations of the Village, or if the property
is in noncompliance with the building and/or zoning regulations, the nature of that noncompliance.
3. By virtue of the issuance of said certificate of compliance, the Village does not guarantee the subject premises to be free from mechanical, electrical
or structural defects, and the Village shall not be responsible or liable for any claims arising from such defects.
4. The inspection fee for such inspection made at the request of any buyer, seller or real estate broker shall be at the rate schedule set forth in
subsection 8-2-3I of this title, payable in advance at the time of the request.
A single reinspection to assure compliance is included in the initial fee. If an additional reinspection is required, the fee shall be forty dollars ($40.00)
per inspection.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 274/416
B. Temporary Certificate: In the event that a certificate of compliance is not issued after completion of the inspection by the Department of Health and
Safety, an owner may sell, transfer or convey improved real property upon issuance of a temporary certificate of compliance upon completion of the
following subsections:
1. Deposit of one hundred dollars ($100.00) with the Village as a prepaid reinspection fee after the abatement of all violations;
2. Written confirmation on the part of the buyer, grantee or transferee certifying to the Village that such buyer, grantee or transferee has assumed the
obligation to abate all violations of the Municipal Code within four (4) months of the issuance of the temporary certificate of compliance. (Ord. O-21-
17, 7-24-2017)
C. Violation; Penalty: A person who participates in a sale or transfer in violation of this section as a seller, buyer or agent shall be fined no less than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) and no more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for such offense. (Ord. O-17-01, 3-26-2001)
8-1-7: OFF STREET PARKING SPECIFICATIONS1:
A. All off street parking areas shall have access and egress.
B. All open off street parking areas, except the single parking space accessory to a single-family dwelling, shall be paved and have a dust free surface.
The minimum requirement standards for an open off street parking area pavement shall be a six inch (6") thick crushed stone base surfaced with a
minimum thickness of two inches (2") of bituminous concrete. If the pavement is to be concrete, it shall have a minimum thickness of six inches (6")
and shall be laid upon a two inch (2") thick cushion of crushed stone.
C. The surface drainage from an open off street parking area shall be in such manner as not to overflow onto adjoining property. Open off street parking
areas covering less than one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet may have their surface drainage discharge across public sidewalks onto public
rights-of-way. Off street parking areas covering less than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet may have their surface drainage discharge
onto public alleys. Open off street parking areas that exceed these limitations shall have their surface drainage contained within their paved areas and
removed by means of drainage structures and storm sewers. Where storm sewers must connect to the existing village combined sewer system, the
connection shall be preceded by a catch basin structure having a half trap device on its outlet pipe and a flow restrictor in its inlet pipe. The sizing of the
flow restrictor shall be based upon the metropolitan water reclamation district of Greater Chicago (MWRDGC) stormwater detention requirements and
all storm sewer installations shall be in compliance with the MWRDGC requirements for storm sewer installed within combined sewer areas. (Ord. O-
19-94, 10-10-1994)
8-1-8: CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS:
A. Definitions: The following definitions shall apply to this section:
CERTIFICATE OF CODE COMPLIANCE: A written instrument issued by the village as evidence of a condominium's compliance with applicable
housing code standards of the village.
CODE INSPECTION REPORT: A written report issued by the village as evidence that all units and common elements in a condominium project have
been inspected for compliance with applicable housing code standards of the village.
PROPERTY REPORT: A property report required by this section and in accordance with the Illinois condominium property act2. (Village code § 10-15)
B. Contents Of Property Report: At least thirty (30) days prior to closing a sales contract on any condominium unit in a condominium project, a developer
shall furnish purchaser with a property report and shall certify by affidavit that all disclosures are true to the best of his knowledge and belief. Said
report shall be furnished to prospective buyer and contain at least the following information about the condominium project:
1. A statement indicating the name and address of the developer of the condominium property.
2. A plat of survey showing the size and dimensions of the condominium property.
3. A floor plan of the condominium unit offered for sale.
4. A report from a professional engineer or architect, licensed by the state of Illinois, describing the condition and expected useful life of the following
structural elements:
a. Roof.
b. Foundation.
c. External and supporting walls.
d. Mechanical, electrical, plumbing, heating and structural elements.
e. All other common facilities.
To the extent possible, all said descriptions shall be provided together with an estimate of repair and replacement costs at current market prices for
those elements which need repair or replacement.
C. Conversion Notification Requirements: No less than one hundred twenty (120) days prior to recording the declaration submitting a property to the
provisions of the Illinois condominium property act, a developer shall give notice of said intent to record to all persons who are tenants of the property
on the date notice is given. (Ord. O-23-79, 10-22-1979)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 275/416
8-1-9: SATELLITE ANTENNAS:
A. Permit Required: No satellite antenna shall be located, constructed or installed in the village without a permit being issued therefor. A "satellite antenna"
is described as any reflector used to receive microwave impulses. It is also referred to herein as a "dish".
B. Area Restrictions: No satellite antenna shall be permitted in an area zoned low density residential district, medium density residential district or high
density residential district3 unless:
1. The possession of the antenna is permitted by applicable law.
2. If the antenna consists of a dish, the dish shall be the least size required for reception, not exceed eleven feet (11') in diameter and be mounted on a
concrete base. The dish shall not exceed fifteen feet (15') in height from the concrete base. The mounting of a dish shall not be permitted on a
structure of any kind.
3. Construction shall conform to all village ordinances.
4. Not more than one such dish shall be installed on any lot of record.
5. The dish shall be located on the rear of the lot but not within the rear or side yard requirements; the color and structural quality shall blend with
existing use of the property and adjacent properties and be screened by landscaping. All electrical connections shall be Underwriters Laboratory
approved and the current shall be of low voltage.
C. Requirements: In all other zoned districts a satellite antenna shall not be permitted unless:
1. The possession of the antenna is permitted by applicable law.
2. If the antenna consists of a dish, the dish shall be the least size required for reception.
3. Construction shall conform to all village ordinances.
4. Not more than one such dish shall be installed on any lot of record.
5. In the case of the property abutting a residential district, the dish shall be located on the rear of the lot but not within the rear or side yard
requirements.
6. The color and structural quality of the dish shall blend with existing use of the property and adjacent properties, if it abuts a residential district, and be
screened by landscaping. All electrical connections shall be Underwriters Laboratory approved and the current shall be of low voltage.
D. Permit Application: A permit for the installation of an antenna shall be issued by the building department upon presentation of an application,
compliance with this section and the permit fee as set forth from time to time by the village council4. Applications shall be accompanied by sufficient
documentation to demonstrate compliance, with the provisions of this section.
E. Variations: Variations in the application of this section may be granted by the zoning board of appeals as in the cases of procedures for variations from
the zoning ordinance of the village. (Ord. O-16-84, 12-17-1984)
8-1-10: HOUSE NUMBERING:
A. Requirements: All buildings and structures in the village shall be numbered in accordance with the chart, including the numbers of lots, maintained in
the office of the director of public health and safety. (Village code § 2-23; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
B. Display Of Numbers: It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant of a building or structure in the village to post numbers, visible from the street, in
figures at least two and one-half inches (21/2") high indicating the number of the building or structure. (Village code § 2-24)
8-1-11: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS:
A. Sewer Areas, Downspouts And Drains:
1. Combined Sewers: In buildings located in areas served by combined storm and sanitary sewers, the following regulations are applicable:
a. Downspouts: All downspouts or roof drains shall discharge onto the ground or be connected to storm or combined sewers. No downspouts or roof
drains shall be connected to the sanitary sewer.
b. Footing Drains: Footing drains shall be connected to sump pumps and discharge shall be made into storm sewers, combined sewers or drainage
ditches. No footing drains or drainage tile shall be connected to the sanitary sewer. (Ord. O-6-71, 7-12-1971)
c. Transfer To New Storm Sewer: In the event that a separate storm sewer system is constructed in an area, all existing stormwater drainage
systems (downspouts, footing drains, inlets/gutters, etc.) that currently discharge to the combined sewer system shall be directed to the new storm
sewer within twenty four (24) months.
d. Separate Connection Provided: Any new construction or renovation of a building that discharges to the combined sewer system shall provide
separate connections for domestic waste and direct stormwater inflow sources to facilitate disconnection, in the event that a storm sewer becomes
available. (Ord. O-19-06, 3-27-2006)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 276/416
2. Separate Sewers: In buildings located in areas served by separate storm and sanitary sewers, the following regulations are applicable:
a. Downspouts: All downspouts or roof drains shall discharge onto the ground or be connected to a storm sewer. No downspouts or roof drains shall
be connected to the sanitary sewer.
b. Footing Drains: Footing drains shall be connected to sump pumps, and discharge shall be made into storm sewers or drainage ditches. No footing
drains or drainage tile shall be connected to the sanitary sewer. (Ord. O-6-71, 7-12-1971)
B. Family Fallout Shelters:
1. Permit Required; Fee: No person shall construct a family fallout shelter upon private property unless a permit shall have been issued therefor. The
permit shall be issued without fee to the applicant, provided the plans for said family fallout shelter in all respects comply with the standards set forth
in this Code. (Village Code §§ 12-13, 12-17)
2. Application: Application for a permit required under this section shall be made to the Director of Public Health and Safety on forms provided by said
Director. Such application shall be accompanied by plans and specifications subject to approval of the Director of Public Health and Safety and the
Fire Chief. (Village Code § 12-14; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
3. Construction: Family fallout shelters shall comply with the minimum standards set forth by the Office of Civil Defense and mobilization in publication
designated as MP-15, dated June 1959, reprinted November 1960, and publication designated NP-10-2 entitled "Guide for Architects and Engineers"
dated May 1960. (Village Code § 12-15)
4. Use: Family fallout shelter shall be used for the sole purpose of protection from fallout during a national emergency and for no other purpose.
(Village Code § 12-16)
8-1-12: TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP:
A. Inspection And Issuance Of Certificate Of Compliance:
1. Inspection Request: When an owner, or any person acting on his behalf, offers to sell or transfer the ownership of any residential or nonresidential
building, condominium or apartment, he shall complete a request for inspection and submit the same to the Village Building Department. The request
for inspection must be submitted to the Building Department at least ten (10) working days prior to the date scheduled for closing.
2. Code Compliance: Upon receipt of such request for inspection, the Building Department shall cause an inspection to be made of the subject property
to determine compliance with all applicable codes including, but not limited to, the Village's building and zoning regulations, Electrical and Plumbing
Codes, as well as all incorporated national codes.
3. Certificate Issued: If such property passes inspection, a certificate of compliance shall be issued to the owner. If such property does not pass
inspection in one or more areas, the Director of Public Health and Safety or his designee shall issue a written order of correction to the owner,
specifying the violations which exist for that particular property. Upon the correction of all defects and following reinspection by the Village, a
certificate of compliance shall be issued.
4. Fees:
a. The inspection fee schedule is set forth in subsection 8-2-3I of this title.
b. One follow up inspection is included in the original inspection fee, if required. For each additional reinspection that is required, the fee shall be
one-half (1/2) the original inspection fee.
c. For a mixed use building, a combination of fees shall apply.
5. Transfer Prohibited: It is unlawful for any owner or person acting on his behalf to sell or transfer the ownership of a building within the Village without
complying with this section prior to closing.
6. No Guarantee: The issuance of a certificate of compliance, as delineated above, is in no way a guarantee that said property is free from mechanical,
electrical, structural or other defects, and the Village is not responsible or liable for any claims or actions arising from such defects.
7. Term: The certificate of compliance once issued shall be valid for four (4) months or unless otherwise extended by the Village Administrator or his
designee.
B. Conditional Certificate Of Compliance:
1. A conditional certificate of compliance may be issued in lieu of a certificate of compliance if the following conditions are met:
a. Payment of a one hundred fifty dollar ($150.00) administrative fee if the estimated cost of repairs does not exceed one thousand five hundred
dollars ($1,500.00). If the estimated cost of repairs exceeds one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) a fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00)
shall be required. After successful remediation of items noted on the conditional certificate of occupancy, three hundred dollars ($300.00) will be
returned to the holder of the conditional certificate.
b. Written agreement between the seller and the buyer or transferee and the Village certifying that such buyer or transferee has agreed to correct
any and all violations, as specified in the agreement, within three (3) months of the sale or transfer of ownership of the subject property.
2. The issuance of such conditional certificate of compliance is wholly within the discretion of the Building Department.
3. It shall be unlawful for any person to purchase or be transferred ownership of any building in violation of this section.
C. Document Review And Stamp:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 277/416
1. Submission Of Documents: The ownership of, or ownership interest in, any building in the Village shall not be sold or otherwise transferred unless
the seller or agent of the seller provides to the Village Clerk a copy of the original deed and document of transfer of ownership.
2. Stamp Required: The Village Clerk shall provide a property compliance stamp which is to be affixed upon the original deed or document prior to
recording same if the subject property has passed the required inspection and obtained a certificate of compliance, or conditional certificate of
compliance as provided above, and the seller, buyer, transferor or transferee, as the case may be, has paid any and all fines, fees or penalties owed
to the Village in connection with the subject property. (Ord. O-21-17, 7-24-2017)
D. Procedural Rules:
1. The Village Administrator or his designee is charged with establishing procedural rules and regulations necessary to effectuate the purposes of this
section.
2. The Village Administrator may, from time to time, raise inspection fees as necessary to cover administrative and enforcement costs.
E. Penalties: Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be fined no less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation. (Ord. O-01-02, 1-14-2002)
Chapter 2
BUILDING PERMITS AND FEES
8-2-1: PERMITS REQUIRED; APPLICATION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, alter or remodel any building or structure without first obtaining a permit therefor. Application for such
permit shall be made to the Director of Public Health and Safety in the manner and form provided for the submission of the same. (Village Code § 10-1;
amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
8-2-2: IMPROVEMENTS NECESSARY FOR PERMIT1:
No permit shall be issued for the erection of any building on any lot or parcel of land which: a) has not been subdivided into lots and blocks by a properly
approved and recorded subdivision; and/or b) which does not have the following improvements:
A. A street not less than twenty four feet (24') in width and an alley not less than sixteen feet (16') in width immediately accessible to and abutting the said
lot or parcel of land, constructed in accordance with the ordinances of the Village.
B. Sidewalks not less than five feet (5') in width and not less than five inches (5") thick constructed in accordance with the ordinances of the Village and
immediately abutting and accessible to said lot or parcel of land.
C. A water main accessible to and immediately abutting the lot or parcel of land sufficient to serve the building to be erected thereon and approved by the
Village Engineer.
D. Storm sewers accessible to and immediately abutting the lot or parcel of land sufficient to serve the building to be erected thereon and approved by the
Village Engineer.
E. Sanitary sewers accessible to and immediately abutting the lot or parcel of land sufficient to serve the building to be erected thereon and approved by
the Village Engineer.
F. A fire hydrant located not more than four hundred feet (400') from any proposed building to be erected on the lot or parcel of land.
Any person desiring to obtain a building permit for the erection of any building on any lot or parcel of land which is not improved as provided in this
section, shall provide said improvements at his own expense. Said improvements shall at all times be subject to inspection and approval of the Village
Council or such other person as the Village Council shall designate. No building permit shall be issued unless and until improvements as provided in
this section have been completed and have received final approval by the Village Council. In lieu of actually completing the improvements provided for
herein, the applicant may deposit with the Village the cost of said improvements as determined by the Village Engineer and said improvements will
then be constructed by the Village who shall install the same as soon as practicable. (Ord. O-23-63, 11-11-1963)
8-2-3: PERMIT FEES:
No permit, as required by this Code, shall be issued until the fee prescribed herein has been paid.
A.
New construction and additions (including garages
and accessory buildings):
Residential buildings:
One- and two-family dwellings $15.00 per contracted $1,000.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 278/416
3 or more dwelling units $25.00 per contracted $1,000.00
Plan review Third party review expense plus $25.00
Commercial/industrial buildings: $20.00 per contracted $1,000.00
Plan review Third party review expense plus $25.00
All other uses $25.00 per contracted $1,000.00
B.
Repairs and alterations:
Residential buildings:
One- and two-family dwellings $15.00 per contracted $1,000.00, with minimum fee of $25.00. No charge for
contracts under $2,500.00
3 or more dwelling units $25.00 per contracted $1,000.00
Commercial, industrial and other buildings: $25.00 per contracted $1,000.00
Plan review Third party review expense plus $25.00
C.
Demolition:
Garages and accessory buildings $50.00 each
Other structures $25.00 per contracted $1,000.00
D.
Roofing (removal and replacement, recoating or
additional layer):
Residential buildings:
One- and two-family dwellings $75.00, no fee for contracts under $5,000.00
3 or more dwelling units $20.00 per contracted $1,000.00
Commercial, industrial and other buildings $25.00 per contracted $1,000.00
E.
Temporary structures:
Tents, per 3 day period Permit required, no fee
Portable structures (construction and sales trailers,
etc.) and other structures, for each 6 months or
portion thereof
$200.00
F.
Miscellaneous construction:
Shoring, raising and/or moving of any building:
Basic fee for first 8,000 cubic feet $50.00 plus for each 800 cubic feet or fraction thereof, $10.00
Nonresidential canopy, fixed awning, each erection
or alteration
$25.00
Tanks, raised or underground:
Basic fee for first 2,000 gallons $100.00 plus $20.00 each 1,000 gallons capacity or fraction thereof
Elevators, escalators, lifts, hoists, dumbwaiters,
conveyors, each:
Basic fee for first 5 floors $150.00 plus $25.00 for each floor over 5
Other miscellaneous structures:
Temporary bleachers $250.00
Incinerators, per installation 200.00
Swimming pool, each:
Above ground 25.00
Below ground 50.00
G.
Heating, ventilating and air conditioning:
Heating:
Warm air furnaces Permit required, no fee for single family dwellings. All others $50.00
High pressure boilers $100.00 residential less than 3 units, all others $250.00
Low pressure boilers $25.00 each
Heat pump $25.00 each
Air conditioning (central):
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 279/416
First 3 tons or less $25.00 plus $5.00 each additional ton or fraction thereof over 3 tons
Ventilation systems, mechanical:
Basic fee for first 3,000 CFM $50.00 plus $5.00 each additional 1,000 CFM
H.
Utility poles:
Setting or replacing permit $50.00 plus $1.00 per pole
Trenching $3.00, plus $0.10 per linear foot of trench
Telecomm other utilities $250.00 for contract amount less than $10,000.00. $500.00 for contract amount
greater than $25,000.00, $1,000.00 for contract amount greater than $50,000.00 plus
review and legal fees
I.
Inspection fees: The inspection fee schedule shall be
as follows:
Residential buildings:
Individual condominium units $ 225.00
Single-family detached/attached, dwelling
units/townhomes
325.00
Buildings which contain:
2 dwelling units 500.00
3 dwelling units 650.00
4 dwelling units 750.00
5 to 9 dwelling units 1,000.00
10 to 20 dwelling units 1,500.00
21+ 5,000.00
Industrial buildings:
For properties up to 50,000 square feet 1,500.00
For properties greater than 50,000 square feet 3,000.00
Commercial/other buildings:
For properties less than 5,000 square feet 500.00
For properties 5,001 to 15,000 square feet 1,000.00
For properties 15,001 to 25,000 square feet 2,000.00
For properties greater than 25,000 square feet 5,000.00
Re-inspections for all commercial and multi-family
dwellings (3-units +):
First inspection 50.00
Second inspection 100.00
(Ord. O-21-17, 7-24-2017)
8-2-4: PERMIT EXPIRATION:
Construction, alteration or remodeling under a permit must be commenced within six (6) months from the date of issuance. Otherwise said permit shall be
void. (Ord. O-8-90, 3-26-1990)
8-2-5: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined as provided in the general penalty in section 1-3-1 of this
Code for each offense. Each and every day upon which a violation exists, or continues, shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. O-8-90, 3-26-1990; amd.
Ord. O-10-99, 6-14-1999; 2004 Code)
Chapter 3
ELECTRICAL REGULATIONS
8-3-1: ELECTRICAL CONTRACTORS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 280/416
A. Registration: It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of electrical contractor, without being registered as an electrical contractor, in
the manner hereinafter set forth. Provided, however, that if such person is already registered for the current year in another city or village within the
state, such electrical contractor shall not be required to register or pay a registration fee for such year in the village. He shall be required to register with
the village clerk and post bond as required in subsection D of this section.
B. Application: Any person desiring to engage in the business of electrical contractor shall apply for registration to the village clerk. Upon filing such
application, in the proper form, and the payment of the registration fee set out in subsection C of this section, the village clerk shall register the
applicant as an electrical contractor. Providing said contractor's application has passed the electrical board, the village clerk shall issue to the applicant
a certificate of registration which will authorize the applicant to engage in such business for the year it is issued. (Ord. O-21-97, 12-8-1997)
C. Fee And Certificate Expiration: The fee for registration as an electrical contractor shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00), per annum, or in lieu thereof,
twenty five dollars ($25.00) per permit; which sum shall be paid by the applicant to the director of public health and safety, in advance, upon filing the
application. The certificate of registration for an annual permit issued thereunder, shall expire on April 30 of the year in which it is issued.
D. Bond: Every person desiring to engage in the business of making any electrical installation in the village, shall execute and file with the director of public
health and safety a surety bond, payable to the village in the penal sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), conditioned that the applicant shall well
and faithfully observe all of the provisions of this code; and other ordinances, and regulations of the village relating to such electrical installations. (Ord.
O-21-97, 12-8-1997; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
8-3-2: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
There is hereby established a division, within the building department, which shall be known as the electrical inspection division. Such division shall be the
electrical inspection division of the village authorized by statute. Said division shall consist of the director of public health and safety and such other
employees as may, from time to time, be appointed by the village council. Such electrical inspection division shall be charged with the duty of enforcing the
provisions of this chapter; the rules and regulations thereof; and the standards and specifications for the installation, alteration and use of electrical
equipment as herein provided, including the national electrical code adopted in section 8-1-1 of this title. (Ord. O-21-97, 12-8-1997; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-
2010)
8-3-3: PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS:
A. Permit Required: No electrical equipment shall be installed, or altered except upon a permit first issued by the electrical inspection division. The
electrical inspection division shall issue permits for such installation and alterations of electrical equipment in all cases where application for such
permits shall be made in accordance with the rules and regulations applicable thereto; provided, however, that no permit shall be issued for installing or
altering, by contract, electrical equipment unless the person applying for such permit is registered as an electrical contractor as required by this
chapter.
B. Inspections:
1. The electrical inspection division shall inspect all electrical equipment installed or altered and shall require that it conform to the standards and
specifications applicable thereto and adopted. Upon completion of such installation or alteration, in compliance with such standards and
specifications, it shall immediately issue a certificate of inspection covering such installation or alteration.
2. The electrical inspection division is hereby empowered to reinspect any electrical equipment. When such equipment is found to be unsafe to life or
property, shall notify the person owning, using or operating same to place the same in a safe, secure condition in compliance with the standards and
specifications described herein within such time as the electrical inspection division shall consider just and reasonable. Upon refusal, or wilful failure
to comply with the requirements of such notification (in addition to the penalties otherwise provided herein), the electrical inspection division may
order and compel the cutting off and stopping of such current until such electrical equipment has been placed in a safe and secure condition, in
compliance with the standards and specifications referred to herein. No inspection fee shall be charged for such reinspection. In case it becomes
necessary to replace such electrical equipment on account of defects disclosed by such reinspection, a permit shall be obtained and an inspection
fee paid; as provided for in section 8-3-5 of this chapter.
3. The electrical inspection division shall keep complete records of all permits issued and inspections made, and other official work performed under
the provisions of this chapter.
C. Right Of Entry; Removal Of Obstructions: In the discharge of their duties, the electrical inspector and his assistants, shall have the power to enter
buildings or premises at any reasonable hour. It shall be competent for them, when necessary, to remove any existing obstructions such as laths,
plastering, boarding or partitions which may prevent a perfect inspection of the electrical equipment. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with
the electrical inspectors in the performance of their duties. Whenever, in the opinion of the electrical inspector, it shall be necessary to call upon the
police department for aid and assistance in carrying out or enforcing any of the provisions of this chapter governing the inspection of electrical
equipment, he shall have the authority to do so. It shall be the duty of any member of the police department, when called upon by the electrical
inspector, to act according to the instructions of and to perform such duties as may be required by the chief electrical inspector in order to enforce or
put into effect the provisions of this chapter relating to the inspection of electrical equipment.
D. Exceptions To Inspections: Whenever any electrical equipment has been inspected or altered, no electrical current shall be supplied to or used on such
equipment previous to the inspection of such equipment by the electrical inspection division, and the issuance of a certificate of inspection covering
such installation or alteration. Provided that, the inspection division may issue a temporary certificate for the use of electrical current during the course
of construction or alteration of buildings, which temporary certificate shall expire when the construction or alteration of such building is complete. (Ord.
O-21-97, 12-8-1997)
8-3-4: PROCEDURE UPON FINDING DEFECTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 281/416
In case the electrical inspector or his assistants find a defect in any electrical apparatus or equipment subject to inspection in the village, such inspector
shall report the same in writing to the persons for whom the test is being made, using blanks furnished by the village for that purpose, and giving a
description of the character of the defect. If the defect is of a dangerous character necessitating immediate repair, the electrical inspector shall condemn
the apparatus or equipment from further use or until the same is removed, repaired or renewed. (Ord. O-21-97, 12-8-1997)
If the defect is of a character such that the apparatus or equipment may be safely operated for a period of some days pending repairs, the electrical
inspector shall so report, and name the number of days during which the same may be operated. A duplicate of all such reports shall be promptly filed in
the office of the director of public health and safety. (Ord. O-21-97, 12-8-1997; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
8-3-5: INSPECTION FEES:
The fees for the inspection of wiring of any building or any electrical apparatus to be paid to the village shall be as follows:
A. Residential Uses: Single-family, two-family and three-family dwellings:
1. For new or revised electrical services:
Size Of Service Fee
100 amp $25.00 each
200 amp 50.00 each
Over 200 amp 75.00 each
2. Circuits (new construction or additional):
Circuit Size
15 and 20 amp 8.00 each
25 to 60 amp 16.00 each
65 to 100 amp 24.00 each
Openings added to existing circuits, installed in room additions, remodeling, and/or garages 5.00 each
3. Current consuming devices (new or remodeling):
Type
A/C units 5.00 each
Furnaces 5.00 each
Sump pumps 5.00 each
Dishwashers 5.00 each
Garbage disposals 5.00 each
Exhaust fans 5.00 each
Smoke detectors 3.00 each
Whirlpool tubs 5.00 each
Jacuzzis 5.00 each
Swimming pools 5.00 each
When required, plan examination fee of $100.00 per hour shall be added.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 282/416
B. Multiple-Family Residential Uses (4 Units And Above), Commercial And Industrial Uses:
1. For new or revised electrical services:
Size Of Service Fee
100 amp $ 25.00 each
200 amp 50.00 each
400 amp 75.00 each
600 _ 1,000 amp 100.00 each
1,200 _ 2,000 amp 150.00 each
3,000 plus over amp 200.00 each
Additional meters 5.00 each
2. Circuits (new or additional):
Size
15 amp and 20 amp branch circuits 120-240 volt:
1 to 50 circuits 10.00 each
51 plus over 5.00 each
277 and 480 volt circuits 20.00 each
Openings added to existing circuits 5.00 each
Circuits over 20 amps shall be figured as follows:
25 to 55 amp 15.00 each
60 _ 100 amp 20.00 each
125 _ 200 amp 30.00 each
Over 200 amp 40.00 each
Motors and other current consuming devices, including each floodlight and standard, each motor/device 5.00 each
Indoor illuminated signs 30.00 each
Outdoor illuminated signs 100.00 each
*Note: For signs and antennas, circuit fees must be added above
Temporary installations involving public rights of way 50.00 minimum
C. Fire Alarm And Emergency Lighting:
Smoke detectors 3.00 each
Heat detectors 3.00 each
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 283/416
Pull stations 3.00 each
Illuminated exit signs 3.00 each
Speakers/horns 3.00 each
Emergency battery lights 3.00 each
Strobe lights 3.00 each
Emergency light fixtures 3.00 each
Maximum fee each system 300.00
Other alarm system devices:
Sprinkler flow switches 4.00 each
Tamper switches 4.00 each
Transfer switches for other critical uses (elevators, heating system, etc.) 80.00 each
Annunciator and other control panels 10.00
Ansul fire control systems 10.00
Fan shutdown panels 10.00
Magnetic door holders 5.00
Fire department recall for elevators 20.00
Ryan fuse panel 10.00
Jockey pump 20.00
Fire pump 60.00
Pump control panel 60.00
Transfer switch 80.00
Emergency generator 100.00
When required, a plan examination fee shall be added 100.00 per hour
Minimum fee, plus plan exam fee 50.00
(Ord. O-21-97, 12-8-1997)
8-3-6: UTILITY POLES:
A. Erection: No poles for the carrying of electric or other wires or cables shall be erected in any street or alley without a permit obtained from the
commissioner of public property. All such permits to erect poles in any street or alley hereafter issued, shall provide that the village may use the poles
to be erected for the purpose of attaching thereto such necessary cross arms, wires or other electrical appliances deemed necessary by the village
authorities, for fire and police signal service of the village. (Ord. O-36-04, 9-13-2004)
B. Permit Fees: Before any permit shall issue for the setting or replacing of poles for the support or accommodation of electric conductors of any
description whatever; or for the opening of any trench for underground construction, the applicant shall pay a permit fee as set out in section 8-2-3 of
this title. Provided, nothing herein contained shall be construed as exacting a fee for replacing a pole broken by accident or storms or for shifting poles
from one position to another under orders issued by the director of public works. (Ord. O-21-97, 12-8-1997)
8-3-7: NOTICE OF WORK:
Any person installing electric wires or equipment in any building in the village, which is to be hidden from view, shall notify the director of public health and
safety or assistant in writing, of such intended installation at least twenty four (24) hours before the work is to be covered; and no such work shall be
covered until inspection thereof has been made as herein required. In all cases where such notice has not been given or such work has been covered
without inspection thereof, as herein provided, the director of public health and safety or assistant is authorized to take down or remove such portions of
the building or structure as shall be necessary for the inspection of such electric wires or equipment as herein required. The cost of such taking down and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 284/416
replacing such work so removed by such official shall be borne by the person who has failed to give notice of the installation. (Ord. O-21-97, 12-8-1997;
amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
8-3-8: DEAD AND DEFECTIVE WIRES:
A. Dead Wires: The director of public health and safety shall have the right to cause all dead wires outside and inside of buildings to be removed at the
expense of the owner of such wires, by giving the owner ten (10) days' written notice so to do. If the owner fails or neglects to remove such wires within
ten (10) days after receipt of such notice, such person shall be subject to a fine as provided in the general penalty in section 1-3-1 of this code, for each
and every forty eight (48) hours such wires are permitted to remain in place after expiration of the time fixed in such notice for the removal of same, as
aforesaid. (Ord. O-21-97, 12-8-1997; amd. 2004 Code; Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
B. Defective Wires: The director of public health and safety shall have the right to condemn wires which are defective and dangerous to life or property. He
shall notify the owner of such wires, in writing, to remove or replace the same with new wires. (Ord. O-21-97, 12-8-1997; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
8-3-9: NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE MODIFICATIONS AND ADDITIONS:
The following rules and regulations for the installation, alteration, repair and use of electrical equipment and apparatus in the village are hereinafter set
forth as modifications and additions to the provisions of the national electrical code, latest edition adopted in section 8-1-1 of this title and shall apply in lieu
of any provisions to the contrary contained in the national electrical code:
A. General Provisions:
1. Wiring for all new construction and open wall remodeling shall be in conduit.
2. Electrically operated equipment such as heating equipment, built-in wall air conditioners, built-in kitchen appliances and laundry facilities shall be on
separate circuits.
3. Installation of nonmetallic sheathed cable (Romex) or aluminum conductors is not allowed.
4. Armored cable (BX) entering circuit panels shall not be allowed.
5. No. 12 circuit conductors minimum for all new and revised installations in commercial buildings.
6. Any subpanel installation shall meet the requirements of feeder size and its main circuit control, but must not overload the total supply system.
7. All residential garages must contain a minimum of one fifteen (15) amp circuit, with one lamp holder, one wall switch and one GFCI receptacle. All
detached residential garages shall be supplied by an underground feeder only, using PVC or rigid conduit or an approved direct burial cable using
minimum of three (3) no. 12 conductors.
8. Any abandoned or unused wiring shall be removed.
B. All Services New And Revised:
1. Service grounding electrode must be connected to the supply side of the municipal water system and a water meter shunt shall be provided with an
approved fitting. All connection surfaces of pipe shall be clean with appropriate tag attached. If this method cannot be achieved, consultation with the
electrical inspector is required.
2. Aluminum conductors are not allowed in overhead services.
3. Single meter service requires minimum of no. 3 copper conductor for one hundred (100) amp service, and minimum of one and one-quarter inch
(11/4") rigid conduit, with twenty (20) circuit panel. A two hundred (200) amp service requires a minimum no. 310 conductor and minimum of two inch
(2") rigid conduit, with panel of twenty (20) or more circuits.
4. All services for more than one meter requires minimum of no. 3 copper conductor from meter fittings to panels. Conductor size in riser to service
head must be computed and approved.
5. Services, residential (1 to 3 units) - new construction: Service shall be a minimum of one hundred (100) amps and minimum of one and one-quarter
inch (11/4") rigid conduit with no. 3 copper conductor, with twenty (20) circuit panel per unit.
6. Services, residential (1 to 3 units) - revision/remodeling: Load for each unit shall be computed for size of service and number of circuits required, with
allowance for future circuits and additional load.
7. Services, multi-family (4 or more units) including commercial units - new construction and revision/remodeling: Load for each unit shall be computed
for size of service and number of circuits required, with allowance for future circuits and additional load.
C. Requirements At Change Of Ownership:
1. All appliance circuits in existing buildings shall be upgraded, if necessary, to a minimum of twenty (20) ampere with a minimum of no. 12 gauge
conductors, upon sale and change of ownership.
2. Exposed BX over six feet (6') in length shall be terminated in a junction box and then continued in conduit.
3. Knob-and-tube wiring (nongrounded system) shall be removed and upgraded to a grounded system.
4. Nongrounding ("2 prong") receptacles shall be replaced with standard grounded type ("3 prong").
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 285/416
5. Any installed equipment found to have reverse polarity shall be corrected.
6. On existing fused circuit panels, all fuses shall be replaced with type S fuses (fustats) sized in accordance with size of conductors.
7. Residential units with thirty (30) amp or sixty (60) amp service shall be revised and upgraded to minimum of one hundred (100) amps upon change
of ownership.
8. In all commercial and/or combination residential-commercial units or any unit of any structure containing electrical power, any portion of a structure
that is found to have an overload or unsafe wiring system, including service, shall be corrected upon change of ownership.
9. Any subpanel that does not meet the requirements of feeder size and its main circuit control must be eliminated.
10. Ground-fault receptacle protection shall be required in kitchens, bathrooms, garages and outside of building, as provided by NEC 210.7 and 210.8.
11. Extension cords are not allowed as a permanent power source. (Ord. O-21-97, 12-8-1997)
8-3-10: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any persons owning, controlling or using any electrical apparatus or equipment subject to inspection under the provisions of this chapter for a longer
period, pending repairs, than specified in the electrical inspector's report; or who shall use or attempt to use such apparatus or equipment after the same
has been condemned by the electrical inspector or his assistant from further use, and before the same has been removed, fully repaired or renewed, and
an order for a certificate of inspection obtained thereof, in the manner above prescribed; or who shall refuse the director of public health and safety or
assistant admittance to the premises where such apparatus or equipment is located for the purpose of making such inspection or test; or shall needlessly
hinder such inspection or test, and any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, where no other penalty is prescribed, shall be deemed guilty
of a misdemeanor and, on conviction thereof, shall be fined as provided in the general penalty in section 1-3-1 of this code for each offense. (Ord. O-21-
97, 12-8-1997; amd. 2004 Code; Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
Chapter 4
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
8-4-1: FIRE LIMITS:
A. Definition: The fire limits of the village shall consist of all areas within the boundaries of the village. (Village Code § 10-6)
B. Exteriors: Except for single-family dwellings, it shall be unlawful to construct or erect any buildings or parts thereof within the fire limits unless the
exterior walls and roof of such building or structure are covered or constructed of nonflammable materials; provided, that this shall not operate to
prohibit the construction of temporary, one-story buildings for the use of builders during construction of the fireproof structure, wooden fences not over
eight feet (8') high, piazzas or balconies not exceeding ten feet (10') in width or extending more than three feet (3') above the second story beams, bay
windows when covered with incombustible material; or for workers engaged thereon during construction, small outhouses not exceeding one hundred
fifty (150) square feet in area nor eight feet (8') in height. (Village Code § 10-7)
C. Repairs: Except for single-family dwellings, it shall be unlawful to repair an existing frame building within the village fire limits after the same shall be
damaged by any cause to the extent of fifty percent (50%) of its value at the time of destruction, unless such building is made to conform to the
provisions of subsection B of this section. (Village Code § 10-8; amd. 2004 Code)
8-4-2: FIRE CODE VIOLATIONS:
A. Violations, Penalties And Compliance: Violations of the fire prevention code shall be punished as provided in section 1-3-1 of the municipal code;
provided that the application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of the violations. The imposition of one penalty for
any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or
defects within an allotted time required by the fire chief and/or the person in charge of the fire prevention bureau.
B. Citations: A citation will be issued to any person chargedwith a violation of BOCA fire prevention code, section 110.0 entitled "Unsafe Conditions" or
similar violations of other applicable regulations constituting the following citations:
1. Dangerous conditions liable to cause or contribute to the spread of fire in or on said premises or structure or endanger the occupants thereof.
2. Conditions which interfere with the efficiency or operation of any fire protection equipment and system.
3. Obstructions to or on fire escapes, stairs, passageways, doors, windows, which are liable to interfere with the egress of occupants or the operation
of the fire department in case of fire.
4. Accumulations of dust or waste material in air conditioning or ventilating systems or grease in kitchen or other exhaust ducts.
5. Accumulations of grease on kitchen cooking equipment, or oil, grease or dirt upon, under or around any mechanical equipment.
6. Accumulations of rubbish, waste, paper, boxes, shavings or other combustible materials, or excessive storage of any combustible material.
7. Hazardous conditions arising from defective or improperly utilized or installed electrical wiring, equipment or appliances.
8. Hazardous conditions arising from defective or improperly installed equipment for handling or using combustible, explosive or otherwise hazardous
materials.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 286/416
9. Dangerous or unlawful amounts of combustible, explosive or otherwise hazardous materials.
10. All equipment, materials, processes or operations which are in violation of the provisions and intent of the documents of enforcement.
Violators will be informed of the violation by a citation issued by enforcement personnel of the village detailing the nature of the violation(s) in
substantially the form stated below, and ordered to correct the violation(s) within thirty (30) days. If the violation is determined to be an immediate
threat to the safety of the inhabitant(s) of a structure, the correction shall be completed within the time stated in the notice provided when the
inspection is made.
All violations documented herein shall be corrected within thirty (30) days of this notice. Failure to take corrective action will result in the issuance
of a "Local Ordinance Citation" and the violator may be subject to a fine of not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) for each uncorrected violation.
C. Prosecution Of Violations:
1. Any person charged with a violation of BOCA section 110.0 entitled "Unsafe Conditions" or similar violations of other applicable regulations, a
citation issued by enforcement personnel of the village, detailing the nature of the violation, may avoid prosecution by exhibiting proof of correction of
the condition or compliance with the ordinance stated to have been violated and the payment of not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) within ten
(10) days of issuance, or fifty dollars ($50.00) after ten (10) days, but within thirty (30) days before the hearing date, to the village clerk or his
designee.
2. Absent the failure to satisfy the citation, the person charged shall appear at the place, time and date designated on the citation and the executive
head of the department or his designee shall thereupon conduct a hearing. After the hearing by the executive head of the department, the executive
head shall take the following action:
a. Dismiss the citation; or
b. Find that there was probable cause for the issuance of the citation and that the original amount for the commission of such violation shall remain
the same; or
c. In the event the violator has not corrected the violation and/or paid the penalty within the time established by the enforcement personnel, proceed
to institute appropriate proceedings against the violator in the circuit court of Cook County, Illinois.
3. Violations requiring more than thirty (30) days to correct shall be documented with a plan of correction, drafted by the fire inspector. Such plans of
correction shall detail the nature of the violation and identify the time period within which compliance shall be completed. Plans of correction will bear
the signature of the building owner and/or manager and the fire inspector. Compliance with plans of correction will be monitored by the fire inspector.
(Ord. O-28-96, 10-14-1996)
8-4-3: STOREROOMS:
Storerooms in commercial and multiple story buildings over four (4) units must be sprinklered from the domestic water supply in the building and so
arranged that sprinkler heads will be spaced no more than ten feet (10') apart. One sprinkler head shall be mounted on the ceiling inside of the entrance
door to ensure early suppression in the event of fire. (Ord. O-27-77, 11-14-1977)
8-4-4: SERVICE STATIONS:
Service station owners and attendants will abide by the rules andregulations relating to service stations as outlined in the state of Illinois gasoline and
volatile oils law1. (Ord. O-14-77, 5-9-1977)
8-4-5: SMOKE DETECTORS:
A. Requirement: It shall be the responsibility of the owner of each new and existing occupied dwelling unit to install smoke detectors in each such dwelling
unit as hereinafter provided. Said smoke detectors shall be capable of sensing visible or invisible particles of combustion and providing a suitable
audible alarm in the event of fire.
In any building constructed after the passage of this amendment, smoke detectors shall be installed at the time of construction.
In all existing buildings containing over four (4) dwelling units, smoke detectors shall be installed within eighteen (18) months after the passage of this
amendment.
B. Location:
1. At least one smoke detector shall be installed to protect each sleeping area. A "sleeping area" is defined as the area or areas of the family living unit
in which the bedrooms (or sleeping rooms) are located. Where bedrooms or rooms ordinarily used for sleeping are separated by other use areas
(such as kitchens or living rooms, but not bathrooms or closets), they shall be considered as separate sleeping areas for the purposes of this section.
2. At least one smoke detector shall be installed at the head (top) of each stairway leading up to an occupied area in such manner as to assure that
rising smoke is not obstructed in reaching the detector and the detector intercepts rising smoke before it reaches the sleeping area.
C. Alternative: As an alternative to self-contained smoke detectors, an approved fire detection system may be installed. Each fire detector system must be
individually approved and a permit issued therefor by the fire department and building department.
D. Equipment: All devices, combinations of devices, and equipment required herein are to be installed in conformance with the building code and this
section, and approved by the fire prevention bureau and listed by said department for the purposes for which they are intended; said list may be
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 287/416
subsequently amended by the fire prevention bureau as necessary. Such approval shall be permanent unless the fire prevention bureau subsequently
finds that the equipment is hazardous or unreliable, in whichcase, the fire prevention bureau may suspend or revoke approval. The fire prevention
bureau may in any such case determine whether replacement of existing installation shall be required. Transfer to the inactive list shall not affect
equipment approval.
E. Installation: In new residential dwellings smoke detectors shall be wired directly (hand wired) to the building's power supply. In existing dwellings, the
smoke detectors shall be installed in the manner recommended and approved by the fire prevention bureau and the electrical inspector.
F. Maintenance: It will be the responsibility of the owner of the property to maintain smoke detectors. If the unit is battery operated, the property owner is
responsible for the battery replacement.
G. Garbage Chutes: One smoke detector must be installed above each garbage chute in buildings containing garbage chutes.
H. Certification At Change In Occupancy: After the date within which smoke detectors must be installed in buildings, at every change of occupancy of
every building or dwelling unit occasioned by or incidental to a sale, lease or sublease of said unit, it shall be the duty of the grantor thereof (i.e., the
seller, lessor or sublessor, as the case may be) to certify before occupancy, to the new occupant that all smoke detectors as required by this section (or
other applicable laws) are installed and in proper working condition. Failure to comply with this subsection shall be punishable as set forth herein;
provided, however, that this subsection shall not be construed to vitiate or render void any contract, lease or sublease pertaining thereto.
I. Permits And Fees: No smoke detector or alternative system shall be directly connected (permanently wired) to the electrical system of the structure
unless an electrical permit shall have first been obtained. Permit fees for installation shall be per schedule for electrical permit fees as set forth in
chapter 3 of the this title.
J. Interference: No person shall remove, tamper with or render inoperable any smoke detectors in any building. (Ord. O-27-77, 11-14-1977)
ARTICLE A. SMOKE, HEAT AND FIRE DETECTION SYSTEMS
8-4A-1: SYSTEM REQUIRED:
A. A combined supervised smoke, heat and fire detection system shall be installed in the following buildings:
1. Nursing homes, medical clinics and healthcare centers providing either inpatient or outpatient care and treatment.
2. Daycare centers and schools (both public and private) in accordance with the requirements of the state life safety or other state fire regulations.
3. Bowling alleys, theaters, restaurants and public or private assembly buildings which have a seating capacity or are used for the congregating or
assembling of fifty (50) or more persons.
4. Multi-family dwellings containing twenty (20) or more units.
5. Any multiple-use buildings, including strip centers or malls, over five thousand (5,000) gross square feet.
6. Business and mercantile buildings over five thousand (5,000) gross square feet.
B. A combined local smoke and heat detection and fire alarm system shall be installed in the following buildings:
1. Business and mercantile buildings between two thousand (2,000) and four thousand nine hundred ninety nine (4,999) gross square feet.
2. Multi-family dwellings containing seven (7) to nineteen (19) units.
C. An approved heat detection system shall be installed in attics, lofts and spaces containing two thousand (2,000) square feet or more of surface area
and located in any of the above designated buildings set forth in subsections A and B of this section. (Ord. O-8-92, 6-8-1992)
8-4A-2: SYSTEMS DEFINED:
ANNUNCIATOR: A visual device, comprised of either a lighted panel or a constant or flashing red light which must be manually reset, indicating the
particular zone on which an automatic detection and/or alarm device is in operation, and identifying the location of each such zone.
COMBINED LOCAL SMOKE AND HEAT DETECTION AND FIRE ALARM SYSTEM: A fire alarm system using automatic detection devices or assemblies
which operate upon either an increase in temperature, the sensing of an abnormal amount of smoke or combustion products, or the sensing of a flame to
activate a buzzer, bell or other sounding alarm within the device to warn and notify the occupants within the area where installed, and to activate by direct
connection an alarm sounding within the building to warn or notify the occupants thereof of dangerous fire condition. Such system must be installed as
hereinafter provided and must be approved as to materials and installation by the fire prevention bureau. This system shall comply with 72A of the NFC.
COMBINED SUPERVISED SMOKE AND HEAT DETECTION AND FIRE ALARM SYSTEM: A fire alarm system using automatic detection devices or
assemblies which operate upon either an increase in temperature, the sensing of an abnormal amount of smoke or combustion products, or the sensing of
a flame to activate by direct connection an alarm sounding or flashing device in the police communication center, and an alarm sounding within the
building to warn or notify the occupants thereof of a dangerous fire condition. Such system must be installed as hereinafter provided and must be
approved as to materials and installation by the fire prevention bureau. This system shall comply with 72C of the national fire code (NFC).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 288/416
LOCAL SMOKE DETECTION AND HEAT DETECTION SYSTEM: A detection system using an automatic detection device or assembly which operates on
sensing an abnormal amount of smoke or combustion products, or on sensing an increase in temperature or a flame to activate a buzzer, bell or other
sounding alarm within said device to warn and notify the occupants within the area where installed of a dangerous condition due to fire or other causes.
Such system is not connected to the communications center and does not require an annunciator or the installation of an internal or external alarm or
control panel and wiring by separate circuitry directly to the building's power supply. Such system shall be installed as hereinafter provided and must be
approved as to materials and installation by the fire prevention bureau.
ZONE: When used in connection with a fire detection or fire alarm system, a separate area of a building being served by a distinct, combined detection
and alarm sending circuit. (Ord. O-8-92, 6-8-1992)
8-4A-3: INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS:
A. Except as otherwise specifically provided by this article, smoke and heat detection and fire alarm systems shall be installed and maintained in
accordance with current editions, as supplemented from time to time, of the National Fire Protection Association pamphlet no. 72A entitled "Standard
For Installation, Maintenance And Use Of Local Protective Signaling Systems For Guard's Tour, Fire Alarm, And Supervisory Service" (which pamphlet
is hereby adopted by reference) and the National Fire Protection Association pamphlet no. 72C "Standard For The Installation, Maintenance And Use
Of Remote Station Protective Signaling Systems" and smoke and heat detection systems shall further comply with the provisions of National Fire
Protection Association pamphlet no. 72E entitled "Standard On Automatic Fire Detectors" (which pamphlet is hereby adopted by reference) and the
provisions of National Fire Protection Association pamphlet no. 72H entitled "Testing Procedures For Local Auxiliary, Remote Station And Proprietary
Protective Signaling Systems" (which pamphlet is hereby adopted by reference). Where the term "local authority having jurisdiction" is used in said
pamphlet, it shall mean the fire inspector of the village or his duly authorized representative. Whenever the provisions of said pamphlet 72A, 72C, 72E
or 72H conflict with provisions of the village building, electrical or other fire code requirements, the provisions of pamphlet 72A, 72C, 72E or 72H shall
prevail.
B. Combined smoke and heat detection and fire alarm systems shall be zoned so as to designate each area served by a separate, distinct detection and
alarm sending device. Designation of zones (location and number) shall be approved by the fire prevention bureau.
C. An annunciator shall be required on any system having more than one zone, and shall be placed in a conspicuous location in the entrance, entrance
hall or outside of the entrance to the building in a weatherproof enclosure, as directed by the fire prevention bureau. The annunciator shall indicate the
zone from which an alarm or detection condition has originated by means of a constant or flashing red light or a translucent rectangle which is
electrically illuminated from behind when an alarm or detection signal is received from the zone. The indication on the annunciator, once activated, shall
be continuous until manually reset.
D. All equipment and devices used in the installation of an alarm or detection system shall be tested and bear the listing label of a nationally recognized
standards testing laboratory acceptable to the fire prevention bureau. Such system shall be permanently wired to the electrical service of each building.
E. Detection devices shall be installed on the ceiling at least twelve inches (12") from any wall or installed on a wall and at least six inches (6") from the
ceiling. In multiple residence and mixed occupancy structures and rooming or lodging houses, one smoke detector shall be installed on the ceiling at
the top ofeach stairwell, and a smoke detector shall be installed at the front and rear in all corridors and in each storage room and in each common
area. Where a combined alarm and detection system is required, such smoke and heat detectors in the common areas shall be wired to the alarm
system and, in addition, in mixed occupancy structures with dwelling units above the first or grade level floor such alarm and detection system shall be
installed with a separate internal alarm sounding device so that a dangerous fire condition occurring within the commercial area of the structure shall
sound an alarm in the residential area.
F. In each dwelling unit of multiple residence and mixed occupancy structures and in rooming or lodging houses at least one local smoke detector shall be
installed to protect each sleeping area. The detectors in such bedrooms or sleeping areas shall conform to those of a local smoke detection and heat
detection system and need not be wired to the combined system in the common areas.
G. In said office and office-residential buildings the office areas shall contain a local detection system and the common areas shall contain a combined
system. The commercial areas and the common areas of all commercial and commercial-residential buildings shall contain a combined system.
H. Where fire doors are required in the corridors of any building required herein to have a combined alarm and detection system, such doors shall be
provided with a magnetic door holder or other self-closing device connected to the fire alarm system.
I. Alarm sounding devices shall consist of approved bells, whistles, horn, or buzzers, which shall be distinguished by pitch and quality from all other sound
devices; and which shall be so distributed as to be heard clearly throughout the building or designated zone.
J. At least one manual fire sending (pull) station shall be located in the natural path of exit, in a readily accessible location on each floor and at all external
exits within all buildings required herein to have a combined alarm and detection system, as directed by the fire prevention bureau. The manner of
operation of alarm sending stations shall be permanently attached to each station and, in addition, a notice shall be conspicuously posted on each floor
and at each external exit area advising occupants to pull the alarm in the case of fire. Every station shall be installed and equipped with provisions so
they can be tested without sounding a general alarm. The test may be done at the control panel and not at the pull station.
K. Each alarm sounding station and each combined alarm and detection system shall be tested at least once a year. In addition, a combined system shall
be provided with a trouble signal or bell, approved by the fire prevention bureau arranged to audibly warn of a failure or defect or malfunction in the
system. Such trouble signal shall be clearly marked and identified and shall be provided with a silencing switch.
L. Every detection and/or alarm system which fails to function properly shall be repaired and placed in good operating condition within forty eight (48)
hours.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 289/416
M. No work shall commence on any detection or alarm system provided for herein, including installation, alteration or extension thereof, until complete
plans and specifications for the proposed system have been first submitted to and approved by the fire prevention bureau.
N. It shall be the duty of the owner of any building subject to compliance with the provisions of this section, and the beneficiaries of any land trust holding
title to such building, to comply with the provisions hereof.
O. Any occupancy required to have a cooking suppression system by the fire prevention code shall have this system tied into the alarm system. (Ord. O-8-
92, 6-8-1992)
8-4A-4: KEY BOX REQUIRED:
All occupancies required to install a combined supervised or a combined local smoke and heat detection system must also install a rapid entry key box.
The key box and its location installed must be approved by the fire prevention bureau. (Ord. O-8-92, 6-8-1992)
8-4A-5: COMPLIANCE PERIOD FOR EXISTING OCCUPANCIES:
The systems required by this article; namely, smoke and heat detection and fire detection systems, shall neither be required as stated therein nor shall this
article be enforced until the village council has completed a further study of the impact of this article. (Ord. O-18-92, 9-14-1992)
8-4A-6: FALSE ALARMS:
Any occupancy required to install a fire alarm system, after the system has been in service for a period of one month, will pay a service fee for false alarms
based on the following schedule:
Number Of False Alarms Service Fees
1_4 per calendar year $ 0.00
5_10 per calendar year 50.00 per alarm
11+ per calendar year 100.00 per alarm
(Ord. O-9-92, 6-22-1992)
8-4A-7: PENALTIES:
Any person violating any provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine as provided in the general penalty in section 1-3-1 of this
code. Every day that a violation of the provisions of this article continues shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. O-8-92, 6-8-1992; amd. 2004 Code)
ARTICLE B. HAZARDOUS MATERIALS RESPONSE AND CONTROL
8-4B-1: HAZARDOUS MATERIALS DEFINED:
"Hazardous materials" means any material or mixture of substance that is toxic, corrosive, flammable, combustible, an irritant, asphyxiant, a strong
sensitizer, or that generates pressure through decomposition, heat or other means and that may cause substantial personal injury, illness or property
damage during customary or reasonably anticipated handling or use, or may cause an unreasonable threat of damage to property, the public health or
safety, or the ecological balance of the environment. "Hazardous materials" includes, but is not limited to, explosives, radioactive substances, petroleum or
petroleum products, poisons, toxic gases, flammable substances, corrosive substances and pathogens. (Ord. O-36-07, 8-13-2007)
8-4B-2: DEPOSITS PROHIBITED:
No person, firm, corporation or entity shall place, spill, or otherwise deposit, or cause or permit to be placed, spilled or otherwise deposited, any hazardous
materials on any real property which is located within the village of Forest Park or in or on any building, facility or right of way owned by the village of
Forest Park, without securing, in advance, proper authorization therefor from the village of Forest Park. (Ord. O-36-07, 8-13-2007)
8-4B-3: ABATEMENT:
The fire chief, or authorized representative, shall cause any unauthorized deposit of hazardous materials within the village of Forest Park to be
immediately removed. (Ord. O-36-07, 8-13-2007)
8-4B-4: COST OF ABATEMENT:
Any person, firm, corporation or entity ("payor") which causes or permits to cause any unauthorized deposit, placement or spill of any hazardous materials
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 290/416
within the village of Forest Park shall pay to the village of Forest Park all costs of abatement,mitigation and removal thereof, including, but not limited to, all
payments made by the village of Forest Park to third parties for services rendered in connection therewith, and for all supplies and the use of all equipment
used in connection therewith. These costs shall be paid by the payor within thirty (30) days of the mailing or the delivery of an invoice therefor to such
payor. (Ord. O-36-07, 8-13-2007)
8-4B-5: PENALTIES:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine as provided under general penalties in section 1-3-1 of
this code. Every day that a violation of the provisions of this article continues shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. O-36-07, 8-13-2007)
Chapter 5
HOUSING CODE
8-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter:
BASEMENT: A portion of a building located partly underground, having less than half its clear floor to ceiling height below the average grade of the
adjoining ground.
CELLAR: A portion of a building located partly or wholly underground, having half, or more than half, of its clear floor to ceiling height below the average
grade of the adjoining ground.
DWELLING: Any building which is wholly or partly used, or intended to be used, for living or sleeping by human occupants. Provided that "temporary
housing", as defined herein, shall not be regarded as a dwelling.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE: Any dwelling containing more than two (2) dwelling units.
DWELLING UNIT: Any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and forming a single, habitable unit with facilities which are used, or intended to
be used, for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS: The fire inspector and director of public health and safety working separately, or together, shall be the main officers of the
village to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
EXTERMINATION: The control and elimination of insects, rodents or other pests, by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making
inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating, trapping or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination
methods approved by the department of public health.
FIRE INSPECTOR: The legally designated fire authority of the fire department of the village.
GARBAGE: The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
HABITABLE ROOM: A room, or enclosed floor space, used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms,
water closet compartments, laundries, pantries, foyers or communicating corridors, closets and storage space.
HOTEL: Every building, or structure kept, used or maintained, as or advertised to the public to be an inn, hotel, motel, family hotel, apartment hotel,
lodging house, dormitory or place where sleeping or rooming accommodations are furnished for hire; or used or maintained for the accommodation of
guests, lodgers or roomers.
INFESTATION: The presence within or around a dwelling of any insects, rodents or other pests.
OCCUPANT: Any person over one year of age living, sleeping, cooking or eating in, or having actual possession of, a dwelling unit or rooming unit.
OPERATOR: Any person who has charge, care or control of a building, or part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let.
ORDINARY MINIMUM WINTER CONDITIONS: The temperature fifteen degrees Fahrenheit (15°F), above the lowest recorded temperature for the
previous ten (10) year period.
OWNER: Any person who, alone or jointly or severally, with others shall have legal title to any dwelling or dwelling unit with or without accompanying
actual possession thereof; or shall have charge, care or control of any dwelling or dwelling unit as owner or agent of the owner; or as executor, executrix,
administrator, administratrix, trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner. Any such person, thus representing the actual owner, shall be bound to comply
with the provisions of this chapter and rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, to the same extent as if he were the owner.
PERSON: Includes any individual, firm, corporation, association or partnership.
PLUMBING: Includes all of the following supplied facilities and equipment: gas pipes, gas burning equipment, water pipes, garbage disposal units, water
cooled weather conditioning unit, waste pipes, water closets, sinks, installed dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes washing
machines, catch basins, drains, vents and any other similar supplied fixtures, together with all connections to water, sewer or gas lines.
ROOMING HOUSE: Any dwelling, or that part of any dwelling containing one or more rooming units, in which space is let by the owner or operator to five
(5) or more persons who are not husband or wife, son or daughter, mother or father or sister or brother of the owner or operator.
ROOMING UNIT: Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used, or intended to be used, for living and sleeping, but not for cooking or
eating purposes.
RUBBISH: Combustible and noncombustible waste materials except garbage. The term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 291/416
other combustible material; paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather; tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter,
glass crockery, dust or any object that is removed from the things that are presently worthless or unsuitable for immediate purposes.
SUPPLIED: Paid for, furnished or provided by or under the control of the owner or operator.
TEMPORARY HOUSING: Any tent, trailer or other structure used for human shelter which is designated to be transportable and which is not attached to
the ground, to another structure or to any utilities system on the same premises for more than thirty (30) consecutive days. (Village code § 18-14; amd.
Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
8-5-2: AUTHORITY:
A. General: The fire chief and/or the director of public health and safety are hereby authorized and directed to make inspections to determine the condition
of dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units and premises located within the village, in order that they may perform their duties of safeguarding the health
and safety of the occupants of dwellings and of the general public. For the purpose of making such inspections, the fire chief and/or director of public
health and safety are hereby authorized to enter, examine and survey, at all reasonable times, all dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units and premises.
(Village code § 18-15; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
B. Emergency Authority: Whenever the fire chief and/or director of public health and safety find that an emergency exists, which requires immediate action
to protect the public health, he may, without notice or hearings, issue an order reciting the existence of such an emergency; and requiring that such
action be taken as he deems necessary to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this chapter, such order shall be effective
immediately. Any person to whom such order is directed, shall immediately comply therewith; but, upon petition to the department of public health, shall
be afforded a hearing as soon as possible. After such hearing, depending upon its findings as to whether the provisions of this chapter have been
complied with, the department of public health shall continue such order in effect, modify it or revoke it. (Village code § 18-22; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-
2010)
8-5-3: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES; VIOLATIONS:
A. Duty Of Tenants And Owners: The owner or occupant of every dwelling, dwelling unit and rooming unit, or the person in charge thereof, shall give the
fire chief and/or director of public health and safety free access to such dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit and its premises at all reasonable times
for the purpose of inspection, examination and survey. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall give the owner thereof, or his agent or
employee, access to any part of such dwelling or dwelling unit or its premises at all reasonable times for the purpose of making such repairs or
alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of this chapter. (Village code § 18-16; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
B. Notice Of Violation: Whenever the fire chief and/or director of public health and safety determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that
there has been a violation of any provision of this chapter, he shall give notice of such alleged violation to the person or persons responsible therefor as
hereinafter provided. Such notice shall be in writing and shall include a statement of the reasons why it is being issued, and allow a reasonable time
(not less than 10 days) for the performance of any act it requires. Said notice shall be served upon the owner or his agent, or the occupant, as the case
may require. Provided, such notice shall be deemed properly served upon such owner or agent, or upon such occupant, if a copy is sent by registered
mail to his last known address, or if a copy is posted in a conspicuous place in or about the dwelling affected by the notice. Such notice may contain an
outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of this chapter. (Village code § 18-17; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
C. Hearings: Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection with the enforcement of any provision of this chapter or of any rule or
regulation adopted pursuant thereto, may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the village department of public health. Such
hearing shall be conducted in the manner set out in title 1, chapter 6, article D of this code. (Village code § 18-18; amd. 2004 Code)
D. Findings:
1. After such hearing, the department of public health shall sustain, modify or withdraw the notice depending upon its findings as to whether the
provisions of this chapter have been complied with. If the department of public health sustains or modifies such notice, it shall be deemed to be an
order. Any notice served pursuant to subsection B of this section shall automatically become an order if a written petition for a hearing is not filed in
the office of the village clerk within ten (10) days after such notice is served.
2. After a hearing, in the case of any notice suspending any permit required by this chapter, when such notice has been sustained by the department of
public health, the permit shall be deemed to have been revoked. Any such permit, which has been suspended by a notice shall be deemed to be
automatically revoked if a petition for a hearing is not filed with the department of public health within ten (10) days after such notice is served. The
inspector or inspectors serving the notice upon which a petition for review is filed shall not sit as a member of the department of public health at the
hearing of the petition, but shall be allowed to be present, cross examine witnesses and be cross examined by petitioner. (Village code § 18-19)
E. Record: The petitioner shall furnish and pay a court reporter, acceptable to the department of public health, who shall transcribe all matters of said
petitioner's hearing and furnish a copy to the board. (Village code § 18-20)
F. Procedures Of The Board: The board shall make a finding of facts, which finding of facts shall be reduced to writing. The decision of the board shall also
be reduced to writing as well as all orders of the board. The board shall prepare a record consisting of the notice, the petition for a hearing, the
statement of finding of facts, all decisions and orders of the board, and same shall be deposited in the office of the village clerk for public inspection.
(Village code § 18-21)
8-5-4: MINIMUM STANDARDS:
A. Requirements: No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or rent to another for occupancy, any dwelling or dwelling units for the purpose of living,
sleeping, cooking or eating therein which does not comply with the following requirements:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 292/416
1. Every dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen sink in good working condition and properly connected to water and sewer systems of the village.
2. Every dwelling unit (except as otherwise permitted under this section) shall contain a room which affords privacy to a person within said room, and
which is equipped with a flush water closet and a lavatory basin in good working condition, properly connected to water and sewer systems of the
village.
3. Every dwelling unit (except as otherwise permitted under this section) shall contain, within a room which affords privacy to a person within said room,
a bathtub or shower in good working condition and properly connected to water and sewer systems of the village.
4. The occupants of not more than two (2) dwelling units may share a single flush water closet, a single lavatory basin and a single bathtub or shower,
if neither of the two (2) dwelling units contain more than two (2) rooms. Provided that, for the purposes of this section, a kitchenette or an efficiency
kitchen with not more than sixty (60) square feet of floor area shall not be counted as a room, and that the habitable area of each of such dwelling
units shall equal not more than two hundred fifty (250) square feet of floor area. Such water closet, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be in
good working condition and properly connected to water and sewer systems of the village.
5. Every kitchen sink, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower required under the provisions of this section shall be properly connected with both hot and
cold water lines.
6. Every dwelling unit shall have adequate garbage disposal facilities or garbage storage containers, in accordance with the provisions of this code1.
7. Every dwelling shall have supplied water heating facilities which are properly installed, are maintained in safe and good working condition, are
properly connected with the hot water lines required under the provisions of this section and are capable of heating water to such a temperature as to
permit an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required kitchen sink, lavatory basin, bathtub or shower at a temperature of not less than
one hundred twenty degrees Fahrenheit (120°F). Such supplied, water heating facilities shall be capable of meeting the requirements of the kitchen
section when the dwelling or dwelling unit heating facilities required under the provisions of section 8-5-5 of this chapter are not in operation.
8. Every dwelling unit shall have a minimum of two (2) safe, unobstructed means of egress leading to safe open space at ground level. (Village code
§ 18-23)
B. Light, Ventilation And Heat:
1. Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight facing directly to the outdoors. The minimum total window area, measured between
stops, for every habitable room shall be ten percent (10%) of the floor area of such room. Whenever walls or other portions of structures face a
window of any such room and such light obstruction structures are located less than three feet (3') from the window and extend to a level above that
of the ceiling of the room, such a window shall not be included as contributing to the required minimum total window area. Whenever the only window
in a room is a skylight type window in the top of such room the total window area of such skylights shall equal fifteen percent (15%) of the total floor
area of such room. (Village code § 18-24)
2. Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight which can easily be opened, or such other device as will adequately ventilate the
room. The total of openable window area in every habitable room shall be equal to at least forty five percent (45%) of the minimum window area size,
or minimum skylight type window size, as required in this section; except where there is supplied some other device affording adequate ventilation,
approved by the fire chief and/or director of public health and safety.
3. Every bathroom and water closet compartment shall comply with the light and ventilation requirements for habitable rooms contained in this section,
except that no window or skylight shall be required in adequately ventilated bathrooms and water closets equipped with a ventilation system
approved by the fire chief and director of public health and safety jointly. (Village code § 18-24; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
4. Every habitable room of such dwelling shall contain at least two (2) separate floor or wall type electric convenience outlets, or one such convenience
outlet, and one supplied ceiling type electric light fixture. Every water closet compartment, bathroom, laundry room, furnace room and public hall
shall contain at least one supplied ceiling or wall type electric light fixture. Every such outlet and fixture shall be properly installed and shall be
connected to the source of electric power in a safe manner. (Village code § 18-24)
5. Every dwelling shall have heating facilities which are properly installed and maintained in safe, good working condition and which are capable of
safely and adequately heating all habitable rooms and bathrooms in every dwelling unit located therein. During that portion of each year, from
September 15 through May 1, heat shall be provided to a temperature of at least sixty eight degrees Fahrenheit (68°F) at a distance of three feet (3')
above floor level under ordinary winter conditions. (Ord. O-19-82, 9-27-1982)
6. Every public hall and stairway in every multiple dwelling, containing five (5) or more dwelling units, shall be adequately lighted at all times. Every
public hall and stairway in structures devoted solely to dwelling occupancy, and containing not more than four (4) dwelling units, may be supplied
with conveniently located light switches controlling an adequate lighting system, which may be turned on when needed, instead of full time lighting.
7. During that portion of each year from May 1 through October 31, for protection against mosquitoes, flies and other insects, every door opening
directly from a dwelling unit into outdoor space shall have supplied screens and a self-closing device. Every window or other device with openings to
outdoor space used, or intended to be used, for ventilation shall likewise be supplied with screens.
8. Every basement or cellar window used or intended to be used for ventilation, and every other opening to a basement which might provide an entry
for rodents, shall be supplied with a screen or such other device as will effectively prevent their entrance. (Village code § 18-24)
8-5-5: SAFETY AND SANITARY MAINTENANCE:
A. Every foundation, floor, wall, ceiling and roof shall be reasonably weathertight and rodentproof, and shall be capable of affording privacy and kept in
good repair.
B. Every window, exterior door and basement hatchway shall be reasonably weathertight, watertight and rodentproof, and shall be kept in sound working
condition and good repair.
C. Every inside and outside stair, every porch and every appurtenance thereto shall be so constructed as to be safe to use and capable of supporting the
load that normal use may cause to be placed thereon and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 293/416
D. Every plumbing fixture and water and waste pipe shall be properly installed and maintained in good sanitary working condition free from defects, leaks
and obstructions.
E. Every water closet compartment floor surface and bathroom floor shall be constructed and maintained as to be reasonably impervious to water, and so
as to permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean, sanitary condition.
F. Every supplied facility, piece of equipment or utility which is required under this chapter shall be so constructed or installed that it will function safely and
effectively and shall be maintained in satisfactory working condition. (Village code § 18-25)
G. No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any service facility, equipment or utility which is required under this chapter to be removed from or shut off
from or discontinued for any occupied dwelling let or occupied by him, except for such temporary interruption as may be necessary while actual repairs
or alterations are in process, or during temporary emergencies when discontinuance of service is approved by the fire chief and/or director of public
health and safety. (Village code § 18-25; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
H. Garages with a capacity of four (4) or less vehicles shall be kept in good repair and shall be equipped with doors which shall adequately protect the
interior against invasion by animals and rodents. (Ord. O-12-74, 9-14-1974)
8-5-6: MINIMUM SPACE, USE AND LOCATION REQUIREMENTS:
A. Every dwelling unit shall contain at least one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor space for the first occupant thereof, and at least one hundred (100)
additional square feet of floor space for every additional occupant thereof. The floor space to be calculated on the basis of total habitable room area.
B. In every dwelling unit of two (2) or more rooms, every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at least seventy (70) square
feet of floor space. Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one occupant shall contain at least fifty (50) square feet of floor space for
each occupant thereof.
C. No dwelling or dwelling unit containing two (2) or more sleeping rooms shall have such room arrangement that access to a bathroom or water closet
compartment intended for use by occupants of more than one sleeping room, can be had only by going through another sleeping room. Nor shall room
arrangements be such that access to a sleeping room can be had only by going through another sleeping room, or a bathroom or water closet
compartment.
D. At least one-half (1/2) of the floor area of every habitable room shall have a ceiling height of at least eight feet (8') on the first floor, and seven feet six
inches (7'6") on any additional floors. The floor area of that part of any room where the ceiling height is less than five feet (5'), shall not be considered a
part of the floor area of the room for the purpose of determining the maximum permissible occupancy thereof.
E. No cellar space shall be used as a habitable room or dwelling unit. (Village code § 18-26)
F. No basement space shall be used as a habitable room or dwelling unit unless the floor and walls are impervious to leakage of underground and surface
runoff water and are insulated against dampness. Said basement space shall have a total window area in each room equal to at least the minimum
window area size as required by this chapter. Such required minimum window area to be located entirely above the grade of the ground adjoining such
window area. The total of openable window area in each room to be equal to at least the minimum required under subsection 8-5-4B2 of this chapter,
except where there is supplied some other device affording adequate ventilation and approved by the fire chief and director of public health and safety
jointly. (Village code § 18-26; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
8-5-7: RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS:
A. Every owner of a dwelling containing two (2) or more dwelling units shall be responsible for maintaining in a clean, sanitary condition the shared or
public areas of the dwelling and premises thereof.
B. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling units shall keep in a clean, sanitary condition that part of the dwelling, dwelling unit and premises thereof which
he occupies and controls.
C. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of all his rubbish in a clean, sanitary manner by placing it in the rubbish containers required
by the village code.
D. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of all his garbage, and any other organic waste which might provide food for rodents, in a
clean, sanitary manner, by placing it in the garbage disposal facilities or garbage storage containers required by this chapter. It shall be the joint and
several responsibility and duty of the owner, landlord, tenant or occupant of all dwelling units, in any building containing more than one dwelling unit, to
supply the required garbage disposal facilities, as provided in subsection 8-5-4A6 of this chapter. In all other cases, it shall be the responsibility of the
occupant to furnish such facilities or containers2.
E. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall be responsible for hanging all screens, and double or storm doors and windows, whenever the same
are required under the provisions of this chapter, except where the owner has agreed to supply such service.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 294/416
F. Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit shall be responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents or other pests therein or
on the premises. Every occupant of a dwelling unit, in a dwelling containing more than one dwelling unit, shall be responsible for such extermination
whenever his dwelling unit is the only one infested. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this subsection, whenever infestation is caused by
failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling in a ratproof or reasonably insectproof condition, extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner.
Whenever infestation exists in two (2) or more of the dwelling units in any dwelling, or in the shared or public parts of any dwelling of two (2) or more
dwelling units, extermination thereof shall be the responsibility of the owner.
G. Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep all plumbing fixtures therein in a clean, sanitary condition and shall be responsible for the exercise of
reasonable care in the proper use and operation thereof. (Village code § 18-27)
8-5-8: ANNUAL INSPECTIONS:
A. The building department and/or fire department shall make an annual inspection of all theaters, churches, schools, public assembly units and open air
assembly units, and also all buildings two (2) stories or more in height containing at least four (4) dwelling units and lodging or rooming houses.
B. It shall be the duty of every owner, agent, lessee or occupant of any such building and of the person in charge or control of same to permit the making
of such annual inspection by a duly authorized inspector at any time upon demand being duly made. In addition to exterior and common area
inspections, the inspection shall include the interior of dwelling units according to the following schedule:
1. In buildings containing from four (4) to ten (10) dwelling units, a minimum of one unit in each building.
2. In buildings containing from eleven (11) to twenty (20) dwelling units, a minimum of two (2) units in each building.
3. In buildings containing from twenty one (21) or more dwelling units, a minimum of ten percent (10%) of the units in each building. (Ord. O-21-76, 10-
25-1976)
8-5-9: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, shall upon conviction thereof be fined as provided in the general penalty in section 1-3-1 of this
code for each offense, and each day on which said violation occurs, shall be deemed a separate offense. (Village code § 18-28; amd. 2004 Code)
Chapter 6
SIGNS
8-6-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known, cited and referred to as the FOREST PARK SIGN ORDINANCE. (Ord. O-25-98, 11-9-1998)
8-6-2: PURPOSE:
Regulation of the location, size, placement and certain features of signs and awnings is necessary to enable the public to locate goods, services and
facilities in the village without difficulty and confusion, to encourage the general attractiveness of the community and to protect property values therein. It is
the intention of this chapter to establish regulations governing the display of signs which will:
A. Promote and protect the public health, safety, comfort and convenience;
B. Enhance the economy and the business industry of the village by promoting the reasonable, orderly and effective display of signs;
C. Restrict signs and lights which reduce the public's capacity to receive information which can increase the probability of traffic congestion and accidents
by distracting attention or obstructing vision. (Ord. O-25-98, 11-9-1998)
8-6-3: DEFINITIONS:
ABANDONED/OBSOLETE SIGNS: A sign which no longer correctly directs any person, or advertises a bonafide business, lessor, owner, product or
activity.
ADVERTISING SIGN: A sign, other than an off premises identification sign, that directs attention to or identifies a business, commodity, service or
entertainment conducted, sold or offered at a location other than the premises on which the sign is located. This term shall include signs, other than
customary identification lettering and advertising posters on buses and taxicabs, attached to parked or moving vehicles.
ATTENTION GETTING DEVICE: A sign designed to attract attention by means of flashing or moving parts, bright color or light or movement of any kind.
Examples of such signs are pennants hung in series, banners, garrison sized flags, other than the official flag of the United States, whirligigs, spinners,
streamers, flashing lights, searchlights and balloons.
AWNING, FIXED: A structure made of cloth, metal or other material affixed to a building in such a manner that the structure may not be raised or retracted
to a position against the building.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 295/416
AWNING, MOVABLE: A structure made of cloth, metal or other material affixed to a building in such a manner that the structure may be raised or retracted
to a position against the building.
BANNER: A sign intended to be hung either with or without a frame, possessing characters, letters, illustrations or ornamentations applied to paper, plastic
or fabric of any kind.
BENCH SIGN: A sign located on a bench, as provided in section 3-5B-4 of this code, and located in the public right of way.
BLOCK: That property abutting on a street, on both sides of such street, and lying between the two (2) nearest intersections and intercepting streets, or
nearest intersecting or intercepting street and railroad right of way or water right of way.
BULLETIN BOARD SIGN: A sign identifying an educational, civic or religious organization on whose premises it is located and which contains only the
name of the institution or organization, the name or names of persons connected with it and greetings, announcements of events or activities occurring at
the institution, or similar messages.
BUSINESS SIGN: Any sign identifying a business, profession, activity, commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered upon the premises
where such sign is located, or within the building to which such sign is affixed.
CANOPY: A structure other than an awning made of cloth, metal or other material with frames affixed to the building and carried by a frame which is
supported by the ground.
CHANGEABLE MESSAGE SIGN: A sign, other than a bulletin board or public service sign, having a face or faces that allow the message on the sign to
be readily changed by means of light banks, removable letters or other device.
CIVIC EVENT SIGN: A temporary sign that announces or identifies a civic use, purpose, event or program.
CONSTRUCTION SIGN: A temporary sign erected on premises on which construction is taking place, during the period of construction, indicating the
names of the architects, engineers, landscape architects, contractors and/or similar artisans, and/or the owners, financial supports, sponsors and/or similar
persons or firms having a role or interest in the construction activity.
DIRECTOR: Refers to the director of public health and safety of the village of Forest Park.
ELECTION SIGN: A temporary sign announcing or supporting political candidates or issues in connection with any national, state or local election.
ELECTRONIC MESSAGE SIGN: A sign which displays a message and/or design in lights which may change, but which does not flash. An example of this
would be a time and temperature sign.
EXISTING PERMANENT SIGN: A permanent sign displayed in the village on or after the effective date of this chapter.
FLASHING SIGN: A sign which repeats an unchanging light pattern of words, numerals or designs of constant brightness lighting.
GOVERNMENTAL SIGN: A sign erected and maintained pursuant to and in discharge of any governmental function or required by any law, ordinance or
governmental regulation.
GROUND SIGN: Any sign, except a pole sign, that is placed on grade, and not supported by a building.
HOLIDAY DECORATIONS: Signs in the nature of decorations, clearly incidental to and customarily and commonly associated with any national, local or
religious holiday.
IDENTIFICATION SIGN: A sign giving only the name, trademark or other readily recognized symbol or address, or any combination thereof, of a building,
business, development or establishment on the premises where it is located.
ILLUMINATED SIGN: Any sign of which all or any part of the letters are made in an outline of incandescent lamps; signs with painted, flush or raised
letters lighted by an electric lamp or lamps attached thereto and reflecting light thereon; neon tubing signs and transparent glass signs either lighted by
electricity or other illuminant.
INFLATABLE SIGN: Any sign consisting of fabric, plastic, rubber or other similar material which is inflated with hot air, pressurized air or other gas, and
which may or may not be lettered or painted with advertising, emblems and/or logos.
MARQUEE SIGN: A sign fastened to any hood or canopy over the entrance to places of public assemblage, extending wholly or in part over public right of
way and supported from the building.
NEON SIGN: A sign consisting in part or total of glass or plastic tubing which contains neon or a similar gas and which, when exited by an electrical
current of one thousand (1,000) or more volts, emits a glow or light.
PAPER SIGNS: A sign or signs that are made of paper or cardboard and are taped or otherwise secured to a window.
PERMANENT SIGN: A sign which is displayed for more than thirty (30) consecutive days in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
POLE SIGN: A sign supported by a pole or poles and/or column or columns, and not attached to a building. Such signs may be of any shape, provided
that they do not exceed the maximum square footage permitted for that property, and are at least ten feet (10') above adjacent grade, and not more than
twenty four feet (24') in height. The supporting pole(s) may not exceed a total horizontal width or depth of twelve inches (12"). In no case shall a pole sign
extend beyond the right of way line.
PORTABLE SIGN: A sign that is not permanently affixed to a building, a structure or the ground, but not including customary identification lettering on
vehicles, or advertising posters on buses or taxicabs.
PROJECTING SIGN: A sign, letter, word, model, device or representation used in the nature of an advertisement, announcement or direction extending
over the sidewalk beyond the building line, and over the public right of way. Such projecting signs shall include flat signs which are attached in a rigid
manner and lie parallel to the building line but project beyond the building line, as well as signs which are affixed to the building wall which extend over the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 296/416
sidewalk and/or right of way either perpendicular to the building face or at any angle.
ROOF SIGN: A sign erected, constructed or maintained upon the roof of any building or above the top of the wall.
SANDWICH BOARD SIGN: A sign which is not permanently affixed to a building, structure or the ground, which is of an "A" framed design and which is
oriented to the pedestrian.
SIGN: Any display, device, flag, balloon, letter, word, picture, model or light used in the nature of an advertisement, announcement or intended to attract
attention or to direct and/or provide information about or to a business or other establishment.
TEMPORARY SIGN: A sign which identifies a sale or promotional item and shall not be displayed for more than thirty (30) consecutive days in any ninety
(90) day period.
VISION TRIANGLE: The space extending from the right of way line at a street or alley intersection to a distance of ten feet (10') from the intersection of the
two (2) right of way lines.
WALL SIGN: A painted poster or sign on the front, rear or side of any building, or on any poster on the front, rear or side wall of any building or on any
surface or place that may be affixed to the front, rear or side wall of any building. (Ord. O-25-98, 11-9-1998; amd. Ord. O-18-04, 4-26-2004; Ord. O-7-10,
2-8-2010)
8-6-4: SIGN PERMITS:
A. Permit Required: No ground sign, roof sign, wall sign, pole sign, projecting sign, bench sign, banner sign, inflatable sign or illuminated sign shall be
erected by any person except as prescribed by this chapter, nor until a permit therefor shall have been issued by the director. For the purpose of this
chapter, a change in the advertising copy of a sign shall be construed to be a new sign; in other words, a change in the sign face, although utilizing an
existing support or frame, shall be considered a new sign. Use of existing supports for a projecting sign shall not include any exposed supports.
For the purpose of this chapter, copy changes on bench signs and on highway advertising shall be permitted subject to the fees established in
subsection C of this section, and shall not be construed as new signs.
B. Application For Permit: No permit shall be granted until after an application has been filed with the director, showing the plans and specifications
including dimensions, materials and details of construction of the proposed structure, nor until all the provisions of this chapter relating to such structure
shall have been paid to the village collector. The director may prescribe suitable regulations consistent with the provisions of this chapter concerning
the form and contents of all applications for the various forms of permits herein required.
C. Permit/Annual Inspection Fees:
1. The permit fee for signs shall be as follows:
Illuminated signs:
20 square feet and less $35.00
Over 20 square feet $35.00 plus $1.00 for each additional square foot, plus all applicable electrical
permit fees
Nonilluminated signs:
20 square feet and less $35.00
Over 20 square feet $35.00 plus $1.00 for each additional square foot
Bench sign, annual permit $35.00, including any sign changes
Billboards, highway, conforming to Illinois highway
advertising act:
New signs $2.00 per square foot of sign area (total of all faces)
Copy change on existing signs $25.00 per change
Banner signs $10.00
Inflatable signs $100.00 per calendar year
Sandwich board signs $25.00
2. The annual inspection fee for signs shall be:
Illuminated signs:
20 square feet and less $35.00
Over 20 square feet $35.00 plus $1.00 for each additional square foot
Nonilluminated signs:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 297/416
20 square feet and less $20.00
Over 20 square feet $20.00, plus $0.50 for each additional square foot
Bench signs Fee is included in annual bench fee, see section 3-5-1 of this code
Billboards, highway, conforming to Illinois highway advertising act $0.25 per square foot for each sign face
(Ord. O-25-98, 11-9-1998; amd. Ord. O-18-04, 4-26-2004)
8-6-5: PERMITTED SIGNS:
A. Signs With A Permit:
1. R Districts: In an R district, the following signs shall be permitted:
a. A sign, not exceeding one square foot in area, giving the name and/or address only of the land or building on which it is displayed, or the owner or
lessee thereof.
b. For a structure other than a dwelling unit, one identification sign not exceeding ten (10) square feet, except a church bulletin board which shall not
exceed eighteen (18) square feet.
If illuminated, the source of light shall not be visible and shall not be intermittent or flashing. All signs other than a church bulletin board or house
numbers shall not project into any portion of a required front yard.
c. Signs related to a residential garage sale, as permitted by other code provisions, shall not exceed a double faced sign of six (6) square feet posted
on the premises during the time that the sale is being conducted, and which shall not be located on public property or the public way.
d. Such state, county and village signs and traffic signs as are installed for public purposes.
2. B-1 And B-2 Districts: In a B-1 or B-2 district, the following signs shall be permitted:
a. Signs which pertain to a legal use conducted within the main building on the lot. All signs are limited to no more than a total area of sixty (60)
square feet for each lot and shall be displayed not less than ten feet (10') or more than sixteen feet (16') for wall and projecting signs or the top of
the front wall of the building, whichever is lower, and for all other signs, no more than twenty four feet (24') above the ground level. However, if any
one building occupies more than fifty feet (50') of frontage on any one street, then the total aggregate area of one face of all such signs on the
premises may be increased at the rate of one square foot of sign area for each foot of frontage in excess of fifty feet (50'), and the percentage
allocated to each business adjusted accordingly. In the case where several businesses share space in one building, then such maximum sign area
shall be distributed among the businesses on a percentage basis of the total rentable square footage of the building.
All projecting signs (in the Madison Street sign district) shall be located no lower than ten feet (10') and no higher than sixteen feet (16') from
adjacent grade to the top of the front wall, whichever is lower.
b. Window area signs, permanent or temporary, may not cover more than fifty percent (50%) of any window unit square footage (1/2 of the total
window area). (Ord. O-25-98, 11-9-1998)
c. Sandwich board signs in conformance with subsection 8-6-6H of this chapter. (Ord. O-18-04, 4-26-2004)
3. B-3, I-1 And I-2 Districts: In a B-3, I-1 or I-2 district, the following signs shall be permitted:
a. Any sign which pertains to a use conducted within the main building, provided that the total area of such sign or signs shall not exceed ninety (90)
square feet for each building and shall be displayed not less than ten feet (10') or more than twenty four feet (24') above the ground level.
However, if any one building occupies more than fifty feet (50') of frontage of all streets, then the total aggregate area of one face of all such signs
on the premises may be increased at the rate of one and one-half (11/2) square feet of sign area for each foot of total frontage in excess of fifty feet
(50').
In the case where several businesses share space in one building, then such maximum sign area shall be distributed among the businesses on a
percentage basis of the total rentable square footage of the building.
b. For a development of mixed office, business, commercial and/or assembly uses in a B-3, I-1 or I-2 district, on a site of not less than fifteen (15)
acres, the total aggregate of all wall signs shall be one and three-fourths (13/4) square feet of sign for each foot of primary building frontage for
each tenant, and for tenants with corner exposure, three-fourths (3/4) square foot for each foot of secondary frontage. In addition, group ground
signs shall be permitted on the basis of three-fourths (3/4) square foot of ground sign for each foot of total lot frontage; such ground signs being
allocated on the basis of each tenant's or occupant's percentage of total rentable area of the building, and shall be controlled by the building
management.
In such cases where a tenant has multiple exposures, such as a corner location, such tenant shall be permitted to locate signage on the side
exposure, but such signs shall be limited to three-fourths (3/4) of a square foot based on the side secondary exposure. Sign allocation of the
primary frontage exposure shall be limited to that side of the building.
c. Window area signs, permanent or temporary, may not cover more than fifty percent (50%) of any window unit square footage (1/2 of the total
window area).
4. Inflatable Signs: In a B-3 district, an inflatable sign may be erected for a period of not more than ten (10) days and with a maximum frequency of no
more often that twelve (12) times per year. In all other business and industrial zones, such inflatable signs shall be permitted for a period of not more
than fourteen (14) days, and with a maximum frequency of no more often than three (3) times per year. Such signs shall be special event signs, and
are semitemporary in their nature.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 298/416
B. Signs Allowed Without Permit, Fee Or Inspection: Except as regulated by sections 8-6-6 and 8-6-7 of this chapter and/or as expressly prohibited in
section 8-6-9 of this chapter, and notwithstanding any other contrary provisions of this code, the following signs may, subject to the following limitations,
be erected and maintained in any district without obtaining a sign permit or paying the fee required for such permit:
1. Bulletin Board Signs: Such signs shall be limited to no more than one wall or ground sign per zoning lot, shall be no more than twenty five (25)
square feet in area, and shall be permitted only in connection with public, religious and civic institutions. No such sign shall be higher than six feet
(6'), nor be closer to any sidewalk or street line than eight feet (8'), or closer to any other lot line than six feet (6') or, in either case, no closer than the
distance of the required yard or setback, whichever is less. No such sign shall permitted in any residential district.
2. Civic Event Signs: Such signs shall be limited to no more than one wall or ground sign per zoning lot. No such sign shall be larger than thirty two (32)
square feet in area. Such signs shall be displayed for a period of not more than fourteen (14) days unless an application has been filed and
specifically approved for a longer period of time by the director upon application filed therefor. Signs permitted under this subsection shall be
removed within two (2) days after the end of the event.
3. Election Signs: Such signs shall be located entirely on private property pursuant to the owner's consent, shall be permitted no more than thirty (30)
days prior to an election, and shall be removed within two (2) days after that election. Unless such sign includes on its face the name of the person or
organization responsible for such sign, the owner of the private property on which such sign is located shall be deemed responsible for such sign.
4. Governmental Signs: The content and size of any such sign shall not exceed the requirements of the law, ordinance or regulation pursuant to which
such sign is erected.
5. Holiday Decorations: Such signs shall be displayed; notwithstanding any other provisions of this section to the contrary, such signs may be of any
type, number, area, height, location, illumination or animation so long as they create no safety hazard, nuisance or adverse impact on the adjacent
properties.
6. Memorial Signs: Such signs shall be limited to no more than one wall or ground sign per zoning lot, shall be made of durable materials such as
bronze, stone or concrete, shall not be illuminated, and shall not exceed three (3) square feet in area. No ground sign shall be higher than two feet
(2'), or closer to any sidewalk or street line than ten feet (10') or any lot line than six feet (6').
7. Nameplate Signs: Such signs shall be limited to no more than one wall or ground sign per occupancy, shall be no more than one square foot in area
per occupancy and in no event may the aggregate total be more than three (3) square feet in area, and shall not be illuminated. No nameplate
ground sign shall be higher than four feet (4') nor closer to any sidewalk or street line than ten feet (10') or to any lot line than six feet (6').
8. Official Flags And Emblems: Such signs may be displayed on flagpoles and when so displayed shall not exceed twenty four (24) square feet in area.
Such signs also may be displayed in the form of a wall sign and when so displayed shall not exceed three (3) square feet in area.
9. On Site Informational Signs: Such signs shall be limited to wall or ground signs of not more than three (3) square feet in area, shall be, if a ground
sign, not more than four feet (4') in height, and shall be illuminated only as necessary to accomplish their intended purpose. No such sign shall be
permitted in any residential district.
10. Political Message Signs: Such signs shall be permitted on private property; provided, however, that no more than two (2) such signs shall be
permitted per lot, no such sign shall be located within any required yard or setback and no such sign shall exceed six (6) square feet in sign area.
11. Private Garage Sale Signs: Such signs shall be no more than six (6) square feet in area, shall be located entirely on the premises where such sale
is to be conducted, shall be clearly marked with the name, address and telephone number of the person responsible for the removal of such sign,
shall be erected not more than twenty four (24) hours before such sale, and shall be removed within twenty four (24) hours following the conclusion
of such sale. No ground sign shall be higher than four feet (4'), nor closer to any sidewalk or street line than ten feet (10') or any lot line than six feet
(6').
12. Private Warning Signs: Such signs, such as those displaying private parking and/or off street loading condition, and private traffic control signs shall
be no more than two (2) square feet in area each, shall be limited to the number necessary to accomplish the intended purpose, and shall be
illuminated only as required to accomplish such purpose.
13. Restaurant Menu Display: Such signs shall be permitted only in the B-1 and B-2 business districts. Only one such sign shall be permitted per
zoning lot. No such sign shall exceed three (3) square feet in total sign area.
14. Temporary Use Signs: Such signs may include:
a. Signs announcing events, such as grand openings, going out of business, under new management, birthday announcements and births.
b. Signs announcing the sale of seasonal products, such as Christmas trees, farmer's market, etc.
Every such temporary use sign is subject to the following conditions, and the conditions set out in section 8-6-7 of this chapter:
(1) Ground signs shall not to exceed thirty six (36) square feet, nor be more than four feet (4') tall per sign face and shall not exceed six feet (6') in
overall height as measured from the immediate adjacent grade;
(2) Wall and window signs shall comply with the area limitation for such structural sign;
(3) Such signs shall be limited to a period of thirty (30) days unless otherwise provided by the director;
(4) May be displayed up to three (3) times within one calendar year on any given property;
(5) Shall be located on the lot of which such temporary use serves;
(6) Shall be of sturdy construction and shall not be detrimental to the character of the area;
(7) Shall be removed within twenty four (24) hours following termination of the temporary use;
(8) May not obstruct the vision triangle.
15. Window Signs, Temporary: The aggregate area of all such signs shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the area of the window in which they are
exhibited nor block any window area required for light, ventilation or emergency exit by any applicable code. No such sign shall be illuminated, nor
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 299/416
shall any such sign shall be permitted in any residential district. (Ord. O-25-98, 11-9-1998)
8-6-6: SIGN SPECIFICATIONS:
A. Ground Signs:
1. Ground signs shall not obstruct the required vision triangle on corner lots. Every ground sign shall comply with all requirements of the village's
building code.
2. No ground sign shall exceed twenty four feet (24') in height above the grade of the street to which the face of the sign is directed or in the event that
the sign faces two (2) streets, the grade of the street at the lowest level measured to the top of the sign.
B. Roof Signs: Roof signs are prohibited.
C. Wall Signs:
1. No wall sign shall be so erected as to cover the doors or windows of any building or as to prevent free ingress and egress to and from any window,
door or fire escape of any building.
2. No wall sign shall extend beyond the building line more than twelve inches (12") except, however, that if the sign is illuminated, lighting reflectors
may project up to six feet (6') beyond the building line but in no event beyond the right of way line. All wall signs must be safely and adequately
attached to the building.
3. No signs shall be painted directly on the outside wall of any building.
D. Projecting Signs: Projecting signs are permitted in the Madison Street sign district only.
1. Due to the older development pattern along Madison Street, where the buildings have been constructed without side yards or open space on the
street front, these properties do not have the opportunity for ground or pole signs. Accordingly, the properties abutting both sides of Madison Street,
from Harlem Avenue to 73.12 feet west of Jackson Boulevard shall constitute the Madison Street sign district. Projecting signs shall be permitted in
this district only, and are prohibited in the rest of the village.
2. Projecting signs may extend to a maximum of one foot (1') back from the curb line as established for the majority of the block face, but the maximum
projection shall not exceed ten feet (10') from the face of the building.
3. The permitted projection shall be determined by the location of the sign in reference to the building facade, with a projection of three inches (3")
being permitted for each one foot (1') that the sign is located from the edges of the building. (Ord. O-25-98, 11-9-1998)
4. With the exception of awnings, no projecting sign shall be erected, constructed or maintained so that its lowest edge is less than ten feet (10') above
the sidewalk or less than fifteen feet (15') above an alley. Awnings may be located no lower than eight feet (8') above the sidewalk and no lower than
fifteen feet (15') above any alley. (Ord. O-25-98, 11-9-1998; amd. Ord. O-4-01, 1-8-2001)
5. No projecting vertical sign shall extend above the roof or top of the cornice wall.
6. All projecting signs shall be constructed to satisfy the requirements of the village's building code.
7. Projecting signs shall be made of metal or wood.
8. Every projecting sign shall be securely attached to the building in such a fashion that the supports are not visible, but instead are contained and
concealed by the sign body.
E. Banner Signs:
1. No section of a banner sign made of plastic, canvas or other cloth nor shall it be more than thirty two (32) square feet in area. No more than one
section shall be attached to any twenty feet (20') frontage of any building abutting public property, nor shall any banner sign be placed in contact with
an electric sign.
2. A banner sign shall not be erected for a period to exceed thirty (30) days, without extension of permit being obtained, and no renewal shall be
granted for a period over ninety (90) days from original date of erection.
F. Marquees And Marquee Signs: Marquee and marquee signs are no longer permitted.
G. Awnings:
1. Movable: Movable awnings shall be permitted to project over the public right of way no more than five feet (5') from the front wall of the building on
which they are mounted. Such awnings shall be allowed sign content, but such sign area shall be counted as part of the permitted sign area of that
property and/or business as applicable. Such awnings may be illuminated by exterior mounted light standards from above, but not below the
awnings. (Ord. O-25-98, 11-9-1998)
2. Fixed: All fixed awnings shall consist of a single flat plane surface for the face panel with triangular end panels, if any. Such awnings shall not be lit
from below or within, but may be illuminated from exterior light standards from above the awning.
If the awning contains signage or advertising, other than the address number, such awning shall be considered to be a sign. If the awning signage
contains information other than the name, address and/or telephone number of the business, then such content must be approved by the village. If
the awning projects over the public right of way, with the exception of awnings located in the Madison Street sign district, the maximum area of any
advertising on the awning shall be limited to no more than ten percent (10%) of the total area of the awning. (Ord. O-18-01, 4-23-2001)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 300/416
H. Sandwich Board Signs:
1. Madison Street Sign District Only: Sandwich board signs shall be permitted in the Madison Street sign district only, as described in subsection D of
this section.
2. Business Criteria: Sandwich board signs must meet all of the following criteria:
a. The building in which the business is located is set back no more than ten feet (10') from the sidewalk on which the sandwich board will be
located.
b. The business has a customer entrance or service window which faces and is within ten feet (10') of the sidewalk on which the sandwich board
sign will be located.
3. Location On Sidewalk: Sandwich board signs shall be located entirely on a sidewalk within a public right of way or on private property and shall be
located between the two (2) lot lines of the business displaying such sign. Sandwich board signs shall not be located in a roadway, alley or vehicle
way. A minimum of four feet (4') of public sidewalk shall remain unobstructed at all times.
4. Design Criteria:
a. Size: Sandwich board signs shall be not more than ten (10) square feet in area and no more than four feet (4') in height.
b. Design: Sandwich board signs shall be professionally made and maintained in good condition. Signs shall be of an "A" frame design and properly
weighted so as not to create a windblown hazard. Signs shall not have any nails, tacks, wires or sharp metal edges protruding therefrom.
c. Illumination: Sandwich board signs shall not be illuminated.
5. Mixed Signs Prohibited: Businesses which display a sandwich board sign shall not display any other temporary use signs or banners.
6. Number Permitted: Not more than one sandwich board sign shall be permitted per business.
7. Time Restrictions: Sandwich board signs shall not be displayed before the time that the business displaying such sign is open to the public.
Sandwich board signs shall be taken down each day no later than nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. or the close of the business displaying such sign,
whichever is earlier.
8. Fees: Sandwich board signs shall be subject to the fees established in subsection 8-6-4C of this chapter. (Ord. O-18-04, 4-26-2004)
8-6-7: GENERAL STANDARDS:
The following general standards shall apply to all signs:
A. Illumination:
1. Location And Design Of Light Source: Whenever an external artificial light source is used for a sign, such source shall be located, shielded and
directed so as not to be directly visible from any public street or private residence. No receptacle or device housing a permitted light source for a sign
shall protrude more than eighteen inches (18") from the face of the sign or building to which it is attached.
2. Level Of Illumination: In no event shall the illumination of any sign, resulting from any internal or external artificial light source, exceed fifty (50) footcandles
when measured with a standard light meter held perpendicular to the sign face at a distance equal to the narrowest dimension of such sign
face. All artificial illumination shall be so designed, located, shielded and directed as to prevent the casting of glare or direct light upon adjacent
property or streets.
3. Signs Adjacent To Residential Areas: Any illuminated sign located on a lot abutting or across a street from, and visible from, any residentially zoned
area shall not be illuminated between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M., except that such sign may remain
illuminated during such time as the activity to which the sign pertains is open for business as long as such sign is not a public or private nuisance.
4. Flashing Lights Prohibited: Except for public service signs expressly permitted by this chapter no flashing, blinking or intermittent lights shall be
permitted.
5. Awnings: Awnings illuminated from the interior are prohibited.
6. Neon Lights: Neon utilized to outline windows, doors and building elements is prohibited.
B. Electrical Elements: All wiring, fittings and materials used in the construction, connection and operation of electrically illuminated signs shall be in
accordance with the provisions of the village's electrical code. An Underwriter's Laboratories label, or an equivalent certification, shall be affixed to
every electrical component incorporated into a sign. Each illuminated sign shall have a readily accessible disconnection switch.
No metal sign illuminated by any means requiring internal wiring and no electrical fixtures attached to any sign shall be lower than nine feet (9') from
grade unless it is grounded by the use of a grounding conductor run with the circuit conductors and is also grounded by being bonded to a grounding
electrode at the sign site.
C. Structural Elements: The construction and structural components of all signs shall be in accordance with the standards and regulations of the village's
building code. All permanent signs shall be constructed of fire resistant materials and shall be capable of withstanding wind pressures of at least thirty
(30) pounds per square foot of surface area and of receiving dead loads based on the actual weight of the structure.
D. Minimum Elevation Of Certain Signs: The bottom of every canopy, projecting and wall sign shall be elevated at least ten feet (10') above grade, except
that one wall mounted identification sign not greater than one square foot in area may be elevated to not less than four feet (4') above grade.
Whenever possible, wall signs on the same facade shall maintain the same top and bottom elevations above grade.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 301/416
E. Obstruction Of Accessways: No sign or sign structure shall obstruct free ingress to or egress from a fire escape, door, window or other required
accessway, or be attached to any standpipe or fire escape.
F. Obstruction Of Window Surface: No sign shall project over or obstruct any window surface required for light or ventilation by any applicable provision of
the village's building code.
G. Traffic Safety:
1. Confusion With Traffic Signals: No sign shall be maintained at any location where by reason of its position, size, shape, content, color or illumination
it may obstruct, impair, obscure, interfere with the view of, or be confused with any traffic control sign, signal or device or where it may interfere with,
mislead or confuse traffic.
2. Obstruction Of Sight Triangles Prohibited: No sign, nor any part of a sign other than a supporting pole or brace no greater than twelve inches (12") in
width or diameter, shall be located in the area between two and one-half feet (21/2') and ten feet (10') from grade within the area defined in this code.
(Ord. O-25-98, 11-9-1998)
3. Signs In Rights Of Way: No sign shall be placed in or extend into or over any public property or right of way, except: a) governmental and civic signs
providing direction and/or information and as authorized in this chapter; b) bench signs as approved annually by the village council as provided in
section 3-5B-4 of this code; and c) projecting signs and sandwich board signs located in the Madison Street sign district. Civic event signs may
extend on, into or over a public right of way upon the specific prior approval of the building director. (Ord. O-18-04, 4-26-2004)
4. Civic Event Signs: No civic event signs authorized in this chapter shall be permitted except upon the specific prior approval of the director.
H. Sign Measurement:
1. Area Included: The supporting structure or bracing of a sign shall be omitted in measuring the area of the sign unless such structure or bracing is
made part of the message or face of the sign. When a sign has more than one display face, all faces shall be included in determining the total area of
the sign.
2. Area Of Signs With Backing: The area of all signs with backing shall be measured by computing the area of the sign backing.
3. Area Of Signs Without Backing: The area of all signs without backing shall be measured by computing the area of the smallest rectangular geometric
figures that can separately encompass all words, letters, figures, emblems and other elements of the sign message.
4. Area Of Signs With And Without Backing: The area of all signs formed by a combination of elements with and without backing shall be measured by
combining the area of such elements measured in accordance with the foregoing subparagraphs.
I. Signs On Lots With Multiple Users: When more than one user occupies a zoning lot, the owner of the lot shall be responsible for allocating permitted
signs among such users.
J. Sign Spacing: No sign shall be nearer than two feet (2') to any other sign or structure, other than a structure to which it is lawfully attached.
K. Obscene Matter: No sign shall include or display any obscene, indecent or immoral matter.
L. General Safety: Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, no sign shall be constructed or maintained in any area or in any manner so as to
create a nuisance or a threat to the public safety or welfare. (Ord. O-25-98, 11-9-1998)
8-6-8: REAL ESTATE SIGNS:
A. R-1 And R-2 Districts:
1. It shall be unlawful for any real estate broker, owner, manager, tenant or person in control of property to construct, erect, place, maintain or install on
any premises or dwelling located in the village in any district zoned R-l or R-2 by the village zoning ordinance, any sign, printed, inscribed or having
thereon any of the following words or words which have a similar meaning or connotation to said words; namely: "for rent", "for lease", "for sale",
"sold", "new house", "now selling", "visitors invited", "installed by" or "built by".
2. For the purpose of this chapter, a "sign" is defined to be a flag, bunting or any structure or material substance, its or their parts together with frame,
background or supports thereof used for advertising purposes.
3. A sign with the words "open house" or "open for inspection" shall be permitted on private residential property zoned R-1 or R-2 provided:
a. The size of the sign does not exceed twenty four inches by thirty six inches (24" x 36"); and
b. Such a sign is erected and displayed only on a Saturday or Sunday and displayed only during the time the property is open or being inspected by
prospective renters or purchasers, but in no case for longer than four (4) hours on such day.
4. Signs permitted, relating to the sale or lease of any land or building within the business or industrial districts, as specified by the village's zoning
ordinance:
a. For the purpose of selling or renting any lot or group of lots and/or any existing or proposed building or group of buildings, one sign may be
erected not exceeding ten (10) square feet in aggregate area for each facade of the building; and
b. In connection with the marketing of any subdivision of five (5) lots or more, a condominium development of five (5) or more dwelling units, an
industrial or business site of more than one acre, or any area in excess of five (5) acres, that one sign not exceeding sixty four (64) square feet in
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 302/416
total area, nor ten feet (10') in its greatest dimension may be displayed. (Ord. O-25-98, 11-9-1998; amd. Ord. O-42-00, 10-23-2000)
B. R-3 District: A "for sale" sign shall be permitted on private residential property zoned R-3 provided:
1. The private residential property is improved with a structure containing twelve (12) or more dwelling units;
2. The size of the sign shall not exceed fifteen (15) square feet;
3. A permit shall have been obtained from the village clerk upon payment of fifty dollars ($50.00) and verification of the size of the sign and the number
of dwelling units in the structure improving the property upon which such sign shall be placed;
4. The permit for the sign shall be issued for a ninety (90) day period and may be renewed for an additional ninety (90) day period provided payment is
received for renewal in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00);
5. Such sign shall be removed upon execution of a contract for the sale or exchange of the property whether or not such contract contains
contingencies which may avoid the actual closing of the conveyance;
6. No sign shall be illuminated other than by natural light. (Ord. O-42-00, 10-23-2000)
8-6-9: PROHIBITED SIGNS:
The following signs, as well as all other signs not expressly permitted by this chapter, are prohibited in all districts and shall not be erected, maintained or
permitted to continue in any district, except as provided in subsection 8-6-5B of this chapter:
A. Marquee signs.
B. Home occupation identification signs.
C. Off premises identification signs.
D. Moving or animated signs.
E. Portable signs, except when approved in connection with temporary uses pursuant to subsection 8-6-5B of this chapter.
F. Projecting signs, except in the Madison Street sign district.
G. Roof signs.
H. Temporary signs, except as expressly authorized in this section and except in connection with temporary uses pursuant to subsection 8-6-5B of this
chapter.
I. Abandoned or obsolete signs. Any sign that advertises, identifies or pertains to a business no longer conducted or a product no longer sold on the
premises where such sign is located. Such signs, including any support structures, shall be removed within thirty (30) days following cessation of the
relevant activity.
J. Any sign on a tree or utility pole, whether on public or private property.
K. Any sign on public property, except government, civic event signs and projecting signs in the Madison Street sign district, as authorized in this chapter.
L. Any sign painted directly on a wall, roof or fence.
M. Any sign using reflective paint or tape, other than a governmental sign or a warning sign.
N. Any sign used for a private purpose that imitates or closely resembles a governmental sign such as a traffic control device. (Ord. O-25-98, 11-9-1998)
8-6-10: POSTING BILLS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to post, stick, stamp, tack, paint or to otherwise fix or cause the same to be done by any person, any notice, placard, bill,
card, poster, advertisement or other device calculated to attract attention to the public to or upon any sidewalk, crosswalk, curb or curbstone, flagstone or
any other portion of any sidewalk or street, lamp post, electric light, telegraph, telephone or trolley line pole, hydrant or upon any tree or tree box or upon
any bridge, pier, fence, gate, gatepost or system, except such as may be required by laws of the United States or the state of Illinois or by the ordinances
of the village. (Ord. O-25-98, 11-9-1998)
8-6-11: UNSAFE AND UNLAWFUL SIGNS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 303/416
A. Notice Given: Whenever it shall appear to the director that any sign has been erected in violation of this chapter or is in unsafe condition, or has
become unstable or insecure, or is in such condition as to be a menace to the property or health of the public, he shall, thereupon, issue or cause to be
issued a notice, in writing, to the owner of such sign or the person in charge, possession or control thereof, or if the whereabouts of such person is
known, informing such person of the violation of this chapter and the dangerous condition of such sign and directing him to make such alterations or
repairs or to do such acts or things as are necessary or advisable to place such sign in a safe, substantial and secure condition and to make same
comply with the requirements of this chapter, within such reasonable time as may be stated in said notice.
B. Failure To Comply: If the owner or person in charge, possession or control of any sign when so notified shall refuse, fail or neglect to comply with and
conform to the requirements of such notice, said director shall, upon the expiration of the time therein mentioned, alter, change, tear down or cause to
be torn down, such part of such sign which is constructed and maintained in violation of this chapter and shall charge the expense to the owner or
person in possession, charge or control of such sign, and the same shall be recovered from such owner or person by appropriate legal proceedings.
(Ord. O-25-98, 11-9-1998)
8-6-12: ABANDONED OR OBSOLETE SIGNS:
All abandoned and/or obsolete signs, including support structures, shall be removed within thirty (30) days from the cessation of business or operation by
the sign owner, or, if the sign owner is no longer available or identifiable, then the property owner shall be responsible for the removal of all signs relating
to a business or use that is no longer in operation. (Ord. O-25-98, 11-9-1998)
8-6-13: MAINTENANCE STANDARDS:
All signs, canopies and/or awnings and support structures shall be kept and maintained in a safe, neat and orderly condition and appearance and shall be
repaired or otherwise maintained periodically by the owner to prevent corrosion or deterioration caused by the weather, age or any other condition, and to
keep the same in a safe, neat and orderly condition and appearance. (Ord. O-25-98, 11-9-1998)
8-6-14: EXISTING SIGNS:
A. Nonconforming Signs: It is recognized that there are some signs in the village which do not conform to this chapter; such signs shall be considered as
nonconforming signs. It is not the intent of this chapter to encourage their survival, but to bring such signs into conformance. Nonconforming signs are
permitted to remain, subject to the following provisions:
1. May not be reestablished if discontinued for a period of thirty (30) days.
2. May not be expanded, enlarged, reerected, replaced or changed in copy.
3. May not be reconstructed after damage or destruction to an extent equal to or more than fifty percent (50%) of the sign's original value, as
determined by the enforcement official.
4. May not be moved in whole or in part to another location, unless the sign is made to conform to all regulations of the sign code; and
5. May not be structurally altered so as to prolong the life of the sign.
This provision does not include any flags, temporary signs, banners, paper or cardboard signs or inflatable signs.
B. Maintenance: Normal repair and maintenance, such as painting, repair of chains, anchors and the like, shall be allowed on nonconforming signs. (Ord.
O-25-98, 11-9-1998)
8-6-15: VARIATIONS:
Applications for a variance from the provisions of this chapter shall be filed in accordance with the provisions of the zoning regulations contained in section
9-10-6 of this code.
After a public hearing as provided in said section 9-10-6 of this code, the recommendation of the zoning board of appeals shall be forwarded to the village
council, who then shall either approve or disapprove the requested variation. (Ord. O-25-98, 11-9-1998)
8-6-16: OWNER UNKNOWN:
If the owner of such sign or the person in charge, possession or control thereof cannot be found or his or their whereabouts cannot be ascertained, the
director shall attach or cause to be attached to said sign, if possible, a notice of the same report that is required to be sent to the owner or person in
possession, charge or control thereof where the owner is known. If such sign shall not have been made to conform to this chapter and be placed in secure,
safe and substantial condition in accordance with the requirements of such notice within thirty (30) days after such notice shall have been attached to such
sign, it shall be the duty of the director to thereupon cause such sign or such portion thereof as is constructed and maintained in violation of this chapter to
be torn down, provided that nothing herein contained shall prevent the director from adopting such precautionary measures as may be necessary or
desirable in case of imminent danger in order to place such sign in a safe condition, the expense of which shall be charged to and recovered from the
owner of such sign or person in charge, possession or control thereof, in any appropriate proceedings therefor or thereafter. (Ord. O-25-98, 11-9-1998)
8-6-17: PROSECUTION OF VIOLATIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 304/416
A. Any person charged with a violation of this chapter in a citation issued by an employee of the department of public health and safety, detailing the
nature of the violation may avoid prosecution by exhibiting proof of correction of the condition on or compliance with the ordinance stated to have been
violated and the payment of twenty five dollars ($25.00) within ten (10) days of issuance of said citation, or fifty dollars ($50.00) after ten (10) days but
within thirty (30) days before the hearing date, to the village clerk or the clerk's designee.
B. Absent the failure to satisfy citation, the person charged shall appear at the place, time and date designated on the citation and the commissioner of the
department or his designee shall thereupon conduct a hearing. After the hearing by the commissioner of the department or his designee, the
commissioner or the designee shall take the following action:
1. Dismiss the citation; or
2. Find that there was probable cause for the issuance of the citation and that the original amount for the commission of such violation shall remain the
same; or
3. Require the payment of a fine not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00); or
4. In the event the violator has not corrected the violation and paid the penalty within the prescribed time, or has failed to obey any order of the
commissioner or his designee issued in pursuance of this chapter, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
C. The commissioner or his designee may proceed to institute appropriate proceedings against the person cited in the circuit court of Cook County, Illinois.
D. Upon conviction thereof, the violator shall be fined not less than seventy five dollars ($75.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00); and
where such violation is of a continuing nature, each day such person violates any such provisions or fails to conform to any such provision of this
chapter or any such order of the director, shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ord. O-25-98, 11-9-1998)
Chapter 7
SWIMMING POOLS
8-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL: A swimming pool which is used exclusively by the occupants of the property on which it is located, his family and guests.
SWIMMING POOL: A manmade rigid or semirigid receptacle for water having a depth at any point greater than eighteen inches (18"), used or intended to
be used for swimming, wading or bathing, and constructed, installed or maintained in or above the ground outside any building. This definition does not
include collapsible plastic pools. (Village code § 24-2)
8-7-2: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
A. Permit Required; Plans And Specifications: No person shall hereafter construct, cause to be constructed, operate or maintain a swimming, wading or
bathing pool without first obtaining a permit therefor from the village. Written application for such permit shall be filed with the director of public health
and safety and shall be accompanied by two (2) sets of plans and specifications sufficiently detailed to enable determination of whether the proposed
pool complies with the requirements of this chapter. No such permit for an existing pool shall be granted by the director of public health and safety until
full compliance with this chapter has been demonstrated. (Village code § 24-19; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
B. Fee Schedule: The fee for a permit for the erection or construction of a swimming pool shall be as provided in section 8-2-3 of this title. (Village code
§ 24-21)
8-7-3: ENFORCEMENT:
The director of public health and safety is charged with the duty of enforcing this chapter. For this purpose, he is hereby authorized to enter upon any
premises in the village to investigate the existence of a swimming pool and to determine whether or not any such pool complies with the requirements of
this chapter. (Village code § 24-22; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
8-7-4: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
A. Comply With Code: Every existing private residential swimming pool and every such pool constructed, installed and maintained hereafter shall comply
with all applicable provisions of this chapter, and with all the provisions of the building ordinances and codes of this village. (Village code § 24-1)
B. Existing Pools: Swimming pools in existence on the effective date hereof shall be brought into compliance with the requirements of this chapter on or
before January 1, 1959. (Village code § 24-24)
8-7-5: CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS:
A. Structural Design: Residential swimming pools shall be designed to withstand water pressure from within and to resist pressure of the earth when the
pool is empty, to a pressure of two thousand two hundred (2,200) pounds per square foot. Materials used shall be subject to the approval of the director
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 305/416
of public health and safety. Grade height of pools constructed hereafter not to exceed established grade. (Village code § 24-11; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-
2010)
B. Water Supply: No source of water, other than that secured from the village's waterworks distribution system, shall be used in private swimming pools.
The connection shall be as required by the plumbing code of the village1, by means of a permanent, rigid system of piping having an air-gap delivery
connection located not less than six inches (6") vertically above the flood rim of the pool. (Village Code § 24-6)
C. Discharge Maximum: Pools shall be equipped with facilities for completely emptying the pool and the discharge of the pool water to the sewer shall be
at the rate not exceeding two hundred fifty (250) gallons per minute. No direct connection shall be made to the sewer. (Village Code § 24-9)
D. Sewer System Drainage Restrictions: Water drained from the pool shall not be discharged directly into the sewer system during periods of rain or
storms. (Village Code § 24-10; amd. 2004 Code)
8-7-6: EQUIPMENT SPECIFICATIONS:
A. Filtering Systems: No swimming, wading or bathing pool in excess of two thousand five hundred (2,500) gallons capacity shall be installed or operated
without a recirculating and filtering system. (Village Code § 24-7)
B. Outlets: In swimming pools, thirty feet (30') in width or less, water circulation system outlets shall be located so as to provide at least one outlet at the
deepest point in the pool. If the pool width is more than thirty feet (30'), multiple outlets shall be provided and spaced not more than thirty feet (30')
apart, nor closer than four feet (4') to any wall. All pool drain outlets shall be equipped with gratings having an area of opening of not less than four (4)
times the cross sectional area of the outlet pipe. The gratings shall be of such design so they cannot be readily removable by bathers and will not injure
bathers' fingers. One outlet shall be provided for each eight hundred (800) square feet of surface area. (Village Code § 24-8)
C. Steps Or Ladders: Two (2) or more means of egress in the form of steps or ladders shall be provided for all private residential swimming pools. At least
one such means of egress shall be located on a side of the pool at both the deep end and shallow end of the pool. Threads of steps and ladders shall
be constructed of nonslip material and at least three inches (3") wide for their full length. Steps and ladders shall have a handrail on both sides. (Village
Code § 24-13)
D. Electrical Requirements:
1. General: All electrical installations provided for, installed and used in conjunction with private residential swimming pools, shall be in conformance
with the provisions of the electrical code of the village2. No current carrying electrical conductors shall cross private residential swimming pools either
overhead or underground or within fifteen feet (15') of such pools. (Village Code § 24-14)
2. Grounding: All metal fences, enclosures or railings near or adjacent to private residential swimming pools, which might become electrically alive as a
result of contact with broken overhead conductors, or from any other cause, shall be effectively grounded. (Village Code § 24-15)
E. Diving Boards And Apparatus: Where a swimming pool has a diving board or diving apparatus for the purpose of diving into the pool, there shall be a
clear area of not less than an eight foot (8') radius ahead of the furthermost projection of the diving board. (Village Code § 24-23)
8-7-7: LOT AREA RESTRICTIONS:
A. Minimum Distance Requirements: After the effective date hereof, swimming pools shall be so constructed that there will be at least ten feet (10')
between the main building and the swimming pool, and there shall be at least five feet (5') between a side or rear lot line, and there shall be at least five
feet (5') between any auxiliary building and the swimming pool. No swimming pool shall be built within any front yard. Pumps, filters and pool water
disinfecting equipment installation shall be located at a distance not less than eight feet (8') from any side property line. (Village Code § 24-20)
B. Walk Areas: Unobstructed walk areas not less than thirty six inches (36") wide shall be provided to extend entirely around the pool. The walk area shall
be constructed of impervious material, and the surfaces shall be of such as to be smooth and easily cleaned and of nonslip construction. The slope of
the walks shall have a pitch of at least one-fourth inch to the foot (1/4":1'), designed as to prevent back drainage from entering the pool. (Village Code
§ 24-12)
8-7-8: FENCE REQUIREMENTS3:
A. Required: Every person in possession of land within the village, either as owner, purchaser under contract, lease, tenant, or licensee, upon which is
situated a swimming pool, shall at all times maintain on the lot or premises upon which such pool is located and completely surrounding such pool, a
fence or other structure to prevent small children from inadvertently wandering into the pool. (Village Code § 24-3)
B. Restrictions: Such fence or other structure shall be not less than five feet (5') in height with no gaps or apertures (other than doors or gates) more than
four inches (4") square, such fence shall be erected along the periphery of the pool walks. (Village Code § 24-4)
C. Latches And Locks: All gates or doors opening through such enclosure shall be equipped with a self-closing and self-latching device designed to keep
and capable of keeping such door or gate securely closed and locked at all times when not in actual use to prevent small children from opening said
door or gate; provided, however, that the door of any dwelling forming any part of the enclosure hereinabove required need not be so equipped.
(Village Code § 24-5)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 306/416
8-7-9: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
A. Safety Precautions: A skilled swimmer shall be present at all times that private residential swimming pools are in use. (Village Code § 24-16)
B. Operation And Maintenance: A suitable substantial protective cover shall be provided and installed over all private residential swimming pool surfaces
during the nonswimming season or when residents are absent for a period of more than three (3) days. (Village Code § 24-17)
C. Sanitary Conditions: Every pool shall be so designed and constructed as to facilitate clearing and shall be maintained and operated in such manner as
to be clean and sanitary at all times. (Village Code § 24-18)
8-7-10: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person convicted of a violation of any provisions of this chapter shall be fined as provided in the general penalty in section 1-3-1 of this code for each
offense, and each day on which such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. (Village Code § 24-25; amd. 2004 Code)
Chapter 8
FENCES
8-8-1: CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS:
A. Height Restrictions: No person shall build, construct, use or maintain any fence or barrier, within the village of a greater height than determined as
follows:
1. In the case of property utilized for residential, or a combination of residential and commercial purposes, six feet (6') above the surface of the ground
or above the sidewalk grade, whichever is lower.
2. In the case of property utilized solely for commercial or industrial purposes, eight feet (8') above the surface of the ground or above the sidewalk
grade, whichever is lower. (Village Code § 20-26)
The erection, use or maintenance of any such fence or barrier of a greater height than above set forth is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and any
person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall, upon conviction of such offense, be fined as
provided in the general penalty in section 1-3-1 of this code for each offense. (Village Code § 20-28; amd. 2004 Code)
B. Construction Specifications:
1. The fence must be positioned so that the finished side faces away from the lot on which erected.
2. All posts for any such fences must be on the owner's side of the fence.
3. If a fence has a good side and a bad side, the good side of the fence must be placed facing out.
4. All fences shall be erected so that their finished side faces out, and the unfinished side faces the property of the person who has caused said fence
to be erected.
5. The finished side of all fences shall face away from the interior of fenced property.
6. Fences must be erected so that the posts and all other supporting members face to the owner's side. The rough part of a fence shall face the
owner's property. This restriction shall not apply in the case of a fence erected by a residential district property owner abutting a commercial or
industrial lot or an alley abutting a commercial or industrial lot.
7. Fences must be erected so that the posts and all other supporting members face to the owner's side. The rough part of a fence shall face the
owner's property.
8. All fence posts and support framework shall face the interior of the property upon which such fence is located. (Ord. O-18-90, 8-27-1990)
8-8-2: EXCEPTIONS:
This chapter shall not apply to fences erected between any land or premises in said village and the right of way of any railroad in said village; provided
also, that fences around manufacturing establishments may, upon special permission of the mayor and village council, be built higher than provided in
subsection 8-8-1A of this chapter. (Village Code § 20-30)
8-8-3: PROHIBITED FENCES:
A. Fences With Barb Wire, Spikes, Etc.: No person shall build, construct, use or maintain any fence or barrier consisting of or made of what is called
barbed wire or of which barbed wire is a part or any electric or electrically charged fence, within the village, along the line of or in or upon or along any
street, alley or public park, or in and about or along any land lots or parks owned or controlled by the village. (Village code § 20-31; amd. 2004 Code)
Wherever in the village, in, along or through any public street, alley or park barbed wire is found in use in part or in whole for a fence or barrier, the
same shall forthwith be removed by the commissioner of public property. (Village code § 20-31; amd. 2004 Code; Ord. O-36-04, 9-13-2004)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 307/416
B. Harmful Materials: No owner, lessee or person in possession of any building in the village shall erect or maintain or permit to be erected about the
stairway in, or the entrance to such building, or on or about its exterior building line or upon any portion of the sidewalk adjacent to such building, any
railing, fence, guard or other protection of any kind, to be affixed or placed, or in any manner attached so as to protrude therefrom, any spike, nail or
other pointed instrument of any kind or description. Each and every day any such person shall fail or neglect to remove from such railing, fence, guard
or other protection, any such spike, nail or other pointed instrument, after notice in writing from the director of public health and safety so to do, shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense. (Village code § 20-32; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
8-8-4: REMOVAL OF FENCES:
Any person who shall fail, neglect or refuse for three (3) days after notice by the mayor or fire chief of said village to remove any fence or barrier built,
constructed, used or maintained in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, shall also be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon
conviction of such offense, be fined as provided in section 8-8-5 of this chapter for each and every day such fence shall remain at a height greater than
allowed by the provisions of this chapter, after the expiration of said three (3) days. (Village code § 20-29; amd. 2004 Code)
8-8-5: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Unless otherwise provided herein, any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall upon conviction thereof be fined as provided in the general
penalty in section 1-3-1 of this code for each offense. (Village code § 20-33; amd. 2004 Code)
Chapter 9
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
8-9-1: DEFINITION:
As used herein, the term "dangerous building" is hereby defined to mean, and include, the following:
A. Any building, shed, fence or other manmade structure which is dangerous to the public health because of its construction or condition; or which may
cause or aid the spread of disease; or cause injury to the health of the occupants of it or the adjoining buildings or structures.
B. Any building, shed, fence or other manmade structure which, because of the faulty construction, age, lack of proper repair or any other cause, is
especially liable to fire and constitutes or creates a fire hazard.
C. Any building, shed, fence or other manmade structure which, by reason of faulty construction, age, lack of proper repair or any other cause, is liable to
cause injury or damage by a collapse or fall of the structure or part thereof.
D. Any building, shed, fence or other manmade structure which, because of its condition or lack of doors or windows, is available to and frequented by
malefactors or disorderly persons who are not lawful occupants of said structure. (Village code § 10-9)
8-9-2: NUISANCE DECLARED:
It shall be unlawful to maintain or permit the existence of any dangerous building in the village. It shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant or person in
charge of any such building to permit the same to remain in a dangerous condition or to occupy or permit the building to be occupied while it is in or
remains in a dangerous condition. Any "dangerous building", as defined by section 8-9-1 of this chapter is hereby declared to be a nuisance. (Village code
§ 19-10)
8-9-3: ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE:
A. Eliminate Buildings: Whenever the director of public health and safety or any other officer of the village shall be of the opinion that any building or
structure in the village is a dangerous building, he shall file a written statement to that effect with the village clerk. The village clerk shall, thereupon,
cause a written notice to be served upon the owner and occupant or occupants thereof, if any, by registered mail or by personal service. Such notice
shall state that the building has been declared to be in a dangerous condition and that such dangerous condition must be removed or immediately
remedied.
If the notice has not been complied with within fifteen (15) days from the date of service of the same, the director of public health and safety may
proceed to remedy the condition or demolish the dangerous building. (Village code § 10-11; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
B. Removal Of Damaged Buildings:
1. Whenever any building within the fire limits has deteriorated or has been damaged by any cause to the extent of fifty percent (50%) of its value at the
time of damage, said building shall be torn down or removed. To ascertain whether any building has so deteriorated or been damaged, the director of
public health and safety or any other officer of the village shall notify the village clerk. The village clerk shall then appoint three (3) persons to
determine whether or not such building has deteriorated or been damaged to the extent of fifty percent (50%) or more of its value. (Village code § 10-
12; amd. 2004 Code; Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 308/416
2. A copy of the notice of appointment of the three (3) persons to determine the damage shall be served upon the owner of the premises by personal
service or by registered mail at his last known address. (Village code § 10-12)
3. If the finding of the officer of the village is verified by the village board, the director of public health and safety or the proper officer of the village shall
then take the necessary steps to cause the building to be removed or remodeled as the situation may require. (Village code § 10-12; amd. Ord. O-7-
10, 2-8-2010)
4. It shall be unlawful to occupy or permit the occupancy of such building after such finding, until the building has been so remodeled. (Village code
§ 10-12)
Chapter 10
WRECKING BUILDINGS
8-10-1: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
A. Permit Required: Before proceeding with the wrecking or tearing down of any building or other structure, a permit for such wrecking or tearing down
shall first be obtained by the owner or his agent, or the wrecking contractor or his agent from the director of public health and safety. It shall be unlawful
to proceed with the wrecking or tearing down of any building or structure, or any structural portion of such building or structure, unless such permit shall
first have been obtained. (Village code § 11-62; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
B. Fee: Application for such permit shall issue upon the payment of a fee as provided in section 8-2-3 of this title, which shall be in addition to the
contractor's license fee or individual job permit fee prescribed by the provisions of this code1.
C. Contents Of Application: Every application shall state the location and describe the building which is proposed to be wrecked or torn down. (Ord. O-5-
87, 4-13-1987)
8-10-2: BOND REQUIREMENTS:
Before any permit is issued granting authority to wreck a building or structure for which said permit is required, the person engaged in the work of wrecking
the same shall file with the village clerk a bond, with sureties to be approved by the village board, to indemnify, keep and save harmless the village against
any loss, cost, damage, expense, judgment or liability of any kind whatsoever which the village may suffer, or which may accrue against, be charged to or
be recovered from the village or any of its officials, from, by reason of or on account of accidents to persons or property during any such wrecking
operations; and from, by reason or on account of anything done under or by virtue of any permit granted for any such wrecking operations. In each case,
such bond shall extend to and cover all such wrecking operations carried on through permits obtained hereunder by such person during any year
beginning May 1 and ending April 30 of the following year. No permit shall be issued in any wrecking work except as hereinbefore otherwise provided
during such license year and until such bond is filed. Said bond shall be in the penal sum of thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00) for all wrecking operations
of such buildings. There shall be an additional bond filed, in the penal sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), conditioned upon the restoring and
leveling of the premises upon which said wrecking operations have been completed. Upon the filing of such bond or bonds, the person engaged in the
work of wrecking such buildings and other structures may obtain permits for such wrecking operations as are authorized under the said bond or bonds, as
hereinbefore provided for during the license year in which the same is or are filed. Provided, however, that in case of accident or casualty in the progress
of any wrecking operations carried on under any permit so issued, or the happening of any circumstance which might, in the opinion of the director of
public health and safety, render such bond or bonds inadequate. The director of public health and safety may, in his discretion, require such additional
bond as he may deem necessary to fully protect the village from loss resulting from the issuance of such permits, before he allows the work to proceed or
before any additional permits are issued by him. (Village code § 11-67; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
8-10-3: SUPERVISION AND INSPECTIONS:
A. Supervision: Upon the issuance of the permit required in section 8-10-1 of this chapter, such building may be wrecked or torn down, provided all the
work done thereunder shall be subject to the supervision of the director of public health and safety, and to such reasonable restrictions as he may
impose in regard to elements of safety and health. Provided, further, that the work shall be kept dust free and sufficient scaffolding provided to ensure
safety of workers in and about the construction and removal of buildings. (Village code § 11-64; amd. 2004 Code; Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
B. Inspection: Any person securing a license under this chapter shall perform his work in accordance with the rules and regulations of the director of public
health and safety and shall be subject to such inspection, during the performance of the work, as shall be deemed necessary by the director of public
health and safety; and the inspectors of the department of health and safety shall have the right to enter said premises at all times, during normal
business hours, for the purpose of inspecting any work being performed. (Village code § 11-68; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
8-10-4: WRECKING PROCEDURES:
A. Disposal Of Materials: No debris from the building wrecked or torn down shall be burned within the village limits. All debris or materials salvaged shall
be removed from the village limits within fifteen (15) days after the wrecking or tearing down of said buildings. (Village code § 11-65)
B. Backfilling: The basement of the building wrecked shall be backfilled, subject to the approval of the director of public health and safety, and in such a
manner as to prevent or guard against injury to the general public. (Village code § 11-66; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
8-10-5: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 309/416
If, at any time after the granting of such license, the director of public health and safety shall certify to the village board that any licensee hereunder has
failed to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter, or of the building ordinances of the village, such license may be revoked by the village council.
(Village code § 11-69; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
Chapter 11
MOVING BUILDINGS
8-11-1: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
A. Permit Required: No person shall move any building on, through or over any street, alley, sidewalk or park, or any other public place in the village
without first obtaining a permit therefor. (Village code § 11-70)
B. Application: Application for such permit shall be made in writing to the village clerk and shall state the name and address of the applicant, name and
address of owner of the building, the proposed route and the number of days it is intended that the building should occupy any portion of any street,
alley, sidewalk or other public place. (Village code § 11-71)
C. Permit Fee: The fee for a permit to move any building shall be as provided in section 8-2-3 of this title for each, and every, day during which, or part of
which, said building shall be on part of any public street, alley, parkway or other public place. (Village code § 11-73)
8-11-2: BOND AND INSURANCE:
A. Bond: Before a permit shall be issued to move any building, the applicant shall execute and deliver, to the village clerk a bond, in the penal sum of five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00) running to the village, with surety or sureties, to be approved by the village council, conditioned upon compliance by
applicant, his servants and agents, with all the ordinances of the village, and the payment of, and indemnifying the village against any or all damages,
loss, payment, judgments, costs and claims occasioned by the said applicant or his servants or agents, in or connected with the moving of said
building, and repair, restoration and payment of any and all damages to any tree, pavement, sidewalk or any other property of the village caused by or
in connection with the moving of said building.
B. Insurance: The applicant shall also obtain an adequate insurance policy which shall insure the village against any damages and/or claims or suits which
policy shall be approved by the village council. (Village code § 11-74)
8-11-3: APPROVAL OF PERMIT:
If, upon examination of such application, contents and building, the village council shall conclude that it is not contrary to public interest and safety to
permit such moving, they shall issue or cause to be issued to applicant a permit therefor, upon making payment to the village clerk of the fee required in
subsection 8-11-1C of this chapter and filing with the village clerk and the bond provided in subsection 8-11-2A of this chapter. Such permit shall be good
only for the number of days specified therein. (Village code § 11-72)
8-11-4: MOVING PROCEDURES:
A. Lights And Warnings: Whenever a street, alley or other public place is blocked by a building which is being moved, warnings to that effect shall be
placed so as to warn vehicles from entering that portion so blocked. The person to whom such permit is issued shall keep or cause to be kept warning
signs and lights at night on such buildings so as to guard against any person or vehicle colliding with it, and shall take every reasonable precaution to
prevent said building, or any article or thing used in connection with the moving thereof, from injuring any person or property. (Village code § 11-75)
B. Wires: Whenever it shall be necessary to interfere with wires or cables of a public utility, or of the village in moving a building, the director of public
health and safety shall require proper cost of repairs thereto, to be paid by the applicant and the proper bond to be filed in guaranty thereof and shall
inspect and supervise said interference, or cause same to be inspected and supervised. (Village code § 11-76; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
C. Planking Streets: The pavement of any street, alley or sidewalk on or along which any building is being moved, shall be protected by planks of two inch
(2") thickness. (Village Code § 11-77)
D. Restrictions: No person shall be permitted to move any building which has been damaged to a greater extent than fifty percent (50%) of its value at the
time of damage by fire, decay or otherwise, nor to move any frame building, nor to move any building to a location at which the use for which such
building is designed or intended is prohibited by ordinance. (Village Code § 11-78; amd. 2004 Code)
Chapter 12
VACANT BUILDINGS
8-12-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, and the interpretation and enforcement thereof, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 310/416
meanings given herein, unless the context in which they are used shall indicate otherwise:
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY: The director of public health and safety of the village of Forest Park or his or her designee.
OWNER: Any person, agent, operator, firm, or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the
state, county, or village as holding title to the property; or otherwise having control of or a possessory interest in the property, including the guardian of the
estate of any such person, the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court; or a
mortgagee in possession or any person or entity maintaining, operating or collecting rent for any vacant building.
PERSON: Includes a corporation, a partnership, or other entity as well as an individual.
VACANT BUILDING: A building which is lacking habitual presence of human beings who have a legal right to be on the premises, or at which substantially
all lawful business or construction operations or residential occupancy has ceased, or which is substantially devoid of content. In determining whether a
building is vacant, it is relevant to consider, among other factors, the percentage of the overall square footage of the building or floor to the occupied
space, the condition and value of any items in the building and the presence of rental or for sale signs on the property; provided that a multi-family
residential property containing five (5) or more dwelling units shall be considered vacant when ninety percent (90%) or more of the dwelling units are
unoccupied; and further provided that a residential property shall not be deemed vacant if it has been used as a residence by a person entitled to
possession for a period of at least three (3) months within the previous nine (9) months. A vacant building shall not include unoccupied buildings which are
undergoing construction, renovation, or rehabilitation and which are in compliance with all applicable village ordinances, codes, and regulations, and for
which construction, renovation or rehabilitation is proceeding diligently to completion.
VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR: The village administrator of the village of Forest Park or his or her designee. (Ord. O-01-10, 1-11-2010)
8-12-2: VACANT BUILDING DETERMINATION:
A. Within sixty (60) days after the effective date of this chapter, the village administrator shall evaluate all buildings in the village he or she believes to be
vacant on the effective date of this chapter and make a determination for each as to whether the building is a "vacant building" within the meaning of
this chapter. The determination shall be in writing and shall state the factual basis for the determination. For buildings the village administrator
determines to be "vacant buildings", s/he shall, within seven (7) days of making that determination, send notice of the written determination with the
factual findings to the last taxpayer of record listed on the most recent Cook County tax roll. Said notice of determination shall be sent certified mail,
return receipt requested. Failure of delivery shall not excuse a person from complying with this chapter. Any person making such service shall execute
an affidavit attesting to the facts of service. The village administrator shall maintain an affidavit of such mailing for each notice of determination sent.
B. The notice of determination shall contain a statement of the obligations of the owner of a building determined to be a vacant building, a copy of the
registration statement the owner is required to file pursuant to section 8-12-4 of this chapter and a notice of the owner's right to appeal the
determination. (Ord. O-01-10, 1-11-2010)
8-12-3: APPEAL OF DETERMINATION OF VACANT BUILDINGS:
A. An owner of a building determined by the village administrator to be a vacant building as provided for in this chapter may appeal that determination to
the mayor. Such appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the village clerk within fifteen (15) days of the date of mailing of the notice of
determination. The filing of an appeal stays the owner's obligation to register his or her building as required by section 8-12-4 of this chapter. The
appeal shall contain a complete statement of the reasons the owner disputes the village administrator's determination, shall set forth specific facts in
support thereof, and shall include all evidence the owner relies upon to support the appeal. The village mayor shall decide the appeal on the basis of
facts presented by the owner in his or her written appeal and the village administrator's written determination.
B. The burden is upon the owner to present sufficient evidence to persuade the village mayor that it is more likely than not that the subject building is not a
"vacant building" within the meaning of this chapter.
C. The village mayor shall send written notice of his or her decision to the owner within ten (10) days of his or her receipt of the appeal. The village mayor
may, but is not required to, seek additional information from the owner. The village mayor may, upon written notice thereof to the owner, take no more
than ten (10) additional days to decide the appeal if he or she determines that such additional time is required for consideration of the appeal.
D. An owner who wishes to challenge applicability of this chapter to his/her building without the village administrator's determination having been made
shall set forth specific facts to support nonapplicability in writing to the village administrator. In the event the village administrator determines that the
subject building is a "vacant building", the owner shall have the right to appeal the village administrator's determination to the village mayor as provided
for herein. (Ord. O-01-10, 1-11-2010)
8-12-4: OBLIGATION TO REGISTER VACANT BUILDINGS:
The owner of a building who knows, or from all the facts and circumstances should know, that his or her building is or has become a "vacant building"
within the meaning of this chapter after the effective date of this chapter, or the owner of a building which the village administrator determines at any time
to be a "vacant building", or the owner of a building whose appeal from the village administrator's determination has been denied by the village mayor shall
be required to file a registration statement for each such building with the village administrator on a form provided by the village administrator within thirty
(30) days after either the date of village administrator's notice of determination, or occurrence of the facts which would cause a reasonable person to
believe that the building was a "vacant building", or denial of the appeal, whichever is applicable. The registration shall be valid for a period of one year
from the date of registration. (Ord. O-01-10, 1-11-2010)
8-12-5: REGISTRATION REQUIREMENTS:
The registration statement required by this chapter shall include the name, street address, and telephone number of a natural person twenty one (21)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 311/416
years of age or older, designated by the owner as the authorized agent for receiving notices of code violations and for receiving process in any court
proceeding or administrative enforcement proceeding on behalf of such owner in connection with the enforcement of this code. Said person must maintain
an office in Cook County, Illinois, or must actually reside within Cook County, Illinois. A street address is required; a post office box is not an acceptable
address. An owner who is a natural person and who meets the requirements of this section as to location of residence or office may designate himself or
herself as agent. By designating an authorized agent pursuant to this section, the owner consents to receive any and all notices of code violations
concerning the registered building and all process in any court proceeding or administrative enforcement proceeding brought to enforce this code
concerning the registered building by service of the notice or process on the authorized agent. Any owner who fails to register a vacant building under the
provisions of this section shall further be deemed to consent to receive, by posting at the building, any and all notices of code violations and all process in
an administrative proceeding brought to enforce code provisions concerning the building. (Ord. O-01-10, 1-11-2010)
8-12-6: CHANGES IN REGISTRATION INFORMATION:
An owner shall notify the village administrator within twenty (20) days of any change in the registration information by filing an amended registration
statement on a form provided by the village administrator. A new registration is required for any change in ownership whatsoever. The registration
statement shall be deemed prima facie proof of the statements therein contained in any administrative enforcement proceeding or court proceeding
instituted by the village against the owner of the building. (Ord. O-01-10, 1-11-2010)
8-12-7: RENEWAL OF REGISTRATION:
An owner shall be required to annually renew on the anniversary date of the first filing of registration as long as the building remains vacant. (Ord. O-01-
10, 1-11-2010)
8-12-8: RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE OWNER:
An owner of any vacant building shall within thirty (30) days of the building becoming vacant enclose and secure the building and maintain the building in a
secure and closed condition in a manner which is acceptable to the director of public health and safety until the building is no longer a "vacant building" as
defined herein. (Ord. O-01-10, 1-11-2010)
8-12-9: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
A. Any person found to have violated any provision of this chapter shall be fined as provided in the general penalty in section 1-3-1 of this code for each
offense, in addition to any other legal or equitable remedies available to the village. Such other remedies include, but are not limited to, injunctive relief,
application to a court of competent jurisdiction for a receiver, demolition, or condemnation, contracting for the repair or purchase of the premises, or
foreclosure of any lien the village may have thereon.
B. A separate and distinct offense shall be committed each day on which such person or persons shall violate the provisions of this chapter.
C. Nothing herein contained shall prohibit the village from condemning a vacant building as provided by applicable law or taking other actions upon a
determination that the building is a public nuisance or poses an imminent danger to the occupants of the building, or the public health, safety and
welfare. (Ord. O-01-10, 1-11-2010)
Title 9
ZONING REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
GENERAL ZONING PROVISIONS
9-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This title shall be known and may be cited as the FOREST PARK ZONING ORDINANCE. (April 1969)
9-1-2: PURPOSE:
This title is adopted for the following purposes:
A. To promote and protect the public health, safety, morals, comfort, convenience and general welfare of the people;
B. To divide the village into zones or districts restricting and regulating therein the location, erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration and use of
buildings, structures and land for residence, business, manufacturing and other specified uses;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 312/416
C. To protect the character and stability of residential, business and manufacturing areas within the village and to promote the orderly and beneficial
development of such areas;
D. To provide adequate light, air, privacy and convenience of access to property;
E. To regulate the intensity of use of lot areas, and to determine the area of open spaces surrounding buildings necessary to provide adequate light and air
and to protect the public health;
F. To establish building lines and the location of buildings designed for residential, business, manufacturing or other uses within such areas;
G. To fix reasonable standards to which buildings or structures shall conform;
H. To prohibit uses, buildings or structures incompatible with the character of development or intended uses within specified zoning districts;
I. To prevent additions to, or alteration or remodeling of, existing buildings or structures in such a way as to avoid the restrictions and limitations imposed
hereunder;
J. To limit congestion in the public streets and protect the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare by providing the off street parking of
motor vehicles and the loading and unloading of commercial vehicles;
K. To protect against fire, explosion, noxious fumes and other hazards in the interest of public health, safety, comfort and general welfare;
L. To prevent the overcrowding of land and undue concentration of structures, so far as is possible and appropriate in each district, by regulating the use
and bulk of buildings in relation to the land surrounding them;
M. To conserve the taxable value of land and buildings throughout the village;
N. To provide for the gradual elimination of nonconforming uses of land, buildings and structures which are adversely affecting the character and value of
desirable development in each district;
O. To provide minimum standards of air and light within residences and to conserve the taxable values of neighboring residences by providing reasonable
standards for floor areas of residential structures;
P. To define and limit the powers and duties of the administrative officers and bodies as provided herein. (April 1969)
9-1-3: INTERPRETATION:
It is not intended by this title to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair or interfere with any existing provision of law or ordinance or any rules,
regulations or permits previously adopted or issued pursuant thereto, relating to the use of buildings or premises, now in force and effect in relation
thereto; except that all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this title shall be and the same are hereby repealed. Where this title imposes a
greater restriction upon the use of buildings or premises than are imposed or required by such existing provision of law, the provisions of this title shall
control. (April 1969)
9-1-4: COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS:
Except as provided by this title and except after a building permit shall have been issued by the director of public health and safety of the village, which
permit shall state that the proposed building or use of land complies with all the provisions of this title, it shall be unlawful within the corporate limits of the
village: (April 1969; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
A. To establish any use of a building or land, either by itself or in addition to another use;
B. To excavate for or build any foundation;
C. To erect or establish a new building or part thereof, except signs of the class permitted in the R-1 district;
D. To rebuild, structurally alter, add to, enlarge or relocate any building or part thereof;
E. To reduce the yard space or plot area required for a building, or to include any such yard space or plot area as that required for an adjoining building;
F. To erect more than one main building on one lot. (April 1969)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 313/416
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 12-19 - INCUBATORS. Go to new ordinance.
9-1-5: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this title certain terms and words are hereby defined. Words used in the present tense shall include the future; words used in the
singular number shall include the plural number; words used in the plural number shall include the singular; the word "building" shall include the word
"structure", the word "lot" shall include the word "plot", and the word "shall" is mandatory and not directory.
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE: A building or a portion of the main building or use, located on the same lot on which the main building or use is
located, which is reasonably necessary and incidental and subordinate to the conduct of the primary use of the main building or the main use of the
premises, when permitted by district regulations.
ALLEY: A public or private thoroughfare not less than sixteen feet (16') wide and not more than thirty three feet (33') wide that affords only a secondary
means of access to property abutting thereon.
ANIMAL BOARDING: A nonresidential facility offering care for four (4) or more domestic pet animals for more than twelve (12) hours per day.
ANIMAL DAYCARE: A nonresidential facility offering care for four (4) or more domestic pet animals for up to fourteen (14) hours per day between the
hours of six thirty o'clock (6:30) A.M. and eight thirty o'clock (8:30) P.M.
ANIMAL GROOMING: Services provided to domestic pet animals including, but not limited to, clipping, bathing and related services, and excluding
veterinary services.
ANTIQUE STORE: A business whose primary purpose is the sale of objects having special value because of their age, especially a domestic item or piece
of furniture or handicraft esteemed for its artistry, beauty, or period of origin.
APARTMENT: A room or suite of rooms in a multiple- or two-family dwelling, or where living units are permitted above nonresidential uses, a room or suite
of rooms arranged, designed, used or intended to be used as a single housekeeping unit.
APARTMENT HOUSE: See definition of Dwelling, Multiple.
ART GALLERY: An establishment where fine art is displayed for sale to the public.
ARTIST STUDIO: A place where fine art is created and occasionally displayed, and affords the artists a live-work opportunity. Fine art is art concerned with
the creation of aesthetically appealing objects such as painting and sculpture, but not including performing arts.
AUTOMOBILE ORIENTED USES OR FACILITIES: See definition provided in subsection 9-4C-4-6D of this title.
AUTOMOTIVE HOUSE TRAILER: Any structure used for living, sleeping, business or storage purposes, having no foundation other than wheels, blocks,
skids, jacks, horses or skirtings and which is, has been or reasonably can be, equipped with wheels or other devices for transporting the structure from
place to place.
AUTOMOTIVE SERVICE STATION: Any building or premises used for the dispensing, sale or offering for sale directly to the public at retail of automotive
fuels or oils. When the dispensing, sale or offering for sale is incidental to the conduct of a public garage, the premises are classified as a public garage.
BASEMENT: A story partly underground and having half or not more than half of its clear floor to ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining
ground, which shall not be included as a story for height purposes unless subdivided into rooms and used for tenant purposes.
BILLBOARD: A single or double faced freestanding sign as regulated in chapter 5, article D of this title.
BLOCK: Property having frontage on one side of a street and lying between the two (2) nearest intersecting or intercepting streets, or nearest intersecting
or intercepting street and railroad right of way, waterway or other barrier.
BOARDING HOUSE: A building other than a hotel or restaurant where, for compensation, meals, or lodging and meals, are regularly provided by
prearrangement for three (3) or more persons and not open to transient guests.
BREWPUB RESTAURANT: A commercial establishment that brews its own beer primarily for consumption on the premises and that is combined with an
on site kitchen and restaurant facility.
BUILDABLE AREA: The space remaining on a lot after the minimum open space requirements of this title have been complied with.
BUILDING: Any structure with substantial walls and a roof, securely affixed to the land and entirely separated on all sides from any other structure by
space or by walls in which there are no doors, windows or other openings, designed or intended for the support, enclosure or shelter of persons, animals
or chattels.
BUILDING AREA: The maximum horizontal projected area of the principal and accessory building, excluding open steps or terraces, unenclosed porches
not exceeding one story in height, or architectural appurtenances projecting not more than two feet (2').
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance measured from the sidewalk level or its equivalent established grade opposite the middle of the front of the
building to the highest point of the roof for flat roofs; to the mean height level between eaves and ridge for gambrel, gable, and hip roofs; to the deck line
for mansard roofs. Where a building is located upon a natural terrace or slope the height may be measured from the average ground level at the building
wall.
BUSINESS: The engaging in the purchase, sale, barter or exchange of goods, wares, merchandise or services, the maintenance or operation of offices or
recreational and amusement enterprises for profit.
BUSINESS SERVICE USE: The rendering of service of a business nature in conjunction with which no commodity is sold or stock in trade is kept on the
premises.
CARPORT: A structure attached to or made a part of the main building, and which is open to the weather on at least two (2) sides, intended for the shelter
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 314/416
of not more than three (3) motor driven passenger vehicles.
CATERING: An establishment whose primary purpose is food preparation on the premises for sale, delivery and consumption off site.
COLLECTIBLES STORE: A business whose primary purpose is the sale of objects of popular culture that have become rare and unusual enough to be a
collectors' item.
COMMERCIAL: See definition of Business.
CURB LEVEL: The level of the established curb in front of the building measured at the center of such front. Where a building faces on more than one
street, the curb level shall be the average of the levels of the curbs at the center of the front of each street. Where no curb elevation has been established,
the mean level of the land, immediately adjacent to the building, shall be considered the curb level.
DISTRICT: A section or sections of the village for which the regulations governing the use and construction of buildings and the use of premises, the size
of yards and the intensity of use are uniform.
DWELLING: Any building, but not an automotive house trailer, which is designed and used exclusively for residential purposes, not including hotels and
boarding houses.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE: A building or portion thereof designed for or occupied exclusively by more than two (2) families living independently of each other.
DWELLING, ROW: A row of two (2) to eight (8) one-family, party wall dwellings not more than two (2) rooms deep located on one zoning lot.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A detached building designed for or used exclusively by one family.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A detached building designed for or used exclusively by two (2) families.
FAMILY: Any number of individuals related by blood, marriage or adoption, living together as a single housekeeping unit, excluding boarding houses,
fraternities, sororities, residential clubs and homes of an institutional character. A family shall include servants.
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION: An institution licensed by the federal reserve bank, the federal deposit insurance corporation, or the office of comptroller of
currency that regularly takes and maintains deposits from and provides a variety of credit and lending services to corporate, business and individual
customers.
FLOOR AREA, USABLE: Any floor area measured from the outside of the exterior walls of a residential building exclusive of areas in cellars, basements,
unfinished attics, garages, open porches, accessory buildings and rooms on ground floor designed primarily for location of heating or utilities equipment.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: An accessory building used only for the storage of not more than three (3) self-propelled vehicles, including the storage of not more
than one commercial vehicle having not more than one-half (1/2) ton capacity which is the property of an occupant of the lot on which the garage is
located.
GARAGE, PUBLIC: Any building or premises except those used as private garages used for equipping, repairing, hiring, selling or storing motor driven
vehicles, or parts therefor, but not including trucks, tractors, truck trailers and commercial vehicles exceeding two (2) ton capacity.
GARAGE, TRUCK AND EQUIPMENT: A building which is used or intended to be used for the storage, repair or servicing of motor trucks, truck trailers,
tractors and commercial vehicles and self-propelled heavy equipment and cranes, both crawler and wheeled type, exceeding two (2) ton capacity.
GOVERNMENT OFFICE: An office owned, leased or operated by a unit of local, county, state or federal government where government officials perform
official duties.
GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS: People elected to administer a unit of local, county, state or federal government.
GROUP DAYCARE HOME: An occupation or a profession conducted for monetary gain which:
A. Is carried on within a dwelling unit; and
B. Holds a current valid license from the Illinois department of children and family services for a group daycare home; and
C. Is carried on by at least one member of the family residing in the dwelling unit; and
D. Is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling unit for residential purposes; and
E. Conforms to the following additional conditions:
1. A maximum of two (2) employees not residing in the unit may be employed in the operation of a group daycare home provided the site meets
current parking requirements, and a separate, on site, paved parking space in compliance with chapter 8 of this title is available or may be added
for each employee involved in the business.
2. There shall be no exterior display or signage, no exterior storage of materials and no other exterior indication of the group daycare home or
variation from the residential character of the principal building.
3. Outdoor play areas must be fenced by a six foot (6') tall board on board fence.
4. Vehicles used in connection with the group daycare home, if any, shall not contain any advertising and must be parked in an enclosed structure
when not in use.
5. No offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, radiations, heat or glare shall be produced.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 315/416
6. The activity shall be limited to the hours between seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
HOME OCCUPATION: An occupation or a profession conducted for monetary gain which:
A. Is customarily carried on within a dwelling unit; and
B. Is carried on by a member or members of the family residing in the dwelling unit; and
C. Is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling unit for residential purposes; and
D. Conforms to the following additional conditions:
1. The occupation or profession shall be carried on wholly within the principal building.
2. No one outside of the family resident on the premises shall be employed in a home occupation.
3. There shall be no exterior display, no exterior storage of materials and no other exterior indication of the home occupation or variation from the
residential character of the principal building.
4. No offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, radiations, heat or glare shall be produced.
5. The activity shall be limited to the hours between seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
A home occupation shall not include, among others, the following: barbershops and beauty parlors, commercial stables, veterinary hospitals,
poultry farms and kennels, real estate offices and restaurants.
HOTEL: A building in which lodging, or lodging and board, are provided and offered to the public for compensation and which is customarily open to
transient guests.
INSTITUTION: A building occupied by a nonprofit corporation or nonprofit establishment for public use.
JUNKYARD: Open area where waste scrap iron, paper, rags or similar materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled,
excluding similar uses taking place entirely within a completely enclosed building.
KENNEL: Any lot or premises on which four (4) or more dogs or cats, at least four (4) months of age, are kept.
LIQUOR STORE, PACKAGE: A liquor licensee business establishment authorized with a class B1 license classification as described in subsection 3-3-5I
of this code.
LOADING AND UNLOADING SPACE, OFF STREET: An open, hard surfaced area of land other than a street or public way, the principal use of which is
for the standing, loading and unloading of motor trucks, tractors and trailers, to avoid undue interference with the public use of streets and alleys.
LODGE OR CLUB: An association of persons for some common purpose, but not including a group organized primarily or which is actually engaged to
render a service which is customarily carried on as a business.
LOT: A parcel of land occupied or suitable for occupancy by a use permitted by this title, including one main building or use, with accessory building, the
open spaces and parking spaces required by this title, and having not less than the minimum area required by this title for a lot in the district in which it is
located, and having its principal frontage upon a street or upon an officially approved place.
LOT, CORNER: A parcel of land situated at the intersection of two (2) or more streets. Any lot adjoining a curved street at a point where the street line
describes an arc subtended by an angle of one hundred thirty five degrees (135°) or less shall also be considered a corner lot.
LOT DEPTH: The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines measured in the mean direction of the side lot lines.
LOT, FRONTAGE: The front of a lot shall be that boundary of a lot along a public street; for a corner lot the owner may elect either street line as the front
lot line.
LOT, GROUND LEVEL: A. For buildings having walls adjoining one street only, the elevation of the ground at the center of the wall adjoining the street.
B. For buildings having walls adjoining more than one street, the average of the elevation of the ground at the center of all walls adjoining the streets.
C. For buildings having no wall adjoining the street, the average level of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of the buildings. Any wall
approximately parallel to and not more than five feet (5') from street is to be considered as adjoining the street.
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINE, FRONT: In the case of an interior lot, a line separating the lot from the street or place; and in the case of a corner lot a line separating the
narrowest street frontage of the lot from the street, except in cases where deed restrictions in effect specify another line as the front lot line.
LOT LINE, REAR: A lot line which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line and, in the case of an irregular or triangular shaped lot, a line ten feet
(10') in length within a lot, parallel to and at the maximum distance from the front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE: Any lot boundary line not a front lot line or a rear lot line.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 316/416
LOT OF RECORD: A lot which is a part of a subdivision, the map of which has been recorded in the office of the recorder of deeds or a parcel of land, the
deed to which was recorded prior to March 24, 1958.
LOT, THROUGH AND/OR DOUBLE FRONTAGE: A lot having frontage on two (2) parallel or approximately parallel streets, and which is not a corner lot.
LOT WIDTH: The horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at right angles to the lot depth at the front setback line.
MAINTENANCE: The replacing of a part or parts of a building, which have been made unusable by ordinary wear or tear, or by the weather.
MEDICAL CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER: A facility operated by a registered and licensed organization that is regulated by the Illinois department of
agriculture to grow and produce cannabis to dispense to registered medical cannabis dispensing organizations pursuant to the compassionate use of
medical cannabis pilot program act, enacted by the state of Illinois effective January 1, 2014, as may be amended.
MEDICAL CANNABIS DISPENSARY: A business operated by a registered and licensed dispensing organization that is regulated by the Illinois
department of financial and professional regulations to acquire cannabis and related products for medical purposes from a registered Illinois medical
cannabis cultivation center and sell retail to qualifying patients and caregivers pursuant to the compassionate use of medical cannabis pilot program act,
enacted by the state of Illinois effective January 1, 2014, as may be amended.
MIXED USE: A building, structure or premises occupied or used by two (2) or more principal types of use, any of which is permitted in a district
independent of other uses.
MOBILE HOME COURT: Any area or tract of land used or designed to accommodate one or more mobile homes for nontransient use meeting the
standards established by the Illinois state department of public health for such park or court.
MOBILE VENDOR: A business establishment that is mounted on wheels or is otherwise designed to be moved from place to place to conduct business.
MOTEL: A building or group of buildings, in which lodging is provided and offered to the public for compensation, and catering primarily to the public
traveling by motor vehicle.
NONCONFORMING USE: Any use of land or building which does not conform after passage of this title or amendment thereto with the regulations of this
title, other than height and yard requirements for the district in which it is located.
PARKING AREA, PRIVATE: An open, hard surfaced area of land, other than a street or public way, designed, arranged and made available for the storage
of private passenger automobiles only, of occupants of the building or buildings for which the parking area is developed and is accessory.
PARKING AREA, PUBLIC: An open, hard surfaced area, other than a street or public way, intended to be used for the storage of passenger automobiles
and commercial vehicles and available to the public, whether for compensation, free or an accommodation to clients or customers.
PARKING LOT: A parcel of land devoted to unenclosed parking space for five (5) or more motor vehicles for compensation or otherwise.
PARKING SPACE, AUTOMOBILE: The area required for parking one automobile, as provided in chapter 8 of this title.
PERSONAL GROOMING SERVICES: An establishment licensed by the state of Illinois that utilizes one or more individuals that are licensed by the state
of Illinois to provide services necessary for personal grooming, including beauticians that provide any cosmetic treatment, including, but not limited to,
services to the hair, hands, legs, feet and face; spas that administer any personal care treatment such as massages and facials, and barbershops.
PERSONAL SERVICE SHOP: A facility for the sale of personal services, but specifically excluding "personal grooming services" as defined herein. Typical
personal service shop uses include shoe repair, tailor, a photography studio, a laundry or cleaning pick up and receiving station, a custom printing or
duplicating shop, and exercise and weight loss facilities.
POSTAL, MAILING AND PROFESSIONAL SERVICES: A business establishment whose principal business includes the provision of overnight or express
delivery of letters and packages, as well as photocopying, binding, shredding, and printing services not utilizing on site commercial printing presses.
PROFESSIONAL USE: The rendering of service of a professional nature by:
A. Architects, engineers and surveyors who are licensed by the state of Illinois department of professional regulation.
B. Doctors, osteopaths and dentists who are licensed by the state of Illinois department of professional regulation.
C. Lawyers who are admitted to practice before the courts of the state of Illinois.
D. Certified public accountants who are licensed by the state of Illinois.
E. Consultants and practitioners who are engaged in recognized professional work, or who are recognized by appropriate licensed professions.
RETAIL STORE, DOWNTOWN BUSINESS DISTRICT (DBD): A building or structure not greater than thirty thousand (30,000) square feet gross floor area
primarily engaged in the retail sales of merchandise not specifically listed under another use classification, excluding package liquor stores and tobacco
stores. This classification includes department, clothing, furniture, and appliance stores, and businesses retailing goods such as the following: toys, hobby
materials, handcrafted items, jewelry, cameras, electronic equipment, audio and video sales and rentals, sporting goods, kitchen utensils, hardware,
antiques, art supplies and services, paint and wallpaper, bookstore not otherwise regulated under adult use restrictions, grocery, delicatessen, office
supplies, and bicycles.
ROOMING HOUSE: A building where lodging is provided by prearrangement for definite periods for three (3) or more persons and not open to transient
guests.
SANATORIUM: A private hospital, whether or not such facility is operated for profit.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 317/416
SECONDHAND STORE: Any premises used for the sale or handling of used goods. Secondhand store includes establishments for the sale or trade of
used clothing, furniture and appliances. Secondhand store does not include establishments selling used jewelry, collectibles, old coins, stamps, or
antiques.
SHARED OFFICE SPACE: A coworking office space for use by persons who are self-employed or working for different employers. Use of shared office
space can be by a service provided through drop in/occasional use or membership.
STORY: That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it or, if there be no floor above it, then
the space between such floor and the ceiling next above it, provided that a story shall not be counted if fifty percent (50%) or more of such story is to be
occupied for parking of automobiles.
STORY, HALF: Space within or under a sloping roof, the floor area of which does not exceed two-thirds (2/3) of the floor area of the story immediately
below it and which does not contain an independent apartment.
STREET: A public thoroughfare thirty three feet (33') or more in width between property lines, which affords principal means of vehicular access to abutting
property.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION: Any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders or any
substantial change in the exterior walls or the roof, excepting such alteration as may be required for the safety of the building.
STRUCTURE: Anything created or constructed, the use of which requires permanent location on the ground or attached to something having a permanent
location on the ground, including, but without limiting the generality of the foregoing, advertising signs, billboards, poster panels and supports and frames
thereof.
TOURIST HOME: A dwelling in which overnight accommodations for not more than ten (10) transient guests is offered for compensation.
TUTORIAL CENTERS: A business owned and operated privately for profit that employs individuals to provide supplemental traditional academic
educational services for clients in the kindergarten through high school grade levels.
USED CAR LOT: A zoning lot on which used cars or trucks are displayed for sale or trade.
VISION CLEARANCE ON CORNER LOTS: A triangular space at the street corner of a corner lot, free from any kind of obstruction to vision between the
height of two and one-half feet (21/2') and ten feet (10') above established grade, determined by a diagonal line connecting two (2) points measured
equidistant from the corner along each property line.
WINE BAR: A liquor licensee business establishment authorized with a class A1 license classification as described in section 3-3-5 of this code that serves
only wine by the glass, with or without food service.
WINE MERCHANT: A liquor licensee business establishment authorized with a class B2 license classification as described in subsection 3-3-5J of this
code.
YARD: An open space on the same lot with a building, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward, except as
otherwise provided herein. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the width of a side yard, the depth of a front yard, or the depth of a rear
yard, the mean horizontal distance between the lot line and the main building shall be used.
YARD, FRONT: A yard extending across the full width of a lot, and being the minimum horizontal distance between the street line and the main building or
any projection thereof other than the projection of the usual steps or open, unroofed terraces.
YARD, REAR: A yard extending across the full width of a lot, and being the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the rear of the main
building or any projection other than steps or open, unroofed terraces. On corner lots, the rear yard shall be considered as parallel to the street upon which
the lot has its least dimension. On both corner lots and interior lots the rear yard shall in all cases, be at the opposite end of the lot from the front yard.
YARD, SIDE: A yard between the main building and the side line of the lot, extending from the required front yard (or from the front lot line, if there is no
required front yard) to the required rear yard.
ZONE: See definition of District.
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR: The official appointed and/or designated by the village council as hearing officer pursuant to section 11-13-14.1 of the Illinois
municipal code, for the purpose of conducting public hearings and making recommendations to the village council with respect to certain applications for a
change to a nonconforming building or use and/or variations as identified in the zoning ordinance of the village of Forest Park. The director of public health
and safety shall be the zoning administrator. (April 1969; amd. Ord. O-16-63, 10-14-1963; Ord. O-6-66, 3-28-1966; Ord. O-44-02, 8-12-2002; 2004 Code;
Ord. O-24-05, 6-13-2005; Ord. O-68-05, 12-19-2005; Ord. O-23-06, 4-10-2006; Ord. O-50-06, 9-11-2006; Ord. O-02-07, 1-8-2007; Ord. O-09-08, 3-24-
2008; Ord. O-17-09, 3-9-2009; Ord. O-71-09, 12-14-2009; Ord. O-29-11, 9-26-2011; Ord. O-18-12, 5-14-2012; Ord. O-25-12, 7-23-2012; Ord. O-22-14, 9-
8-2014; Ord. O-24-14, 9-8-2014; Ord. O-04-15, 1-26-2015; Ord. O-06-17, 2-27-2017)
Chapter 2
ZONING DISTRICTS AND SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS
9-2-1: ZONING DISTRICTS:
In order to carry out the purposes and provisions of this title, the village is hereby divided into districts known as:
R-1 Low density residential district
R-2 Medium density residential district
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 318/416
R-3 High density residential district
B-1 Neighborhood shopping district
B-2 Community shopping district
DBD Downtown business district
I-1 Light industrial district
I-2 Industrial district
(Ord. O-23-06, 4-10-2006)
9-2-2: ZONING MAP AND BOUNDARIES:
A. Zoning Map: The location and boundaries of the districts established in section 9-2-1 of this chapter are hereby established as shown on a map
designated as the zoning map of Forest Park, Illinois. This map shall be signed and dated by the village clerk. Said map and all notations, colors,
dimensions, references, legends and symbols shown thereon shall be as much a part of this title as if fully described herein, and shall be filed as part of
this title with the village clerk. Such map, or a reproduction thereof, certified as showing the districts created and approved, shall be available for public
reference in the office of the village clerk and in the office of the director of public health and safety of the village. Alterations of said map made from
time to time and adopted by amendments as hereafter provided, shall be similarly signed, dated, filed and made available for public reference. (April
1969; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
B. Uncertainty Of Boundaries: When uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various districts as shown on the zoning map accompanying
and made a part of this title, the following rules shall apply:
1. The district boundaries are the centerlines of either streets or alleys or the extensions thereof unless otherwise shown, and where the districts
designated on the map accompanying and made a part of this title are bounded approximately by street or alley lines, the centerline of the street or
alley or the extension thereof shall be construed to be the boundary of the district.
2. Where the district boundaries are not otherwise indicated, and where the property has been or may hereafter be divided into blocks and lots, the
district boundaries shall be construed to be the lot lines, and where the districts designated on the map accompanying and made a part of this title
are bounded approximately by lot lines, the lot lines shall be construed to be the boundary of the districts.
3. In the case of further uncertainty, the zoning board of appeals shall interpret the intent of the zoning maps as to location of the boundary in question.
4. All streets, alleys and railroad rights of way, if not otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be in the same zone as the property
immediately abutting upon such streets, alleys or railroad rights of way. (April 1969)
C. Land Subsequently Annexed: All land which may hereafter become a part of the incorporated area of Forest Park, Illinois, as a result of annexation
shall automatically be classified as R-1 residential district. (Ord. O-16-63, 10-14-1963)
9-2-3: ACCESSORY USES AND BUILDINGS:
The uses permitted in the various zoning districts are principal uses, and a building or use that is accessory to a permitted use is allowable in connection
with such a use provided:
A. It is located on the same lot designed for the principal use of a building being established or existing;
B. It is compatible in character and extent with the principal use and district where located;
C. It conforms with such other regulations as apply;
D. It is not prohibited;
E. It shall not be erected prior to the establishment or construction of the principal use or building;
F. Where an accessory building is structurally attached to a main building, it shall be subject to, and must conform to all regulations of this title applicable to
the main building.
G. Where an accessory building is structurally unattached to a main building, no wall of such accessory building shall be nearer than five feet (5') to any
wall of the main building. (April 1969)
H. In all zoning districts except residential zoning districts, all detached accessory structures, buildings, and uses shall comply with the height limitations of
the zoning district in which they are located; provided that no detached accessory building, structure or use shall exceed the height of the principal
building, structure or use. In residential zoning districts, the maximum height of a detached accessory structure, building or use shall be one story or
sixteen feet (16'), whichever is lower; provided that in no case shall a detached accessory building, structure or use exceed the height of the principal
building, structure or use. (Ord. O-41-04, 9-13-2004)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 319/416
9-2-4: HEIGHT AND AREA EXCEPTIONS:
The district regulations set out in this section qualify or supplement, as the case may be, the district regulations appearing elsewhere in this title.
A. Public buildings, hospitals, sanitariums, schools or institutions of an educational, philanthropic, religious or eleemosynary nature, in the R-1, R-2, and R-
3 districts may be erected to a height not exceeding sixty feet (60') if the building is set back from each minimum yard line at least one foot (1') for each
foot of additional building height above the height limit otherwise provided in the district in which the building is located. (April 1969)
B. Chimneys, towers, elevator bulkheads, monuments, stacks, tanks, spires, church steeples, antennas and necessary mechanical devices appurtenant to
the principal use may be erected to a height in accordance with existing or hereafter adopted ordinances of the village. Whenever chimneys, towers,
elevator bulkheads, monuments, stacks, tanks, spires, church steeples, antennas and other mechanical devices are erected at ground level and in or
upon space removed from the principal building, they shall be protected by an enclosed fence of five feet (5') in height erected in the manner
prescribed by the applicable ordinances in this code. (April 1969; amd. Ord. O-5-77, 2-14-1977)
C. Whenever the rear of a lot abuts upon an alley, one-half (1/2) of the width of the alley may be considered as a portion of the required rear yard.
D. Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky, unobstructed, except for accessory buildings in a rear yard, and except for the ordinary projection
not to exceed twenty four inches (24") and except for open or latticed enclosed fire escapes, fireproof outside stairways and balconies opening upon
fire towers which may project not more than five feet (5').
E. For the purpose of side yard regulations, a two-family dwelling in a group house, or a multiple dwelling shall be deemed one building occupying one lot.
F. The side, front and rear yard requirements shall not apply to steps, open terraces, underground structures and fences, provided any fences or other
landscape improvement located on a corner lot within the vision triangle provided by the applicable front yard and side yard requirements of the district
in which the lot is located shall preserve a clear view between the heights of two and one-half feet (21/2') and ten feet (10') above the established grade
of each intersecting street or highway.
G. Gasoline pumps and air and water services of retail gas service stations in the districts in which they are permitted shall be exempted from front and
side yard requirements provided the centers thereof shall be at least twenty feet (20') from the street or highway right of way line. (April 1969)
9-2-5: ANTENNAS AND TOWERS FOR PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES:
Antennas and/or towers for personal wireless services shall not be installed without first obtaining a permit from the department of public health and safety.
The following regulations shall govern the installation of antennas and towers for personal wireless services:
A. Definitions: For the purposes of this section, the following words and terms shall be construed as herein defined:
ANTENNA: Any exterior apparatus designed for the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves, and used for personal wireless services.
FAA: The federal aviation administration.
FCC: The federal communications commission.
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES: Commercial mobile services, common carrier wireless exchange access services, and unlicensed wireless
services (i.e., telecommunications services using duly authorized devices which do not require individual licenses, but not including direct to home
satellite services).
TOWER: Any structure designed and constructed primarily for, and used for, the purpose of supporting one or more antennas.
TOWER FACILITY: The area comprising the tower, ground equipment, fencing and other improvements associated with the tower, excluding the
access thereto.
B. Purpose: The purpose and intention of this section is to provide for the installation of antennas and towers for personal wireless services so as to:
encourage the location of towers in nonresidential areas and minimize the total number of towers throughout the village; encourage users of towers
and antennas to locate them, to the extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the village is minimal; encourage users of towers and
antennas to configure them in a way that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers and antennas; and to comply with the requirements of
federal law.
C. Compliance: Antennas and towers for personal wireless services, complying with the requirements of this section, may be installed by licensed wireless
carriers on lots in the following districts:
B-1 Neighborhood shopping district
B-2 Community shopping district
I-1 Light industrial district
I-2 Industrial district
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 320/416
D. Requirements: Antennas and towers for personal wireless services may be installed on lots as provided in subsection C of this section, in accordance
with the following:
1. Inventory Required: Each applicant for a permit pursuant to this section shall provide to the director of public health and safety an inventory of its
existing tower facilities within the village and within one-half (1/2) mile of the corporate limits of the village, including specific information detailing the
location, height and design of each such tower.
2. Use Of Existing Towers: No new tower shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the director of public
health and safety that no existing tower or structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no
existing tower or structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna may consist of any of the following:
a. No existing towers or structures are located within the geographic area required to meet applicant's engineering requirements.
b. Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to meet applicant's engineering requirements.
c. Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment.
d. The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with the antenna on the existing towers or structures, or the antenna
on the existing towers or structures would cause interference with the applicant's proposed antenna.
e. The fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the owner in order to share an existing tower or structure or to adapt an existing tower or
structure for sharing are unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower development are presumed to be unreasonable.
f. The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render existing towers and structures unsuitable.
3. Roof Mounted Or Monopole Towers Required: Each tower for personal wireless services shall be roof mounted, i.e., structurally attached to the roof
of a building, or freestanding, i.e., structurally attached directly to the ground. When structurally attached to the ground, towers shall be of a
monopole type (i.e., a cylindrical, tapering metal pole without supporting wires) and shall have a galvanized finish or be painted a neutral color so as
to minimize visual obstruction.
4. Number Permitted: One roof mounted or one ground mounted tower is permitted on each zoning lot.
5. Height: No freestanding tower shall exceed a total height of twenty feet (20') above the zoning district's maximum building height, and no roof
mounted tower shall exceed a total height of twenty feet (20') above an existing building's height, both as measured to the highest point of the tower,
including the height of any antennas attached thereto, unless as approved pursuant to this subsection D, in which case, the tower shall not exceed
the minimum height necessary to provide personal wireless services.
6. Setbacks: Each freestanding tower facility, including any equipment and fencing, shall be set back from any adjacent property line a minimum of ten
feet (10') in any district, except when the property upon which the freestanding tower is located is adjacent to, or across the street or public right of
way from any residentially zoned property (excluding cemeteries) or property used for residential purposes, then the minimum setback from any
residentially zoned property or use shall be equal to the height of the tower.
7. Separation: No freestanding tower shall be installed less than five hundred feet (500') from any other freestanding tower. There is no minimum
separation requirement between roof mounted equipment.
8. Projection From Walls: No antenna installed by structural attachment to a roof mounted tower or directly to a building shall overhang, or project,
more than twenty four inches (24") beyond the vertical plane of any exterior wall of such building.
9. Protection, Screening And Landscaping: Each tower shall be equipped with an appropriate anticlimbing device or devices; and shall feature security
fencing and/or other security measures, unless the applicant can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the director of public health and safety that such
fencing and/or other security measures may be waived without a significant adverse impact on public safety. Landscaping shall be designed to
screen the tower and any related equipment or screening from the direct views of nearby rights of way or properties used for residential purposes.
10. Access: Unobstructed asphalt or other hard surface paving as approved by the director of public health and safety shall be provided for driveways
and parking between the right of way and the personal wireless facility. Proof of easements over such access areas shall be provided to the director
of public health and safety.
11. Illumination: No tower shall be artificially illuminated, unless artificial illumination is required by the FAA or other regulatory agency having
jurisdiction; in which case, such artificial illumination shall be limited to that which is so required.
12. Color: All towers and antennas, including all associated electrical and mechanical equipment, shall be of a neutral color and shall be designed to
the extent practicable to use materials, colors, textures, screening and landscaping which visually blend with the surrounding property.
13. Signage: No commercial advertising shall be allowed on any antenna and/or towers, for personal wireless service.
14. Additional Uses Permitted On Lot: Antennas and towers for personal wireless services may be installed on lots with different existing principal
structures and/or uses. Such antennas and towers, complying with the requirements of this section, shall not be deemed to be either principal or
accessory structures or uses, but shall be permitted additional structures and uses. Such antennas and towers, including all associated electrical and
mechanical equipment, shall, however, be included for purposes of determining maximum lot coverage for the lots upon which they are located and
shall not decrease parking below what is required or authorized by ordinance.
15. Compliance With Codes: Each antenna and tower shall be installed, and at all times maintained, in accordance with the village's building code, title
8 of this code, and with all applicable federal, state and local laws, ordinances, codes, rules, regulations and standards, including, but not limited to,
those of the FAA and the FCC.
16. Abandonment: Any antenna or tower that is not operated for a continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned, and the
owner of such antenna or tower shall remove same within thirty (30) days of receipt of notice from the director of public health and safety notifying
the owner of such abandonment.
17. Denial: If the zoning board of appeals or village council shall make any decision to deny a request made pursuant to this section, the denial shall be
made by the village within a reasonable amount of time in writing and supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record. (Ord. O-25-13,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 321/416
9-23-2013)
Chapter 3
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A. R-1 LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
9-3A-1: USE REGULATIONS:
In the R-1 District, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be hereafter erected, converted, enlarged or structurally altered unless otherwise
provided in this title, except for one or more of the following uses:
Accessory buildings and uses not involving the conduct of a business and including one private garage, but if such accessory building is not attached to
the main building, it shall be located not less than sixty feet (60') from the front line of the lot and not less than three feet (3') from the rear line and side
lines of the lot.
Cemetery.
Church.
Farming, truck and flower gardening and plant nursery, excluding the raising of livestock and poultry.
Home occupations, as defined in section 9-1-5 of this title.
Public elementary or high school; private school for students, the majority of whom are not more than eighteen (18) years of age.
Publicly owned parks and playgrounds.
Single-family dwelling.
Temporary buildings and uses for construction purposes for a period not to exceed one year. (Ord. O-13-98, 4-27-1998; amd. 2004 Code)
9-3A-2: CONDITIONAL USE REGULATIONS:
The following conditional uses may also be permitted by the Village Council in accordance with the procedures specified in this title. Application for
conditional uses is to be made to the Zoning Board of Appeals and after public notice and hearing on the petition according to law, the Board shall refer
the petition with such recommendation as it may make to the Village Council for its action, all in accordance with the procedures specified in chapter 10 of
this title:
Governmental and public utility buildings and facilities when necessary for serving the surrounding territory, provided that no public business offices and no
repair or storage facilities are maintained thereon.
Group daycare homes, as defined in section 9-1-5 of this title.
Removal of soil, sand, loam, clay and gravel (except in conjunction with the construction of a building, street or utility). (Ord. O-50-06, 9-11-2006)
9-3A-3: LOT AREA REQUIREMENTS:
A. Building Height: No building or structure hereafter erected or altered shall exceed two and one-half (21/2) stories nor thirty five feet (35') in height,
except as provided in section 9-2-4 of this title. (Ord. O-13-98, 4-27-1998)
B. Intensity Of Use:
1. Every lot or tract of land shall have an area of not less than six thousand two hundred fifty (6,250) square feet.
2. Every lot shall have a width of not less than fifty feet (50').
3. Every lot shall have depth of not less than one hundred twenty five feet (125').
4. Lot depth to width ratio of the usable area of a lot shall not be greater than three to one (3:1) except by approval of the Zoning Board of Appeals after
a public hearing.
5. No building with its accessory buildings shall occupy in excess of forty percent (40%) of the area of a lot. (Ord. O-16-17, 6-12-2017)
C. Yards:
1. Front Yard:
a. There shall be a front yard of not less than twenty feet (20') or fifteen percent (15%) of the lot, whichever is greater; provided, however, that where
lots comprising more than forty percent (40%) of the frontage on the same side of the street between two (2) intersecting streets are improved with
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 322/416
buildings, the average depth of the front yards of such lots shall be maintained by all new buildings, but this regulation shall not be interpreted to
require a front yard of more than fifty feet (50').
b. Through lots shall have the required front yard on both streets.
c. Corner lots shall have an exterior side yard on each street side of the lot, except that the exterior side yard on the side street shall not be less than
ten feet (10'). No accessory building shall project beyond the front yard or exterior side yard line on either street.
d. No fence shall hereafter be built or erected between the front lot setback line of the building or buildings and the front lot line except natural fences
of hedges, trees and shrubbery1.
2. Interior Side Yard: Except for corner lots, as provided in subsection C1c of this section, there shall be an interior side yard on each side of a building
of not less than ten percent (10%) of the lot or three feet (3'), whichever is greater.
3. Rear Yard: There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than twenty five feet (25') or twenty percent (20%) of the depth of the lot, whichever
is smaller.
D. Vision Clearance Of Corner Lots: Eight feet (8') from the intersection of property lines. (Ord. O-13-98, 4-27-1998)
ARTICLE B. R-2 MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
9-3B-1: USE REGULATIONS:
In the R-2 District, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be hereafter erected, converted, enlarged or structurally altered except for one or
more of the following uses:
Accessory buildings and uses when located on the same lot and not involving the conduct of a business, including private garages, but if such accessory
building is not attached to the main building it shall be located not less than sixty feet (60') from the front and not less than three feet (3') from the rear line
and side lines of the lot.
Cemetery.
Church.
Farming, truck and flower gardening and plant nursery, excluding the raising of livestock and poultry.
Home occupations, as defined in section 9-1-5 of this title.
Public elementary or high school; private school for students, the majority of whom are not more than eighteen (18) years of age.
Publicly owned parks and playgrounds.
Single-family dwelling.
Temporary buildings and uses for construction purposes for a period not to exceed one year.
Townhouses or rowhouses.
Two-family dwellings. (Ord. O-13-98, 4-27-1998; amd. 2004 Code)
9-3B-2: CONDITIONAL USE REGULATIONS:
The following conditional uses may also be permitted by the Village Council in accordance with the procedures specified in this title. Application for
conditional use is to be made to the Zoning Board of Appeals and, after public notice and hearing on the petition according to law, the Board shall refer the
petition with such recommendations as it may make to the Village Council for its action, all in accordance with the procedure specified in chapter 10 of this
title:
College or university.
Fraternities, sororities and dormitories.
Governmental and public utility buildings and facilities when necessary for serving the surrounding territory, provided that no public business offices and no
storage facilities are maintained thereon.
Hospitals, clinics, sanitariums and nursing homes which are subject to regulation by the State of Illinois or any agency thereof.
Philanthropic and charitable institutions.
Private clubs and lodges, except skeet and gun clubs and those, the chief activity of which is service customarily carried on as a business.
Professional office in residence of practicing professional person.
Removal of soil, sand, loam, clay and gravel (except in conjunction with the construction of a building, street or utility). (Ord. O-13-98, 4-27-1998)
9-3B-3: LOT AREA REQUIREMENTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 323/416
A. Building Height: No building hereafter erected or altered shall exceed two and one-half (21/2) stories nor shall it exceed thirty five feet (35') in height
except as provided in section 9-2-4 of this title.
B. Intensity Of Use: Every dwelling hereafter erected, enlarged, relocated or reconstructed shall be located upon a lot having the following area:
1. A lot on which there is erected a single-family dwelling shall contain an area of not less than five thousand (5,000) square feet and an average width
of not less than forty feet (40').
2. A lot on which there shall be erected or established a two-family dwelling shall contain an area of not less than three thousand (3,000) square feet
per family and an average width of not less than forty feet (40').
3. A lot on which there is established a rowhouse or townhouse dwelling shall contain an area of not less than two thousand (2,000) square feet per
dwelling and an average width of not less than eighteen feet (18').
4. Every lot or tract of land shall have a depth of not less than one hundred twenty feet (120'), and the depth to width ratio of the usable area of a lot
shall be not greater than three to one (3:1) except by approval of the Zoning Board of Appeals after public hearing.
5. No building with its accessory buildings shall occupy in excess of forty five percent (45%) of the area of lot.
C. Yards:
1. Front Yard:
a. There shall be a front yard of not less than twenty feet (20') or fifteen percent (15%) of the lot; provided, however, that where lots comprising more
than forty percent (40%) of the frontage on the same side of the street between two (2) intersecting streets are improved with buildings, the
average depth of the front yards of such lots shall be maintained by all new buildings, but this regulation shall not be interpreted to require a front
yard of more than fifty feet (50').
b. Through lots shall have the required front yard on both streets.
c. Corner lots shall have an exterior side yard on each street side of the lot, except that the exterior side yard on the side street shall not be less than
ten feet (10'). No accessory building shall project beyond the front yard line on either street.
d. No fence shall be hereafter built or erected between the front lot, setback line of the building or buildings and the front lot line except natural
fences of hedges, trees and shrubbery1.
2. Interior Side Yard: There shall be an interior side yard on each side of a building of not less than ten percent (10%) of the width of the lot or three feet
(3'), whichever is greater.
3. Rear Yard: There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than twenty five feet (25') or twenty percent (20%) of the depth of the lot, whichever
is smaller.
D. Vision Clearance On Corner Lots: Eight feet (8') from the intersection of property lines. (Ord. O-13-98, 4-27-1998)
ARTICLE C. R-3 HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
9-3C-1: USE REGULATIONS:
In the R-3 district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be hereafter erected, enlarged, converted or structurally altered except for one or
more of the following uses:
Accessory buildings and uses when located on the same lot and not involving the conduct of a business, including private garages, but if such building is
not attached to the main building it shall be located not less than sixty feet (60') from the front line and not less than three feet (3') from the rear line and
side lines of the lot.
Cemetery.
Church.
Farming, truck and flower gardening, and plant nursery, and excluding the raising of livestock and poultry.
Home occupations, as defined in section 9-1-5 of this title.
Public elementary or high school; private school for students, the majority of whom are not more than eighteen (18) years of age.
Publicly owned parks and playgrounds.
Rowhouse dwellings and townhouses.
Temporary buildings and uses for construction purposes for a period not to exceed one year.
Two-family dwelling. (Ord. O-13-98, 4-27-1998; amd. 2004 Code)
9-3C-2: CONDITIONAL USE REGULATIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 324/416
The following conditional uses may also be permitted by the village council in accordance with the procedures specified in this title. Application for
conditional use is to be made to the zoning board of appeals and after public notice and hearing on the petition according to law, the board shall refer the
petition with such recommendations as it may make to the village council for its action, all in accordance with the procedure specified in chapter 10 of this
title:
Business or commercial school.
College or university.
Commercial parking lots.
Fraternities, sororities and dormitories.
Governmental and public utility buildings and facilities when necessary for serving the surrounding territory, provided that no public business offices and no
storage facilities are maintained thereon.
Hospitals, clinics, sanitariums and nursing homes which are subject to regulation by the state of Illinois or any agency thereof.
Personal service shop, such as shoe repair shop, beauty parlor, barber shop, reducing salon and photographic studio, but expressly excluding those uses
listed in the B-2, I-1 and I-2 districts.
Philanthropic and charitable institutions.
Private clubs and lodges, except skeet and gun clubs and those, the chief activity of which is service customarily carried on as a business.
Professional office in residence of practicing professional person.
Removal of soil, sand, loam, clay and gravel (except in conjunction with the construction of a building, street or utility). (Ord. O-13-98, 4-27-1998)
9-3C-3: LOT AREA REGULATIONS:
A. Building Height: No building shall exceed five (5) stories nor sixty feet (60') in height.
B. Intensity Of Use:
1. Every dwelling hereafter erected, enlarged, relocated or reconstructed shall be located upon lots with a minimum of fifty feet (50') in width, a
minimum depth of one hundred twenty five feet (125'), and a minimum area of six thousand two hundred fifty (6,250) square feet, subject also to the
following:
a. A lot upon which there is located a two-family dwelling shall have an area of not less than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet per
family.
b. A lot upon which there is located a multiple dwelling shall have an area of not less than one thousand (1,000) square feet for an efficiency or one
bedroom unit, one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet for a two (2) bedroom unit, two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet for each
three (3) bedroom unit, and three thousand (3,000) square feet for each four (4) bedroom and larger dwelling unit;
2. No building with its accessory buildings shall occupy in excess of forty percent (40%) of the area of a lot. (Ord. O-13-98, 4-27-1998)
3. A lot upon which there is erected a rowhouse or townhouse shall have an area of not less than two thousand (2,000) square feet per dwelling unit.
(Ord. O-16-17, 6-12-2017)
C. Yards: There shall be a front yard of not less than twenty feet (20'), or fifteen percent (15%) of the depth of the lot; provided, however, that in all other
respects the regulations for front yard, side yard and rear yard shall be the same as those in the R-1 District.
D. Vision Clearance On Corner Lots: Eight feet (8') from the intersection of property lines. (Ord. O-13-98, 4-27-1998)
9-3C-4: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS:
A. Lot Of Record: Notwithstanding the regulations of this article, an existing structure on a lot of record may continue to be used for a single-family dwelling
or any of the nondwelling uses permitted in section 9-3C-1 of this article, and any single-family dwelling existing on a lot of record as of June 27, 2005,
may be reconstructed, notwithstanding the provisions of subsection 9-9-2F of this title; and principal and accessory buildings and uses not involving the
conduct of a business and including a private garage may be erected or constructed on such lots of record existing as of June 27, 2005, provided such
existing lot of record was vacant as of June 27, 2005, and has a minimum width of twenty five feet (25'), and further provided that such new
construction provides minimum side yards of ten percent (10%) of the width of the lot. (Ord. O-53-05, 10-11-2005)
B. Dwelling Standards: No building shall hereafter be erected, converted or structurally altered for use as a two-family or multiple-family dwelling unless it
shall conform to the same minimum usable floor area standards as are required respectively for such dwellings in the R-2 District. For this purpose,
group or rowhouse dwellings or apartments shall be deemed to be multiple dwellings.
C. Parking Regulations: Whenever a building is erected, converted, enlarged or structurally altered for a use permitted in the R-3 District, there shall be
provided an available and accessible off street parking area as shall be required by the applicable provisions of chapter 8 of this title. (Ord. O-13-98, 4-
27-1998)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 325/416
Chapter 4
BUSINESS DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A. B-1 NEIGHBORHOOD SHOPPING DISTRICT
9-4A-1: USE REGULATIONS:
In the B-1 district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be hereafter erected, converted, enlarged or structurally altered, except for one or
more of the following uses. (The following named uses shall be deemed to include those uses or buildings in general keeping with and appropriate to the
uses hereinafter specified.):
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to the following uses, including a sign or bulletin board relating only to services, articles and products
offered within the building.
Any use in the R-3 district except single-family and two-family dwellings, rowhouses, churches, public or private elementary or high schools for students,
the majority of whom are no more than eighteen (18) years of age, publicly owned parks and playgrounds and cemeteries.
Antennas and towers for personal wireless services in conformance with section 9-2-5 of this title.
Apartments with not less than four hundred (400) square feet of usable floor area per family, provided they are located on the second floor and above a
business use permitted in this district.
Bakery whose products are sold at retail on the premises.
Bank, savings and loan association.
Beauty supply stores, not greater than one thousand (1,000) square feet in area.
Business or commercial school.
Commercial parking lots.
Equipment service shop, such as radio shop, television shop, electrical appliance shop, record shop, locksmith shop, upholstering shop, but expressly
excluding those uses listed in the B-2, I-1 and I-2 districts.
Food catering establishments.
Food lockers.
Mortuaries.
Personal grooming services, provided that no such business is located within five hundred feet (500') of another business providing personal grooming
services in conformance with subsection 9-4A-5C of this article.
"Personal service shop", as defined in section 9-1-5 of this title.
Post office.
Professional or service office.
Recreation or amusement building, expressly excluding those listed in B-2, I-1 and I-2 districts.
Restaurant and/or liquor licensees where no live entertainment or dancing facilities are provided, but not including drive-in and drive-through restaurants.
Shop or store for conduct of retail business, including supermarkets, but expressly excluding those uses listed in the B-2, I-1 and I-2 districts.
Store for collection and distribution of laundry and dry cleaning articles, but not for the treatment, cleaning of such articles except self-service laundries.
(April 1969; amd. Ord. O-16-63, 10-14-1963; Ord. O-9-93, 3-8-1993; Ord. O-8-98, 2-23-1998; Ord. O-25-12, 7-23-2012; Ord. O-25-13, 9-23-2013)
9-4A-2: CONDITIONAL USE REGULATIONS:
The following conditional uses may also be permitted by the village council in accordance with the procedures specified in this title. Application for
conditional use is to be made to the zoning board of appeals and after public notice and hearing on the petition according to law, the board shall refer the
petition with such recommendations as it may make to the village council for its action, all in accordance with the procedure specified in chapter 10 of this
title.
Any use permitted in the R-3 district not listed under section 9-3C-1 of this title.
Animal grooming and boarding.
Billboards, on publicly owned property, and only as permitted by the village sign ordinance1.
Bus or taxi terminal stations.
Drive-in and drive-through facilities, where services and/or products (excepting the dispensing of gasoline and similar motor vehicle fluids) are provided
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 326/416
directly to customers/clients in motor vehicles.
Money lenders, including any person, partnership, association, limited liability company, corporation or other business combination or entity which engages
in the business of making loans which are typically secured by a post dated check or title to a motor vehicle; but not including any financial institution or
business entity which accepts secured deposits.
Monument works.
Publicly owned parks and playgrounds.
Tobacco shops, which includes any retail store where more than ten percent (10%) of the retail space is devoted to the sale of tobacco and/or tobacco
related products. (April 1969; amd. Ord. O-17-73, 7-28-1973; Ord. O-02-01, 1-08-2001; Ord. O-1-04, 1-12-2004)
9-4A-3: DISTRICT RESTRICTIONS:
The following restrictions shall apply to this district:
A. Sales of secondhand merchandise is prohibited.
B. All business or service or processing of aforesaid stores, shops or businesses shall be conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building, except
for automotive parking and off street loading, and sale of automotive fuel, monuments and bus and taxi terminal stations. All business or service or
processing of aforesaid stores, shops or businesses existing at the time of the passage of this title which are not conducted wholly within a completely
enclosed building, except for automobile parking and off street loading, and sale of automotive fuel, monuments and bus and taxi terminal stations,
must provide such enclosed building for such use within twelve (12) months from the date of passage of this title.
C. Outdoor listings and displays prohibited in any yard.
D. The repair or processing of goods shall be limited to those which are not objectionable by reason of odor, dust, smoke, noise, vibration, heat or glare of
water carried waste.
E. No more than two (2) persons shall be engaged in fabrication, repair and processing of materials, except that this provision shall not apply to the
preparation of food in restaurants, cafes or soda fountains.
F. All products produced, whether primary or incidental, shall be sold at retail on the premises where produced.
G. Outside storage of materials or supplies is prohibited.
H. Any lighting must be so placed as to reflect the light away from lots in residential district.
I. No commercial use and/or incidental use associated with the commercial use will be permitted which is injurious to health or safety of humans or
animals, or injurious to vegetation; and which is noxious, or offensive by reason of the emission of smoke, dust, gas fumes, odors, noises (including
music) or vibrations beyond the limits of the premises upon which such use is conducted. (April 1969)
9-4A-4: LOT AREA REQUIREMENTS:
A. Building Height: No building or structure hereafter erected or structurally altered shall exceed five (5) stories nor sixty feet (60') in height. (Ord. O-16-63,
10-14-1963)
B. Intensity Of Use: When living facilities are a part of the commercial structure, there shall be a lot area per family of not less than one thousand two
hundred fifty (1,250) square feet. In no event shall more than eighty percent (80%) of the lot to be covered by buildings. (April 1969)
C. Yards:
1. Front Yard: There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than twenty feet (20') except that no front yard shall be required (if the use is for
business purposes) and where all the frontage on one side of the street between the intersecting streets is used for business. No fences shall be
hereafter built or erected between the front setback line of the buildings except natural fences of hedge, trees or shrubbery. (Ord. O-9-93, 3-8-1993)
2. Side Yard: Where a corner lot or part thereof is used for any of the commercial purposes permitted in this district, the yard on the side of a lot
adjacent to the street shall not be less than five feet (5') in width except that the buildable width of the lot shall not be less than twenty five feet (25').
In all other cases, a side yard is not required except on the side of a lot abutting on a residential district, in which case there shall be a side yard of
not less than five feet (5'). (Ord. O-16-63, 10-14-1963)
3. Rear Yard: There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than twenty five feet (25') or twenty percent (20%) of the depth of the lot, whichever
amount is smaller. One-half (1/2) of an alley abutting the rear of a lot may be included in the rear yard to satisfy rear yard requirements, but such alley
space shall not be included for loading and unloading berths.
D. Vision Clearance On Corner Lots: Five feet (5') from the intersection of property lines.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 327/416
E. Accessory Buildings And Uses: When not attached to the principal building, accessory buildings and uses shall not be less than three feet (3') from the
side lines and rear lines of the lot. (April 1969)
9-4A-5: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS:
A. Lot Of Record: Notwithstanding the regulations of section 9-4A-4 of this article, an existing lot of record may be used for any of the nondwelling uses
permitted in section 9-4A-1 of this article. (Ord. O-16-63, 10-14-1963)
B. Parking Regulations: Whenever a building is erected, converted or structurally altered for a use permitted in the B-1 district, there shall be provided an
available and accessible off street parking area as shall be required by the applicable provisions of chapter 8 of this title. (April 1969)
C. Measuring Required Separations Between Uses: When permitted or conditional uses must be separated by a certain distance, that distance shall be
measured between the closest front property corners between the uses being compared as follows:
1. Between uses located on the same side of the same street: The measurement shall be the distance along the front property lines separating the two
(2) closest front lot line corners of the properties being compared.
2. Between uses located on opposite sides of the same street: The measurements shall be the distance as measured from the front property line
corner closest to the property it is being compared to, beginning at that point and extending perpendicular across the right of way to the front lot lines
on the opposite side of the street, then along the front lot lines to the closest property corner of the properties being compared.
3. Between uses located on different streets: The measurement shall be the distance as measured from the front property line corner closest to the
property it is being compared to, beginning at that point and extending along the front and/or corner side lot lines to the nearest corner of property to
which it is being compared, utilizing a ninety degree (90°) line to cross a right of way, if necessary. (Ord. O-25-12, 7-23-2012)
ARTICLE B. B-2 COMMUNITY SHOPPING DISTRICT
9-4B-1: USE REGULATIONS:
In the B-2 district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be hereafter erected, enlarged, converted or structurally altered, except for one or
more of the following uses:
Any use permitted in the B-1 district.
Automobile service stations and garages with repair work conducted entirely within enclosed buildings.
Bakery, dyeing and cleaning works or laundry, provided primary purpose is to serve retail trade.
Bowling alleys.
Bus, railroad or taxi terminal station.
Community buildings, museums and libraries.
Electric transforming or converting station.
Hospitals, clinics, nursing and convalescent homes.
Hotels and motels.
Municipal, state or federal office buildings.
Nonmanufacturing laboratories.
Plumbing shop.
Printing shop.
Private clubs and lodges, except skeet and gun clubs.
Public garage and automobile salesroom, including all weather surfaced, open air lot for display of motor vehicles in good operating condition.
Radio or television broadcasting station.
Restaurant with entertainment.
Rooming house.
Store for conduct of wholesale business, excluding a building for the principal use of which is for a public storage warehouse.
Tavern and/or liquor licensees.
Telegraph service station.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 328/416
Telephone exchange.
Theater, except open air drive-in theater.
Veterinary hospital and clinic, expressly excluding outside kennels. (April 1969; amd. Ord. O-16-63, 10-14-1963; Ord. O-6-66, 3-28-1966; Ord. O-18-12, 5-
14-2012)
9-4B-2: CONDITIONAL USE REGULATIONS:
The following conditional uses may also be permitted by the village council in accordance with the procedures specified in this title. Application for
conditional use is to be made to the zoning board of appeals and after public notice and hearing on the petition according to law, the board shall refer the
petition with such recommendations as it may make to the village council for its action, all in accordance with the procedure specified in chapter 10 of this
title.
Any conditional use permitted in the B-1 district in accordance with the procedures specified herein.
Medical cannabis dispensary, in compliance with the state of Illinois compassionate use of medical cannabis pilot program act and meeting the parking
requirement of chapter 8 of this title for medical cannabis dispensary. (Ord. O-22-14, 9-8-2014)
9-4B-3: DISTRICT RESTRICTIONS:
The following restrictions shall apply to this district:
A. Sales of secondhand merchandise is prohibited.
B. The repair or processing of goods shall be limited to those which are not objectionable by reason of odors, dust, smoke, noise, vibration, heat or glare
or water carried waste.
C. No more than ten (10) persons shall be engaged in fabricating, repair and processing of materials, except that this provision shall not apply to the
preparation of food in restaurants, cafes and soda fountains except by approval of the zoning board of appeals after public hearing.
D. Outside storage of materials or supplies is prohibited.
E. Any lighting must be so placed as to reflect the light away from lots in residential districts.
F. No commercial use and/or incidental use associated with commercial use will be permitted which is injurious to health or safety of humans or animals, or
injurious to vegetation; and which is noxious or offensive by reason of the emission of smoke, dust, gas fumes, odors, noises (including music) or
vibration beyond the limits of the premises upon which such use is conducted. (Ord. O-16-63, 10-14-1963)
G. All business in or servicing from the stores, shops or activities permitted in section 9-4B-1 of this article shall be conducted wholly within a completely
enclosed building, except for permissible drive-in and drive-through restaurants, restaurants with patio areas, automobile parking, off street loading,
sale of automobiles and service stations. All business in or service from permitted uses which are not wholly within an enclosed building existing at the
time of passage of this title, except for the exempt uses listed in this subsection, shall be moved into an enclosed building within twelve (12) months
from the date of passage of this title. (Ord. O-7-86, 5-27-1986)
9-4B-4: LOT AREA REQUIREMENTS:
A. Building Height: No building or structure hereafter erected or structurally altered shall exceed seven (7) stories nor seventy five feet (75') in height. (Ord.
O-16-63, 10-14-1963)
B. Front Yard: There shall be a front yard of not less than twenty feet (20') except that no front yard shall be required if the use is for business purposes
and all the frontage on one side of the street between the intersecting streets is used for business. No fences shall be hereafter built or erected
between the front setback line of the building except natural fences or hedges, trees or shrubbery. (Ord. O-9-93, 3-8-1993)
9-4B-5: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS:
A. Parking: Whenever a building is erected, converted or structurally altered for a use permitted in the B-2 district, there shall be provided an available and
accessible off street parking area as shall be required by the applicable provisions of chapter 8 of this title. (April 1969)
ARTICLE C. DBD DOWNTOWN BUSINESS DISTRICT
9-4C-0: INTENT; PURPOSE:
The downtown business district (DBD) is established to promote a pedestrian friendly service and retail shopping experience, to minimize negative
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 329/416
secondary effects in surrounding residential neighborhoods, and to serve as an area destination for its restaurants and specialized shops. (Ord. O-71-09,
12-14-2009)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 12-19 - INCUBATORS. Go to new ordinance.
9-4C-1: USE REGULATIONS:
In the DBD district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be hereafter erected, converted, enlarged or structurally altered, except for one
or more of the following uses. The following named uses shall be deemed to include those uses or buildings in general keeping with, and appropriate to,
the uses hereinafter specified:
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to the following uses, including a sign or bulletin board relating only to services, articles and products
offered within the building, subject to the B-1 and B-2 sign regulations.
Antique store.
Art gallery.
Artist studio.
Bakery.
Collectibles store.
Dance studio, not greater than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet.
Dry cleaner, no cleaning on premises.
Dwelling unit above ground floor retail, provided that no such dwelling unit may be less than eight hundred (800) square feet.
Financial institution.
Fitness center, not greater than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet.
Florist.
Government office, not exceeding two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet.
Home occupation.
Interior designer.
Locksmith.
Music instruction, incidental to retail music stores, or not greater than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet.
Personal grooming services, provided that no such business is located within five hundred feet (500') of another business providing personal grooming
services in conformance with subsection 9-4C-5C of this article, except that the five hundred foot (500') separation shall not be required if personal
grooming services are conducted in addition to a permitted retail store, Downtown Business District (DBD), in compliance with all of the following
requirements:
A. The personal grooming services and the retail store must be under the same property and business ownership;
B. The combined space for the retail store and the area used for personal grooming services shall not be greater than three thousand seven hundred
fifty (3,750) square feet;
C. A minimum of one thousand six hundred (1,600) square feet of contiguous space shall be used solely for retail sales;
D. No part of the area used for personal grooming services may be located within sixty feet (60') of the Madison Street right-of-way.
Postal, mailing and small office services shops not greater than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet, that provide copying, mailing, printing or
other similar services.
Professional uses as such term is defined in section 9-1-5 of this title, anywhere east of Des Plaines Avenue except on the first floor (grade level) within
fifty feet (50') of the Madison Street right-of-way.
Professional uses as such term is defined in section 9-1-5 of this title, anywhere west of Des Plaines Avenue.
Public or semipublic parking structure not exceeding fifty feet (50') in height with street level retail no less than sixty percent (60%) of the linear front lot line
footage.
Realtor.
"Retail store, Downtown Business District (DBD)", including such stores with classes associated with the primary use as defined in section 9-1-5 of this
title.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 330/416
Self-defense studio, not greater than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet.
Shared office space.
Shoe repair.
Tailor.
"Temporary parking lot", as defined and regulated by title 3 of this Code.
Wine merchant. (Ord. O-71-09, 12-14-2009; amd. Ord. O-19-10, 5-10-2010; Ord. O-33-13, 12-16-2013; Ord. O-04-15, 1-26-2015; Ord. O-06-17, 2-27-
2017; Ord. O-15-17, 6-12-2017)
9-4C-2: CONDITIONAL USE REGULATIONS:
The following conditional uses may also be permitted by the Village Council in accordance with the procedures specified in this title. Application for
conditional use is to be made to the Zoning Board of Appeals, and after public notice and hearing on the petition according to law, the Board shall refer the
petition with such recommendations as it may make to the Village Council for its action, all in accordance with the procedure specified in chapter 10 of this
title.
Animal boarding, anywhere west of Des Plaines Avenue, provided this service is operated in conjunction with a related retail use.
Animal daycare, anywhere west of Des Plaines Avenue, provided this service is operated in conjunction with a related retail use.
Animal grooming, anywhere west of Des Plaines Avenue, provided this service is operated in conjunction with a related retail use.
Automobile oriented uses and facilities, including car washes and drive-in and drive-through facilities, where services and/or products are provided directly
to customers/clients in motor vehicles, except within fifty feet (50') of the Madison Street right-of-way.
Bed and breakfast inns and hotels.
Brewpub restaurant, as authorized by title 3, chapter 3 of this Code.
Mortuaries.
Publicly owned parks and playgrounds.
Restaurants.
Tutorial centers. (Ord. O-71-09, 12-14-2009; amd. Ord. O-29-11, 9-26-2011; Ord. O-18-12, 5-14-2012; Ord. O-24-14, 9-8-2014)
9-4C-3: DISTRICT RESTRICTIONS:
The following restrictions shall apply to this district:
A. Secondhand stores and the sale of secondhand merchandise are prohibited.
B. Except for approved sidewalk sales, open markets, and temporary events, all business, service, or processing of aforesaid stores, shops or businesses
shall be conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building, except for automotive parking, off street loading, refuse receptacles, sale of
automotive fuel, and/or bus and taxi terminal stations. All business, service or processing of aforesaid stores, shops or businesses existing at the time
of the passage of this title which are not conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building, except for automobile parking and off street loading,
sale of automotive fuel, and bus and taxi terminal stations, must provide such enclosed building for such use by April 10, 2007.
C. Outdoor listings and displays of merchandise are prohibited.
D. The repair or processing of goods shall be limited to those which are not objectionable by reason of odor, dust, smoke, noise, vibration, heat or glare or
water carried waste.
E. No more than two (2) persons shall be engaged in the fabrication, repair or processing of materials, except that this provision shall not apply to the
preparation of food in restaurants, cafes or soda fountains, or for artists who create items for sale in permitted artist studios and art galleries.
F. All products produced, whether primary or incidental, shall be sold at retail on the premises where produced.
G. Outside storage of materials or supplies is prohibited on the street side, except as otherwise provided by this code.
H. Any lighting must be erected in a manner to reflect the light away from lots in residential districts.
I. No commercial use and/or incidental use associated with the commercial use will be permitted which is injurious to health or safety of humans or
animals, or injurious to vegetation; and which is noxious, or offensive by reason of the emission of smoke, dust, gas fumes, odors, noises (including
music) or vibrations beyond the limits of the premises upon which such use is conducted.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 331/416
J. Mobile vendors are prohibited. (Ord. O-71-09, 12-14-2009)
9-4C-4: LOT AREA REQUIREMENTS:
In the DBD downtown business district, buildings are intended to be placed close to the street to create a vibrant pedestrian environment, to slow traffic
down, provide a storefront character to the street, and encourage pedestrian traffic. The setback standards are designed to be flexible to encourage public
spaces between sidewalks and building entrances (e.g., extra wide sidewalks, plazas, squares, outdoor dining areas, and pocket parks). The standards
also encourage the formation of solid blocks of commercial and mixed use buildings for a walkable downtown.
Building setbacks are measured from the building line to the respective property line. Setbacks for porches are measured from the edge of the deck or
porch to the property line. The setback standards, as listed below, apply to primary structures as well as accessory structures. The standards may be
modified only by approval of a variation, in accordance with section 9-10-6 of this title.
A. Front Yard Setbacks: Except as provided in section 9-4C-4-6 of this article, the front setback of a principal structure shall be equal to the established
setbacks of any existing adjoining principal structures, or coterminous with the front lot line, if there are no adjoining principal structures.
B. Rear Yard Setbacks: The minimum rear yard setback for all structures shall be twenty five feet (25') or twenty percent (20%) of the depth of the lot,
whichever amount is lesser. One-half (1/2) of an alley abutting the rear of a lot may be included in the rear yard to satisfy rear yard requirements, but
such alley space shall not be included for loading and unloading berths.
C. Side Yard Setbacks: Except as provided in section 9-4C-4-6 of this article, there is no minimum side yard setback required, except that buildings shall
conform to applicable fire and building codes for attached structures, firewalls, and related requirements.
D. Setback Exceptions: Eaves, chimneys, bay windows, overhangs, cornices, awnings, canopies, porches, decks, pergolas, and similar architectural
features may encroach into setbacks by not more than one-third (1/3) of the distance into a required yard or into a required open space, subject to
compliance with applicable standards of the building code and fire code. Walls and fences may be placed on the property line, subject to the
requirements of title 8, chapter 8 of this code. Vision clearance on corner lots shall be a minimum five feet (5') from the intersection of property lines.
(Ord. O-71-09, 12-14-2009)
9-4C-4-1: LOT COVERAGE:
There is no lot coverage requirement, except that compliance with other sections of this code may preclude full (100 percent) lot coverage for some land
uses. (Ord. O-71-09, 12-14-2009)
9-4C-4-2: BUILDING ORIENTATION STANDARD:
All of the developments listed in sections 9-4C-1 and 9-4C-2 of this article shall be oriented to a street. The building orientation standard is met when all of
the following criteria are met:
A. Setbacks: The minimum setback standards in this section 9-4C-4 are met.
B. Entrances: Buildings have their primary entrance(s) oriented to (facing) the front lot line. Building entrances may include entrances to individual units,
lobbies, entrances oriented to pedestrian plazas, or breezeway/courtyard entrances (i.e., to a cluster of units or commercial spaces). Alternatively, a
building may have its entrance facing a side yard when a direct pedestrian walkway not exceeding fifteen feet (15') in length is provided between the
building entrance and the street right of way.
C. Variances: The standards of this section may be varied to address topographic or other physical constraints, in accordance with the provisions for
variations in section 9-10-6 of this title.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 332/416
Figure 9-4C-4-2(C)
Building Orientation (Typical)
(Ord. O-71-09, 12-14-2009)
9-4C-4-3: BUILDING HEIGHT:
All buildings in the downtown business district shall be no more than four (4) stories or fifty feet (50') in height, whichever is greater. (Ord. O-71-09, 12-14-
2009)
9-4C-4-4: ARCHITECTURAL GUIDELINES AND STANDARDS:
A. Purpose And Applicability: The DBD architectural guideline standards are intended to provide detailed, human scale design, while affording flexibility to
use a variety of building styles. This section applies to all of the following types of buildings:
1. Public and institutional buildings, except those buildings that do not receive the public (e.g., buildings used solely to house mechanical equipment,
and similar uses); and
2. Commercial and mixed use buildings subject to site plan review.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 333/416
B. Guidelines And Standards: Each of the following standards shall be met. An architectural feature used to comply with one standard may be used to
comply with another standard.
Figure 9-4C-4-4(A)
Downtown Building Design Elements (Typical)
1. Detailed Storefront Design: All buildings shall contribute to the storefront character and visual relatedness of DBD buildings. This criterion is met by
providing all of the architectural features listed in subsections B1a through B1e of this section, along the front building elevation (i.e., facing the
street), as applicable. Note: The example shown above is meant to illustrate required building design elements, and should not be interpreted as a
required architectural style.
a. Corner building entrances on corner lots. Alternatively, a building entrance may be located away from the corner when the building corner is
beveled or incorporates other detailing to reduce the angular appearance of the building at the street corner.
b. Regularly spaced and similar shaped windows with window hoods or trim (all building stories).
c. Large display windows on the ground floor (nonresidential uses only). Display windows shall be framed by bulkheads, piers and a storefront
cornice (e.g., separates ground floor from second story, as shown above).
d. Decorative cornice at top of building (flat roof), or eaves provided with pitched roof.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 334/416
e. All buildings subject to design review shall comply with the district architectural guidelines as indicated in the village publication entitled "Forest
Park Main Street Design Guidelines", as may be amended from time to time.
Figure 9-4C-4-4(B)
Design Of Large Scale Buildings And Developments (Typical)
2. Design Of Large Scale Buildings And Developments: The standards in subsection B2c of this section shall apply to "large scale buildings and
developments", as defined in subsections B2a and B2b of this section.
a. Buildings with greater than ten thousand (10,000) square feet of enclosed ground floor space (i.e., "large scale"). Multi-tenant buildings shall be
counted as the sum of all tenant spaces within the same building shell; and
b. Multiple building developments with a combined ground floor space (enclosed) greater than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet (e.g., shopping
centers, public/institutional campuses, and similar developments).
c. All large scale buildings and developments, as defined in subsections B2a and B2b of this section, shall provide human scale design by
conforming to all of the following criteria:
(1) Incorporate changes in building direction (i.e., articulation), and divide large masses into varying heights and sizes, as shown above. Such
changes may include building offsets; projections; changes in elevation or horizontal direction; sheltering roofs; terraces; a distinct pattern of
divisions in surface materials; and use of windows, screening trees; small scale lighting (e.g., wall mounted lighting, or uplighting); and similar
features. Note: The example shown above is meant to illustrate examples of these building design elements, and should not be interpreted as a
required architectural style.
(2) Every building elevation adjacent to a street with a horizontal dimension of more than fifty feet (50'), as measured from end wall to end wall,
shall have a building entrance; except that building elevations that are unable to provide an entrance due to the internal function of the building
space (e.g., mechanical equipment, areas where the public or employees are not received, etc.) may not be required to meet this standard.
Pathways shall connect all entrances to the street right of way, in conformance with title 10, "Subdivision Regulations", of this code. (Ord. O-71-
09, 12-14-2009)
9-4C-4-5: PEDESTRIAN AND TRANSIT AMENITIES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 335/416
A. Purpose And Applicability: This section is intended to complement the building orientation standards in section 9-4C-4-4 of this article, by providing
comfortable and inviting pedestrian spaces within the downtown business district. Pedestrian amenities serve as informal gathering places for
socializing, resting, and enjoyment of the village's downtown, and contribute to a walkable district. This section applies to all of the following types of
buildings:
1. Mixed use developments;
2. Planned developments;
3. Public and institutional buildings, except that the standard shall not apply to buildings which are not subject to site design review or those that do not
receive the public (e.g., buildings used solely to house mechanical equipment, and similar uses); and
4. Commercial and mixed use buildings subject to site design review.
Figure 9-4C-4-5(A)
Pedestrian And Transit Amenities (Typical)
B. Guidelines And Standards: Every development shall provide one or more of the "pedestrian amenities" listed in subsections B1 through B5 of this
section and illustrated above. (Note: The example shown above is meant to illustrate examples of pedestrian amenities. Other designs may be used.)
Pedestrian amenities may be provided within a public right of way when approved by the applicable jurisdiction.
1. A plaza, courtyard, square or extra wide sidewalk next to the building entrance (minimum width of 10 feet);
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 336/416
2. Sitting space (i.e., dining area, benches or ledges between the building entrance and sidewalk; minimum of 16 inches in height and 30 inches in
width);
3. Building canopy, awning, pergola, or similar weather protection over a sidewalk or other pedestrian space;
4. Public art, which incorporates seating (e.g., fountain, sculpture, etc.);
5. Transit amenities, such as a bus shelter or pullout, or bicycle racks as recommended and approved by the director of public health and safety. (Ord.
O-71-09, 12-14-2009)
9-4C-4-6: SPECIAL STANDARDS FOR CERTAIN USES:
This section supplements the standards contained in section 9-4C-4-4 of this article. It provides standards for the following land uses in order to control the
scale and compatibility of those uses within the downtown business district:
Residential mixed uses.
Bed and breakfast inns and hotels.
Accessory uses and structures.
Automobile oriented uses and facilities.
A. Residential Mixed Uses: Residential units, when mixed with commercial uses, are permitted to encourage housing near employment, shopping and
services. All residential developments shall comply with the standards listed in subsections A1 through A6 of this section, which are intended to require
mixed use development; conserve the community's supply of commercial land for commercial uses; provide for designs which are compatible with a
storefront character; avoid or minimize impacts associated with traffic and parking; and ensure proper management and maintenance of common
areas. Structures designed and constructed as dwellings and which existed prior to the effective date of this code are exempt from this section.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 337/416
Figure 9-4C-4-6(A)
Mixed Use Development In The Downtown Business District
1. Mixed Use Development Required: Residential uses shall be permitted only when part of a mixed use development (residential with commercial or
public/institutional use).
2. Limitation On Street Level Housing: No first floor street frontage may be occupied by residential uses. This standard is intended to reserve storefront
space for commercial uses and public/institutional uses; it does not limit residential uses above the street level on upper stories, or behind street
level storefronts. For parcels with street access at more than one level (e.g., sloping sites with 2 street frontages), this limitation on residential
building space shall apply to all street frontages.
3. Intensity Of Use: When living facilities are a part of the commercial structure, there shall be a lot area per residential unit of not less than one
thousand two hundred fifty (1,250) square feet. In no event shall such lot coverage exceed eighty percent (80%) of such lot.
4. Parking, Garages, And Driveways: All off street vehicle parking, including surface lots and garages, shall be oriented to alleys, placed underground,
placed in structures above the ground floor, or located in parking areas behind or to the side of the building; except that side yards facing a street
(i.e., corner side yards) shall not be used for surface parking. All underground or structured parking garage entrances facing a street shall provide for
a minimum of sixty percent (60%) retail oriented parking spaces at ground level along that street. On corner lots, garage entrances shall be oriented
to an alley or, if no alley is available, to a side street.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 338/416
5. Creation Of Alleys: When a subdivision is proposed, a public or private alley shall be created for the purpose of vehicle access. Alleys may not be
required when existing development patterns or topography make construction of an alley impracticable. As part of a subdivision, the village may
require dedication of right of way or easements, and construction of pathways between townhome lots (e.g., between building breaks) to provide
pedestrian connections through a development site, subject to site plan review.
6. Common Areas: All common areas (e.g., walkways, drives, courtyards, private alleys, parking courts, etc.) and building exteriors shall be maintained
by a homeowners' association or other legal entity. Copies of any applicable covenants, restrictions and conditions shall be recorded and provided to
the village prior to building permit approval.
B. Bed And Breakfast Inns And Hotels:
1. Intent: To provide temporary travelers' accommodations and breakfast, for a fee, on a daily or weekly room rental basis, as an accessory use in an
existing structure designed for and occupied as a single-family residence, or for facilities designed or retrofitted for hotel or motel use.
2. Standards:
a. Minimal outward modification of the structure or grounds may be made, but only if such changes are compatible with the character of the area or
neighborhood and the intent of the zoning district in which it is located. The architectural integrity and arrangement of existing interior spaces must
be maintained and the number of guestrooms shall not be increased, except as may be required to meet health, safety, and sanitation
requirements.
b. Off street parking shall be provided. The front yard shall not be used for off street parking for temporary guests unless the parking area is
screened, and designed to be compatible with the neighborhood.
c. There must be at least five hundred (500) square feet of gross interior floor area for each rental unit. The maximum potential rental units shall be
determined by dividing the gross interior floor area of the structure by five hundred (500) square feet. (Ord. O-71-09, 12-14-2009)
Those facilities providing service to more than six (6) guests are not considered "license exempt" under state law and must comply with state
hotel/motel restaurant licensing procedures. (Ord. O-71-09, 12-14-2009; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
d. One on premises sign may be approved by the village, provided that such sign is compatible with residential uses and is not more than five (5)
square feet in size.
e. All necessary village, county, and state permits, certifications, or requirements shall be obtained as a condition of approval of a bed and breakfast
service.
f. Room rentals to families or individuals shall not exceed fourteen (14) consecutive days.
g. The Cook County health department shall be required to conduct a general health and safety inspection of the proposed facility. The health
department shall impose any conditions required to ensure that all necessary health and safety standards have been met. The applicant shall not
initiate any construction activity or make other improvements related to the bed and breakfast facility, or begin operation of the facility prior to a
determination, in writing, by the health department that the necessary inspections have been completed and any deficiencies have been corrected
to the satisfaction of the health department.
C. Accessory Uses And Structures: Accessory uses and structures are of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use or structure
on the same lot. Typical accessory structures in the downtown business district include small workshops, greenhouses, studios, storage sheds, and
similar structures. Accessory uses and structures are allowed for all permitted land uses within the downtown business district, as identified in this
section 9-4C-4. Accessory structures shall not exceed one hundred twenty (120) square feet in size and shall comply with the following standards:
1. Primary Use Required: An accessory structure shall not be allowed in the absence of or prior to the commencement of the primary use.
2. Setback Standards: Accessory structures shall comply with the setback standards in this section 9-4C-4, except that the maximum setback
provisions shall not apply.
3. Design Guidelines: Accessory structures shall comply with the DBD design guidelines, as provided in section 9-4C-4-4 of this article.
4. Restrictions: A structure shall not be placed over an easement that prohibits such placement. No structure shall encroach into the public right of way.
5. Compliance With Subdivision Standards: The owner may be required to remove an accessory structure as a condition of land division approval,
when removal of the structure is necessary to comply with setback standards.
D. Automobile Oriented Uses And Facilities: "Automobile oriented uses and facilities", as defined below, shall conform to all of the following standards in
the downtown business district. The standards are intended to provide a vibrant storefront character, slow traffic down, and encourage walking.
1. Defined: "Automobile oriented uses and facilities" means any use or facility in which automobiles and/or other motor vehicles are an integral part of
the use, except automobile service stations. These uses are restricted because, when unrestricted, they detract from the pedestrian friendly,
storefront character of the district and can consume large amounts of land relative to other permitted uses. Automobile oriented uses and facilities
shall include, but not be limited to, the following uses, and shall comply with the following standards:
a. Vehicle Repair, Sales, Rental, Storage, Service: Businesses that repair, sell, rent, store, or service automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, buses,
recreational vehicles/boats, construction equipment, and similar vehicles and equipment are permitted when the use is contained within an
enclosed building with a front yard not less than twenty feet (20') from a front yard line, twenty five feet (25') from a rear yard line, and five feet (5')
from all side yard lines.
b. Drive-Up, Drive-In, And Drive-Through Facilities: Requirements for drive-up, drive-in, and drive-through facilities (e.g., associated with restaurants,
banks, car washes, and similar uses):
(1) Principal buildings shall not be located less than twenty feet (20') from a front yard line, twenty five feet (25') from a rear yard line, and five feet
(5') from all side yard lines.
(2) Pavement shall not be located less than five feet (5') from any property line abutting a right of way.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 339/416
(3) A minimum of three (3) queuing spaces shall be provided for waiting automobiles in each drive-through traffic lane. A queuing space shall be a
minimum of nineteen feet by nine feet (19' x 9'), and queuing spaces may be provided in a tandem arrangement.
(4) Drive-through lanes shall not obstruct or interfere with other traffic lanes or parking areas located on the zoning lot.
(5) Drive-up, drive-in, and drive-through uses shall not create traffic hazards or congestion on public streets or alleys.
c. Car Washes: In addition to any other conditions or limitations required by this chapter, car washes shall be subject to the following conditions and
limitations:
(1) No car wash building or structure, driveway surface, parking area, advertising device or other similar site improvement, except driveways
traversing a public road or boulevard, shall be located within one hundred feet (100') of any part of a residential district site.
(2) Each site shall have a minimum frontage of one hundred feet (100').
(3) Each site shall be permitted two (2) points of ingress and egress for every one hundred feet (100') of frontage, except that corner lots shall be
permitted one point of ingress and egress for every one hundred feet (100') of frontage.
(4) Interior curbs of not less than six inches (6") shall be constructed to separate driving surfaces from sidewalks, landscaped areas, and street
traveled ways.
(5) Interior drives, parking areas, and service stalls shall not be located closer than five feet (5') from a front lot line.
(6) Islands for sweeping and vacuuming equipment shall be set back not less than fifteen feet (15') from any street right of way and three feet (3')
from any property line not abutting a street right of way.
(7) Three (3) queuing spaces for waiting vehicles shall be provided for each washing bay. A queuing space shall be a minimum of nineteen feet by
nine feet (19' x 9') and such parking spaces may be provided in a tandem. (Ord. O-71-09, 12-14-2009)
9-4C-5: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS:
A. Lot Of Record: Notwithstanding the regulations of section 9-4A-4 of this chapter, an existing lot of record may be used for any of the nondwelling uses
permitted in section 9-4A-1 of this chapter.
B. Parking Regulations: Whenever a building is erected, converted or structurally altered for a use permitted in the downtown business district, there shall
be provided an available and accessible off street parking area as shall be required by the applicable provisions of section 9-4C-6 of this article.
C. Measuring Required Separations Between Uses: When permitted or conditional uses must be separated by a certain distance, that distance shall be
measured between the closest front property corners between the uses being compared as follows:
1. Between uses located on the same side of Madison: The measurement shall be the distance along the front property lines separating the two (2)
closest front lot line corners of the properties being compared.
2. Between uses located on opposite sides of Madison: The measurements shall be the distance as measured from the front property line corner
closest to the property it is being compared to, beginning at that point and extending perpendicular across Madison to the front lot lines on the
opposite side of the street, then along the front lot lines of the property to which it is being compared.
D. Nonconforming Uses: In the event that a nonconforming use of any building or zoning lot is discontinued for a period of ninety (90) days, the use of the
same shall thereafter conform to the regulations of the district. (Ord. O-71-09, 12-14-2009)
Notwithstanding the foregoing, an application to reestablish abandoned residential dwelling units above first floor retail that have units less than eight
hundred (800) square feet may be authorized by the village council by ordinance after a public hearing conducted by the zoning board of appeals, as
provided in section 9-10-4 of this title, subject to the following requirements:
1. The principal structure must have been constructed prior to December 31, 2002.
2. The space being considered was last used for dwelling units, with no subsequent nonresidential uses.
3. No dwelling unit may be less than four hundred (400) square feet in size.
4. The total number of dwelling units within the principal structure cannot be more than previously existed.
5. The zoning board of appeals and the village council make a finding that dwelling units less than eight hundred (800) square feet have been
consolidated as reasonably possible to reduce overall density given the locations of windows and load bearing structures, and the architectural
characteristics of the building. (Ord. O-08-13, 3-11-2013)
9-4C-6: PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
A. Intent: It is the intent of the parking regulations to provide for a rational parking requirement consistent with existing land use patterns and use in the
downtown business district area. The village of Forest Park currently provides certain municipal parking areas.
B. Existing Parking: Off street parking spaces existing as of April 10, 2006, shall not be altered or removed unless authorized by the village council by
ordinance, and only after an application is made and after public notice and a hearing on said application by the zoning board of appeals, using the
procedures for variations outlined in subsection 9-10-6D of this title.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 340/416
C. Parking Requirements: There shall be no off street parking requirement for any newly constructed structures for permitted uses in the downtown
business district, except for those existing parking spaces required to be maintained pursuant to subsection B of this section; provided, however, that
all residential uses shall provide at least two (2) off street parking spaces per residential dwelling unit. Parking may be required as a condition of
approval for newly constructed structures for conditional uses. (Ord. O-71-09, 12-14-2009)
Chapter 5
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A. I-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
9-5A-1: USE REGULATIONS:
In the I-1 district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be hereafter erected, enlarged, converted or structurally altered, except for one or
more of the following uses:
Any use permitted in the B-2 district, except multiple-family residences, tourist homes, boarding houses and except apartments erected above any
commercial use.
Bottling plants.
Building equipment and solid fuel storage and yards, and yards of contracting equipment, maintenance or operating equipment of public agencies or public
utilities, or materials or equipment of a similar nature, provided that where such storage or yards are in the open, if any part of the land so used lies within
three hundred feet (300') of any residential district, or any park, or state or federal highway, the entire open area presently being so used at the time of
passage of this title and to be used in the future shall be surrounded by a substantially built tight board or sheet metal fence, or masonry or other wall, or
dense evergreen hedge not less than eight feet (8') high, except that entire open areas presently being so used at the time of passage of this title which
are not surrounded by a substantially built tight board or sheet metal fence, or masonry or other wall, or dense evergreen hedge not less than eight feet
(8') high, must provide such enclosure within twelve (12) months from the date of passage of this title.
Bulk storage of gasoline, fuel oil or other inflammable or explosive liquids for retail or wholesale distribution, provided the plans for the location and
construction shall first be approved by the chief of the fire department, the commissioner of streets and public improvements, and the director of public
health and safety.
Canning, packing, preserving or bottling of food products.
Creameries and milk distribution stations.
Dyeing and cleaning establishments and laundries.
Ice plant or storage.
Light industrial and manufacturing and processing or assembly plants, excluding those specific uses expressly listed in the I-2 district, and where the scale
of operations and process of manufacturing or treatment of materials is such that the amount of dust, gas, smoke, odor or noise resulting therefrom will not
be detrimental to property or to the health of persons residing in surrounding residential districts.
Open air lot for display and sale or storage of automobiles or farm equipment in good operating condition, expressly excluding auto wrecking and junk
yards.
Roller skating, ice skating arena.
Stone yards or monument works.
Truck or bus storage yards.
Warehouses and storage plants. (April 1969; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
9-5A-2: CONDITIONAL USE REGULATIONS:
The following conditional use(s) may also be permitted by the village council in accordance with the procedures specified in this title. Application for
conditional use is to be made to the zoning board of appeals and after public notice and hearing on the petition according to law, the board shall refer the
petition with such recommendations as it may make to the village council for its action, all in accordance with the procedures specified in chapter 10 of this
title.
Any conditional use permitted in the B-2 district in accordance with the procedures specified herein.
Medical cannabis dispensary, in compliance with the state of Illinois compassionate use of medical cannabis pilot program act and meeting the parking
requirement of chapter 8 of this title for medical cannabis dispensary. (Ord. O-22-14, 9-8-2014)
9-5A-3: PROHIBITED USES:
No building or area shall be used for any of the following uses:
Cooking, distillation, processing and incineration of animal and vegetable products, including, but not limited to, brewery, distillery, food canning plant,
slaughterhouse, stockyards, fat rendering, soap manufacture, glue manufacture, tannery, paper manufacture, wool scouring and cleaning; cotton textile
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 341/416
sizing, scouring, bleaching, dyeing and similar operations; paint and varnish manufacture, creosote and creosote products manufacture.
Extraction, preparation and processing of dust producing mineral products including, but not limited to, abrasives, cement, lime, fertilizer, plaster, crushed
stone, stonecutting products, mining of sand, gravel, topsoil.
Manufacture and storage of explosive products, including, but not limited to, dynamite and commercial explosives, TNT and military explosives, fireworks.
Production of corrosive and noxious chemicals including, but not limited to, acids, acetylene gas, ammonia, chlorine, bleaching compounds.
Production, processing and storage of coal, coal tar, petroleum and asphalt products including, but not limited to, coke manufacture, illuminating gas
production, petroleum refining, bulk gasoline and petroleum products storage, asphalt products, linoleum manufacture, oilcloth manufacture, roofing
material manufacture.
Smelting and reduction of metallic ores including, but not limited to, blast furnace, open hearth, and electric furnace, Bessemer converter, nonferrous metal
smelter.
Storage of materials customarily stored in the open, such as junk, paper and scrap material.
Use of hammer mills, ball mills, rolling mills or drop forges in any industrial process. (April 1969; amd. Ord. O-22-14, 9-8-2014)
9-5A-4: DISTRICT RESTRICTIONS:
The following restrictions shall apply to this district:
A. No land or building shall be used or occupied in any manner as to create any dangerous, injurious, noxious or otherwise objectionable fire, explosive,
radioactive or other hazard; emit any noise or vibration, smoke, dust, odor, noxious, toxic or corrosive fumes or gases, or particular matter, discharge
any liquid or solid refuse or waste conducive to the breeding of rodents or insects into any stream, ditch or other open area in a manner or amount as
to adversely affect the surrounding area.
B. All operations permitted in the I-1 district shall be conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building; and all raw materials, fuels, finished products,
machinery and equipment, including company owned or operated trucks and motor vehicles, shall be stored within an entirely closed building, or within
an area enclosed by a fence of an approved type and design.
C. No operation shall be carried on that would produce heat or glare perceptible from any property line of the lot on which the operation is located.
D. No lighting shall be of such a nature as to produce glare on public streets or highways or neighboring property.
E. No substance other than oil, gas, or electricity shall be used as fuel. (April 1969; amd. Ord. O-22-14, 9-8-2014)
9-5A-5: LOT AREA REQUIREMENTS:
A. Building Height: No building shall exceed six (6) stories nor shall it exceed seventy five feet (75') in height, except as otherwise provided in section 9-2-4
of this title. (April 1969; amd. Ord. O-22-14, 9-8-2014)
9-5A-6: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS:
A. Parking: Whenever a building is erected, converted or structurally altered for a use permitted in the I-1 district there shall be provided an available and
accessible off street parking area as shall be required by the applicable provisions of chapter 8 of this title. (April 1969; amd. Ord. O-22-14, 9-8-2014)
ARTICLE B. I-2 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
9-5B-1: USE REGULATIONS:
In the I-2 district, no land shall be used and no building shall be hereafter erected or structurally altered, except for one or more of the following uses:
Any use permitted in the I-1 district.
Automobile painting, upholstering, repairing, reconditioning, body and fender works.
Blacksmith.
Brick, tile, plastic, glass, clay and metal products; provided, however, that no building or occupancy permit shall be issued until the location and conditions
of such use shall have been authorized by the village council after a public hearing conducted by the zoning and planning commission in accordance with
the provisions of this title.
Grain elevators.
Railroad yards. (April 1969)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 342/416
9-5B-2: CONDITIONAL USE REGULATIONS:
The following conditional use(s) may also be permitted by the village council in accordance with the procedures specified in this title. Application for
conditional use is to be made to the zoning board of appeals after public notice and hearing on the petition according to law, the board shall refer the
petition with such recommendations as it may make to the village council for its action, all in accordance with the procedures specified in chapter 10 of this
title.
Any conditional use permitted in the I-1 district in accordance with the procedures specified herein.
Medical cannabis cultivation center, in compliance with the state of Illinois compassionate use of medical cannabis pilot program act. (Ord. O-22-14, 9-8-
2014)
9-5B-3: PROHIBITED USES:
The prohibited uses specified in the I-1 district shall apply to the I-2 district as if the same were set forth in this article. (April 1969; amd. Ord. O-22-14, 9-8-
2014)
9-5B-4: DISTRICT RESTRICTIONS:
The district restrictions specified in the I-1 district shall apply to the I-2 district as if the same were set forth hereunder; except that open storage of all raw
materials, fuel, finished products, machinery and equipment, including company owned or operated trucks and motor vehicles, is permitted provided that
the area on which these items are stored is enclosed by a fence of an approved type and design. (April 1969; amd. Ord. O-22-14, 9-8-2014)
9-5B-5: LOT AREA REQUIREMENTS:
A. Building Height: No building or structure shall exceed six (6) stories nor seventy five feet (75') in height, except as otherwise provided in section 9-2-4 of
this title. (April 1969; amd. Ord. O-22-14, 9-8-2014)
9-5B-6: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS:
A. Parking: Whenever a building is erected, converted, or structurally altered for a use permitted in the I-2 district, there shall be provided an available and
accessible off street parking area as shall be required by the applicable provisions of chapter 8 of this title. (April 1969; amd. Ord. O-22-14, 9-8-2014)
ARTICLE C. SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS OVERLAY DISTRICT
9-5C-1: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this article to regulate the location of sexually oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of
the citizens of the village and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses
within the village. The provisions of this article have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content or reasonable
access to any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent or effect of this article to restrict or deny access
by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the first amendment or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented
entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this article to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. (Ord. O-
57-07, 11-26-2007)
9-5C-2: FINDINGS:
Based on evidence of the adverse secondary effects of adult uses on the communities, presented in hearings and in reports made available to the zoning
board of appeals and recommended to the village council, and on findings incorporated in the cases of Pap's A.M. v. City of Erie, 2000 U.S. Lexis 2347
(Mar. 29, 2000); City of Renton Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986), Young v. American Mini Theatres, 426 U.S. 50 (1976), and Barnes v. Glen
Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991), Schultz v. City of Cumberland, 26 F.Supp.2d 1128 (W.D. Wisc. 1998), aff'd in part, rev'd in part, 2000 U.S. App. Lexis
23773 (7th Cir. 2000); Berg v. Health & Hospital Corp., 865 F.2d 797 (1989); DiMa Corp. v. Town of Hallie, 185 F.3d 823 (1999); Entertainment Concepts v.
Maciejewski, 631 F.2d 497 (1980); Genusa v. City of Peoria, 619 F.2d 1203 (1980); Graff v. City of Chicago, 9 F.3d 1309 (1993);North Avenue Novelties,
Inc. v. City of Chicago, 88 F.3d 441 (1996); and other cases; and on reports of secondary effects occurring in and around sexually oriented businesses,
both in Cook County and in other communities including, but not limited to, Denver, Colorado - 1998; Rochester, New York - 2000; Indianapolis, Indiana -
1984; Kansas City, Missouri - 1998; Los Angeles, California - 1977; Newport News, Virginia - 1996; St. Paul, Minnesota - 1987/1988 supplemental study;
Springfield, Missouri - 1986; New York, New York - 1994; Phoenix, Arizona - 1979; Tucson, Arizona - 1990; Garden Grove, California - 1991; Whittier,
California - 1978; Adams County, Colorado - 1988; Manatee County, Florida - 1987; Minneapolis, Minnesota - 1980; Las Vegas, Nevada - 1978;
Ellicottville, New York - 1998; Islip, New York - 1980; New York Times Square study - 1994; New Hanover County, North Carolina - 1989; Cleveland, Ohio -
1977; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma - 1986/1992; Amarillo, Texas - 1977; Austin, Texas - 1986; Beaumont, Texas - 1982; Cleburne, Texas - 1997; Dallas,
Texas - 1997; El Paso, Texas - 1986; Houston, Texas - 1983/1997; Bellevue, Washington - 1988; Des Moines, Washington - 1984; Seattle, Washington -
1989; St. Croix County, Wisconsin - 1993; and also on findings from the report of the attorney general's working group on the regulation of sexually
oriented businesses (June 6, 1989, state of Minnesota), the village council finds:
A. Sexually oriented businesses lend themselves to ancillary unlawful and unhealthy activities that tend to have an adverse impact on the surrounding
community. Further, there are presently insufficient mechanisms in the village to regulate the location of sexually oriented businesses to minimize the
adverse impact on surrounding property owners.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 343/416
B. Certain employees of unregulated sexually oriented businesses defined in this article as adult theaters and cabarets engage in higher incidence of
certain types of illicit sexual behavior than employees of other establishments.
C. Unlawful sexual acts occur at unregulated sexually oriented businesses, especially those which provide private or semiprivate booths or cubicles for
viewing films, videos or live sex shows and generally results in an increase in crime within the village.
D. Offering and providing such unregulated locations encourages such activities, which has an adverse impact on the village's retail trade, property values
of surrounding properties which results in a reduction in the quality of the village's neighborhoods, commercial districts and suburban life.
E. Persons frequent certain adult theaters, adult arcades and other sexually oriented businesses for the purpose of engaging in sex within or about the
premises of such sexually oriented businesses, or for the purpose of purchasing or selling illicit drugs.
F. Numerous communicable diseases may be spread by activities occurring in or about sexually oriented businesses, including, but not limited to, syphilis,
gonorrhea, human immunodeficiencyvirus infection (HIV-AIDS), genital herpes, hepatitis salmonella, campylobacter and shigella infections, chlamydia,
myoplasmal and ureoplasmal infections, trichomoniasis and chancroid.
G. Sanitary conditions in some sexually oriented businesses are unhealthy, in part, because the activities conducted there are unhealthy and, in part,
because of the unregulated nature of the activities and the failure of the owners and the operators of the facilities to self-regulate those activities and
maintain those facilities.
H. Numerous studies and reports have determined that bodily fluids are found in the areas of sexually oriented businesses where persons view "adult"
oriented films.
I. The presence of sexually oriented businesses can have an adverse effect on residential neighborhoods, neighborhood children and community
improvement efforts.
J. The findings noted in subsections A through I of this section raise substantial governmental concerns.
K. Sexually oriented businesses have characteristics that tend to have secondary adverse effects on surrounding property and should be reasonably
regulated in order to protect those substantial governmental concerns.
L. Zoning is an appropriate mechanism to minimize the impact of sexually oriented businesses and provide a reasonable alternate avenue of
communication for sexually oriented businesses. Further, zoning permits sexually oriented businesses to be located in areas consistent with the health,
safety and welfare of the community and citizens of the village. It is appropriate to require reasonable limitations on the location of sexually oriented
businesses.
M. The general welfare, health, morals and safety of the citizens of the village will be promoted by the enactment of this article. (Ord. O-57-07, 11-26-2007)
9-5C-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall be defined as follows:
ADULT ARCADE: Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin operated or slug operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically
controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, videos, or other image producing devices are maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer persons
per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of "specified sexual
activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
ADULT BOOKSTORE OR ADULT VIDEO STORE: A commercial establishmentthat, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for sale or rental for
any form of consideration any one or more of the following:
A. Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion picture, videocassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other
visual representations that are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical
areas"; or
B. Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for use in connection with "specified sexual activities".
A principal business purpose exists if materials offered for sale or rental depicting or describing "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical
areas" generate twenty percent (20%) or more of the business's income, or account for twenty percent (20%) or more of inventory, or occupy twenty
percent (20%) or more of total floor space. A commercial establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not involve the offering
for sale or rental of material depicting or describing "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" and still be categorized as an adult
bookstore or adult video store. Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such commercial establishments from being categorized as an
adult bookstore or adult video store so long as one of its principal business purposes is the offering for sale or rental for consideration the specified
materials that depict or describe "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
ADULT CABARET: A nightclub, bar, restaurant, cafe, or similar commercial establishment that regularly, commonly, habitually, or consistently features:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 344/416
A. Persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminudity; or
B. Live performances that are distinguished or characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities"; or
C. Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, photographic reproductions, or other image producing devices that are distinguished or characterized
by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specifiedanatomical areas"; or
D. Persons who engage in "exotic" or erotic dancing or performances that are intended for the sexual interests or titillation of an audience or
customers.
ADULT MOTEL: A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment that:
A. Offers accommodation to the public for any form of consideration and provides patrons with closed circuit television transmissions, films, motion
pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions that are distinguished or characterized by the depiction or description of
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; and advertises the availability of such material by means of a sign visible from the public
right of way, or by means of any off premises advertising, including, but not limited to, newspapers, magazines, pamphlets or leaflets, radio or
television; or
B. Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than twenty four (24) hours; or
C. Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the sleeping room for a period of time that is less than twenty four (24) hours.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: A commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or
similar photographic reproductions are regularly, commonly, habitually, or consistently shown that are distinguished or characterized by the depiction or
description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
ADULT THEATER: A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment that regularly, commonly, habitually, or consistently features
persons who appear, in person, in a state of nudity and/or seminudity, and/or live performances that are distinguished or characterized by the exposure of
"specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities".
ESCORT: A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately
model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person.
ESCORT AGENCY: A person or business association who furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business
purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration.
ESTABLISHMENT: Means and includes any of the following:
A. The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business;
B. The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business;
C. The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business;
D. The relocation of any sexually oriented business; or
E. A sexually oriented business or premises on which the sexually oriented business is located.
LIVE THEATRICAL PERFORMANCE: A play, skit, opera, ballet, concert, comedy, or musical drama.
NUDE MODEL STUDIO: Any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or displays "specified anatomical areas" is provided to be observed,
sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons for consideration.
NUDITY OR A STATE OF NUDITY: The appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, anal cleft or cleavage, pubic area, male genitals, female genitals, or
vulva, with less than a fully opaque covering; or a female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the areola; or human male genitals in
a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
PERSON: An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity.
PREMISES: The real property upon which the sexually oriented business is located, and all appurtenances thereto and buildings thereon, including, but
not limited to, the sexually oriented business, the grounds, private walkways, and parking lots and/or parking garages adjacent thereto, under the
ownership, control, or supervision of the licensee, as described in the application for a business license pursuant to section 3-11-5 of this code.
SEMINUDE OR SEMINUDITY: The appearance of the female breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest point. This definition
shall include the entire lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast exhibited by
a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel, provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 345/416
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER: A business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for any form of
consideration:
A. Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex; or
B. Activities between persons of the opposite sex and/or persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or seminudity.
A principal business purpose exists if the services offered are intended to generate business income.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: An adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult
theater, escort agency, nude model studio, or sexual encounter center.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS:
A. The human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if fully and opaquely covered;
B. Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or a female breast below a point immediately above the top of
the areola.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: Means and includes any of the following:
A. The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts, whether covered or uncovered;
B. Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy;
C. Masturbation, actual or simulated; or
D. Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections A through C of this definition. (Ord. O-57-07, 11-26-
2007)
9-5C-4: CLASSIFICATION:
Sexually oriented business uses are classified as follows:
A. Adult arcades; or
B. Adult bookstores or adult video stores; or
C. Adult motels; or
D. Adult motion picture theaters; or
E. Adult theaters; or
F. Adult cabarets; or
G. Escort agencies; or
H. Nude model studios; or
I. Sexual encounter centers. (Ord. O-57-07, 11-26-2007)
9-5C-5: LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
A. Sexually oriented businesses shall be permitted only in the sexually oriented business overlay district. The sexually oriented business overlay district
shall be that portion of the I-2 industrial district located south of Greenburg Road, east of Des Plaines Avenue, north of the boundary of Woodlawn
cemetery and west of the village's eastern corporate limits described as follows:
Lots 2 thru 17 inclusive in Forest Park Industrial Center Inc. Resubdivision, being a subdivision in the south half of Section 24, Township 39 North,
Range 12 East of the Third Principal Meridian, according to the plat thereof recorded June 16, 1969 as document no. 20872980 in Cook County,
Illinois; EXCEPT the East 24.15 feet of said Lot 2 thereof; ALSO EXCEPT that part of Lot 3 in said Forest Park Industrial Center Inc. Resubdivision
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 346/416
lying west of the west line of the East 307.50 feet thereof; ALSO EXCEPT the west 65.03 feet of said Lot 17 thereof.
Lots A, B and C in Ironworker's Resubdivision, being a subdivision in the Southwest Quarter of Section 24, Township 39 North, Range 12 East of the
Third Principal Meridian, according to the plat thereof recorded November 14, 1988 as document no. 88525151 in Cook County, Illinois.
The Southwest Quarter of the Northeast Quarter of Section 24, Township 39 North, Range 12 East of the Third Principal Meridian in Cook County,
Illinois; EXCEPT the east 33.00 feet thereof.
B. The boundaries of the sexually oriented business overlay district shall be depicted on the official zoning map of the village as provided in section 9-2-2
of this title.
C. A sexually oriented business may not be operated in the same building, structure, or portion thereof, containing another sexually oriented business that
is classified in accordance with section 9-5C-4 of this article.
D. For purposes of subsection A of this section, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the
nearest portion of the building or structure used as a part of the premises where a sexuallyoriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line
of the school, daycare center, public park, forest preserve, public housing, place of religious worship or residential lot.
E. For purposes of subsection A of this section, the distance between any two (2) sexually oriented business uses shall be measured in a straight line,
without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located. (Ord. O-57-07, 11-
26-2007)
9-5C-6: PERMITTED USE ONLY:
A sexually oriented business shall not be allowed as a special use in any zoning district. (Ord. O-57-07, 11-26-2007)
9-5C-7: REGULATIONS SUPPLEMENT OTHER REGULATIONS:
The regulations of the sexually oriented business overlay district shall supplement and are in addition to the regulations of the I-2 industrial district. In case
of conflict between the regulations of the I-2 industrial district and the regulations of the sexually oriented business overlay district, the regulations of the
sexually oriented business overlay district shall prevail. (Ord. O-57-07, 11-26-2007)
9-5C-8: SETBACK REQUIREMENTS:
A. A sexually oriented business that is an adult entertainment facility, as that phrase is defined in section 11-5-1.5 of the Illinois municipal code1, shall not
be located in violation of the locational restrictions set forth in said section 11-5-1.5 of the Illinois municipal code2, as amended, provided that if any
locational restriction of said section, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held to be invalid, a sexually oriented business that is
an adult entertainment facility shall be located in compliance with subsection B of this section.
B. A sexually oriented business that is not an adult entertainment facility, as that phrase is defined in section 11-5-1.5 of the Illinois municipal code3, shall
not be located within:
1. Five hundred feet (500') of a school, daycare center, public park, forest preserve, public housing, place of religious worship; or
2. Five hundred feet (500') of the property line of a lot zoned for residential use and devoted to a residential use as defined in the zoning code.
C. A sexually oriented business may not be operated in the same building, structure, or portion thereof, containing another sexually oriented business that
is classified in accordance with section 9-5C-4 of this article.
D. For purposes of subsections A and B of this section, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects,
from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as a part of the premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest
property line of the school, daycare center, public park, forest preserve, public housing, place of religious worship or residential lot. (Ord. O-57-07, 11-
26-2007)
9-5C-9: PARKING:
Sexually oriented businesses shall provide five (5) off street parking spaces for every one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area. (Ord. O-57-07,
11-26-2007)
9-5C-10: NONCONFORMING USES; AMORTIZATION:
A. Any business lawfully operating on the effective date hereof that is in violation of the locational or structural configuration requirements of this article
shall be deemed a nonconforming use. The nonconforming use will be permitted to continue for a period not to exceed two (2) years, unless sooner
terminated for any reason or voluntarily discontinued for a period of thirty (30) days or more. Such nonconforming uses shall not be increased,
enlarged, extended or altered except that the use may be changed to a conforming use. If two (2) or more sexually oriented businesses are within five
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 347/416
hundred feet (500') of one another and otherwise in a permissible location, the sexually oriented business that was first established and continually
operated at a particular location is the conforming use and the later established business(es) is nonconforming.
B. A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the grant or
renewal of the sexually oriented business license, of a school, daycare center, public park, forest preserve, public housing, place of religious worship or
residential lot within five hundred feet (500') of the sexually oriented business. This provision applies only to the renewal of a valid business license,
and does not apply when an application for a business license is submitted after an operator's license has expired or has been revoked. (Ord. O-57-07,
11-26-2007)
ARTICLE D. SIGNS REGULATED UNDER THE HIGHWAY ADVERTISING CONTROL
ACT OF 1971
9-5D-1: REGULATIONS:
Signs not indicating a bona fide business conducted or a product sold on the same premises, which are permitted and regulated pursuant to section 4.04
of the highway advertising control act of 1971, as amended, shall be permitted if authorized by a conditional use provided that:
A. No such sign shall be constructed or erected on any zoning lot in the R-1, R-2, R-3, B-1, B-2, or DBD district.
B. Such signs shall only be located in an I-1 or I-2 district and within six hundred sixty feet (660') of the right of way of a highway designated by the Illinois
department of transportation, and approved by the United States department of transportation, as a part of the national system of interstate and
defense highways of the federal aid primary system, and such signs must be visible from the main traveled way of such highway.
C. Such signs shall comply with all of the requirements of the Illinois highway advertising control act of 1971, as amended, except where this section
imposes more restrictive requirements, in which case such signs shall comply with the more restrictive requirements of this section.
D. Such signs, if approved, shall be contingent upon the approval and receipt of a current and validly issued Illinois department of transportation permit.
E. Not more than one such sign shall be constructed or erected on any one subdivided lot of record.
F. Such signs shall not exceed the height restrictions of the district in which it is located.
G. Total surface area shall not exceed one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet per face or two thousand four hundred (2,400) total square feet for a
double faced sign.
H. No part of the sign shall be located within five feet (5') of any property line.
I. Such signs must meet the spacing requirements as required by the Illinois highway advertising control act.
J. No portion of such signs shall be allowed within one hundred feet (100') of a residential property line. This distance shall be measured at ground level
from a line perpendicular to the closest part of the billboard to the residential property line. (Ord. O-18-12, 5-14-2012)
Chapter 6
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS
9-6-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of the planned development is to provide a means of achieving innovative and creative design and flexibility of development which would not
otherwise be permitted pursuant to this chapter. The end result shall fulfill the objectives of the comprehensive plan and other planning policies of the
Village while departing from the strict application of the zoning and subdivision ordinances.
A planned development may be granted as a conditional use in any zoning district by the Village Council, should it determine that the planned
development is in the best interest of the Village, and it complies with all the standards established in this chapter. The Plan Commission and Village
Council may require any reasonable conditions of approval or design considerations that will promote proper development or benefit to the community.
The purposes of a planned development are to:
A. Afford greater choice in the types of development available to the public by allowing a development that would not be possible under the strict
application of the other requirements of this title;
B. Allow for a more creative approach to the use of land and related physical facilities that result in better design development and the construction of
aesthetic amenities;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 348/416
C. Promote the cooperative development of office or business centers each with adequate off street parking, to control access points to the street system
and to separate pedestrian and automobile traffic;
D. Aid in stabilizing property values and to develop centers of size and location compatible with the market potential, to buffer adjacent residential areas
with landscaped transition areas and to encourage harmonious architecture between adjacent commercial structures and between dwellings and
commercial structures;
E. Promote preservation of common open space and provide more usable and suitably located recreation areas and facilities;
F. Permit an efficient use of the land resulting in more economic networks of utilities, streets, schools, public grounds, buildings and other facilities;
G. Encourage the use of land which promotes the public health, safety, comfort, morals and welfare of the citizens of Forest Park; and
H. Be compatible with the character and objectives of the zoning district or districts within which it is located. (Ord. O-44-02, 8-12-2002)
The burden of providing evidence and persuasion that any planned development permit is necessary and desirable shall in every case rest with the
applicant. (Ord. O-16-17, 6-12-2017)
9-6-2: PLANNED DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
A. General Standards: The following criteria will be used by the Plan Commission and Village Council to evaluate the suitability of proposed planned
developments under this chapter. However, it is not intended that each and every one of these guidelines be rigidly conformed to, provided that
reasonable cause for any departure from these guidelines is demonstrated.
1. Except as modified by the planned development, proposed improvements shall comply with the regulations of the underlying zoning district(s) in
which it is located.
2. The planned development should be consistent with the official planning policies and the comprehensive plan of the Village.
3. The planned development should be compatible with and not diminish the economic value of the surrounding residential, commercial and industrial
areas.
4. Any unusual physical, topographical or historical features of the site of the planned development which are of importance to the people of the area or
the community should be preserved.
5. The site of the planned development, at the time of application, shall be under single ownership and/or unified control.
6. The uses in the planned development must be of a type and so located as to exercise no undue detrimental influence upon surrounding properties.
7. The planned development shall not endanger public health, welfare or safety.
B. Permitted Uses In Planned Developments: The ordinance approving the preliminary planned development may provide for uses not allowed in the
underlying zoning district, provided the following standards are met:
1. Proposed use exceptions enhance the quality of the planned development, and are compatible with uses otherwise allowed in the underlying zoning
district(s).
2. Proposed use exceptions are not of a nature nor are they located so as to create a detrimental influence on surrounding property.
3. Proposed use exception shall not represent more than fifty percent (50%) of the site area nor more than fifty percent (50%) of the total floor area,
whichever is less. However, a planned development in a residential zoning district shall not allow more than twenty five percent (25%) of the total site
area of total floor area, whichever is less, to be devoted to use exceptions.
4. Industrial uses shall not be allowed in residential planned developments.
C. Minimum Planned Development Size: The minimum size for a planned development shall be one-half (1/2) acre. If a petitioner has hardship with the
minimum size of the site due to certain unique characteristics such as, but not limited to, significant topographic change, significant trees or wooded
areas, wetlands, floodplain areas, soil conditions, utility easements or unusual shape or proportions, a waiver may be sought before the Plan
Commission, as part of the preapplication meeting described in section 9-6-4 of this chapter. The Plan Commission, at its discretion, or at the request
of the petitioner, may seek Village Council concurrence on the waiver prior to submission of a preliminary plan. (Ord. O-44-02, 8-12-2002)
D. Maximum Lot Coverage:
1. General Standards: The maximum lot coverage by uses permitted in residential districts shall be sixty percent (60%), except as permitted to be
exceeded in accordance with subsection D2 of this section. Under a planned development, this provision will replace the maximum lot coverage
provision in the residential district regulations. (Ord. O-16-17, 6-12-2017)
The maximum gross site coverage by uses permitted all other districts shall be no more than eighty five percent (85%), except as permitted to be
exceeded in accordance with subsection D2 of this section. Under the planned development, this provision will replace the maximum lot coverage
provision in the commercial and industrial district regulations. (Ord. O-44-02, 8-12-2002)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 349/416
2. Bonus Area: The Plan Commission may recommend and the Village Council may approve an increase in maximum lot coverage from sixty percent
(60%) up to eighty five percent (85%) in residential districts and from eighty five percent (85%) to ninety percent (90%) in commercial and industrial
districts. In order to qualify for this bonus, the development plan must demonstrate compliance with three (3) or more of the following performance
criteria: (Ord. O-16-17, 6-12-2017)
a. Provide storm drainage detention/retention facilities having a capacity significantly and appreciably, at least one hundred twenty five percent
(125%), in excess of what is required.
b. Install storm drainage detention facilities underground.
c. Increase parking lot landscaping by twenty five percent (25%) more than otherwise required.
d. Design of principal access to the development tract at an approved location that allows for shared access by an adjacent property.
e. Increase of parking spaces by ten percent (10%) more than required under chapter 8 of this title.
f. Provide for mixed use development or include community facilities that further the goals, objectives and policies of the comprehensive plan. Use of
highly innovative architectural, site planning and land use design is encouraged.
g. Any other performance criteria that further the goals, objectives and policies of the comprehensive plan and that, in the opinion of the Plan
Commission and Village Council, warrant the approval of development bonuses. (Ord. O-44-02, 8-12-2002)
E. Density Standards:
1. General Standards:
a. Residential densities shall be determined in accordance with intensity of use limitations applicable to the district in which the proposed planned
development is located. The computation of density shall be based on the number of dwelling units per net acre for residential districts for the
entire site. "Net acreage" is defined as the area of the site less all unbuildable areas including, but not limited to, allocated to street rights-of-way,
wetlands and permanent open space. In the case of private streets, the equivalent of public rights-of-way for these private streets shall be
deducted from gross acreage. In the event that there is a question regarding the width and length of such equivalent rights-of-way, the Director of
Public Health and Safety shall render a determination. (Ord. O-44-02, 8-12-2002; amd. Ord. O-24-05, 6-13-2005)
b. If the planned development should be within multiple zoning districts, density shall be calculated separately for the portions of the planned
development district in each of the different residential districts. (Ord. O-44-02, 8-12-2002)
2. Density Bonuses: The Plan Commission may recommend and the Village Council may approve an increase of density under the following
guidelines: (Ord. O-16-17, 6-12-2017)
a. The petitioner shall demonstrate that the request for increased density will allow the project to overcome site or design constraints, or that the site,
or portions of the site are uniquely located with minimal impact on surrounding properties.
b. That such bonus must be solely for the purpose of promoting an integrated site plan no less beneficial to the residents or occupants of such
development, as well as the neighboring property, than would be obtained under the bulk regulations of this chapter for buildings developed on
separate zoning lots.
c. Granting such a bonus will not result in a development which is substantially out of scale with existing surrounding development, or the petitioner
has taken steps in the design of the project to mitigate scale or compatibility issues.
F. Building Height:
1. General Height Standards: Building height shall be the same as that required in the zoning district in which the planned development is proposed.
2. Building Height Exceptions: The Plan Commission may recommend and the Village Council may authorize a building height exception not to exceed
twenty five percent (25%), under the following guidelines:
a. The petitioner shall demonstrate that the request for increased building height will allow the project to overcome site or design constraints, or that
the site, or portions of the site are uniquely located with minimal impact on surrounding properties.
b. Granting such a bonus will not result in a development which is substantially out of scale with existing surrounding development, or the petitioner
has taken steps in the design of the project to mitigate scale or compatibility issues.
G. Setbacks:
1. General Setback Standards:
a. The setbacks along the periphery of the planned development shall be at least equal in depth to that of the adjacent zoning lot.
b. The lot setback shall be equal to those front, interior side and rear yard setbacks set forth in the residential district for which the planned
development is proposed. (Ord. O-44-02, 8-12-2002)
2. Setback Exceptions: The Village Council, acting upon the recommendation of the Plan Commission, in reviewing a planned development may
decrease required yards of the planned development from the minimum required standard.
a. The petitioner shall demonstrate that the request for decreased setbacks will allow the project to overcome site or design constraints, or that the
site, or portions of the site are uniquely located with minimal impact on surrounding properties.
b. Granting such decreased setbacks will not result in a development which is substantially out of character or scale with existing surrounding
development, or the petitioner has taken steps in the design of the project to mitigate reduced setbacks or compatibility issues. (Ord. O-16-17, 6-
12-2017)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 350/416
H. Parking Requirements: Off street parking and loading facilities shall be provided in accordance with chapter 8 of this title.
I. Landscaping: Entryways and the perimeter within the development shall be landscaped. The scale and nature of landscaping materials shall be
appropriate to the size of the structures. Large scale buildings, for example, should generally be complemented by larger scaled plants. Plant material
shall be selected for its form, texture, color, pattern of growth and adaptability to local conditions. Innovative landscape designs are encouraged in
planned developments and shall be considered a positive attribute in connection with any request for relief as part of the planned development.
1. Site Perimeter Landscaping: Shade trees shall be provided around the perimeter of the site at a rate of one tree for every thirty (30) linear feet. Trees
need not be arranged on thirty foot (30') centers, but may be grouped or clustered depending on the function and use of the adjoining area. The
approval of any such alternative groupings shall be subject to discretionary approval as part of the planned development.
2. Parking Lot Landscaping: For proposed off street parking areas the following landscape requirements are intended to screen parking areas from
adjoining use areas and prevent the creation of large expanses of unlandscaped parking surfaces. The approval of any such alternative groupings of
landscaping shall be subject to discretionary approval as part of the planned development. The requirements are established for two (2) areas, the
parking lot interior and the parking lot perimeter.
a. Parking Lot Landscape Islands:
(1) Parking lot landscape islands are encouraged in parking lots greater than twenty (20) spaces in size.
(2) When provided, parking lot landscape islands shall be planted with one shade tree and shall be provided with suitable ground cover.
(3) No landscaping within the landscape islands may obstruct visibility for vehicles entering, maneuvering in or exiting the parking area.
b. Perimeter Parking Lot Landscaping:
(1) A perimeter parking lot landscape area shall be at least three feet (3') wide and extending the full length of the landscaped area.
(2) Landscaped areas outside of shrub masses shall be planted with grass or other ground cover.
c. Across From Or Adjoining Nonresidential Property: Where a parking lot is located across a dedicated public right-of-way from or adjoins property
zoned for a nonresidential use, or designated for nonresidential use in the comprehensive plan, landscaping shall be provided across fifty percent
(50%) of the street frontage to a minimum of three feet (3') in height. Such landscaping may consist of shrubbery decorative masonry walls or
decorative fencing (excluding wood and chainlink).
d. Across From Residential Property: Where a parking lot is located across a dedicated public right-of-way from property zoned for a residential
district, or designated for a residential use in the comprehensive plan, landscaping shall be provided across one hundred percent (100%) of the
parking lot perimeter facing the public street (except for intersecting drives, signs and other obstructions to landscaping) to a minimum of three feet
(3') in height. Such landscaping may consist of shrubbery decorative masonry walls or decorative fencing (excluding wood and chainlink).
J. Signage:
1. Signage shall be in compliance with the Forest Park sign ordinance1 unless the applicant for a planned development elects to submit a
comprehensive sign plan in addition to the submission of the other required development plan documents. The plan commission may recommend
and the village council may approve a comprehensive sign plan and such plan shall be made part of the conditional use approval.
2. A request for approval for a comprehensive sign plan shall accompany the request for a planned development zoning classification and shall include,
but is not limited to, the following:
a. A site plan, depicting the proposed plan of development and illustration of proposed sign locations;
b. Descriptions and drawings indicating size, quantities, materials and methods of illumination, if any; and
c. A narrative description of the common theme for signage within the development, how it relates to architectural and/or landscaping elements of the
development, and how the comprehensive sign plan relates to each of the criteria set forth in this chapter.
3. Comprehensive sign plans approved under a conditional use of a planned development shall be evaluated upon the following criteria:
a. Quantity: The number of signs that may be approved within any development shall be no greater than that required to provide project identification
and entry signs, internal circulation and directional information to destinations and development subareas and business identification. Factors to be
considered shall include the size of the development, the number of development subareas, and the division or integration of sign functions.
b. Size: All signs shall be no larger than necessary for visibility and readability. Factors to be considered in determining appropriate size shall include
topography, volume of traffic, speed of traffic, visibility range, proximity to adjacent uses, amount of sign copy, placement of display (location and
height), lettering style and the presence of distractive influences. In no event shall a plan contain a sign which exceeds by more than fifty percent
(50%) greater than that of any maximum area standard contained in the Forest Park sign ordinance, unless otherwise waived by the village
council.
K. Subdivisions Of Land: It is the intent of this chapter, where a planned development involves any subdivision activity, that the subdivision review and
approval procedure requirements contained in title 10 of this code be carried out simultaneously with the review of the planned development under this
chapter. (Ord. O-44-02, 8-12-2002)
L. Other Requirements: In order to fully determine the impact of the proposed planned development, the director of public health and safety may require
additional information including the following: (Ord. O-44-02, 8-12-2002; amd. Ord. O-24-05, 6-13-2005)
1. Fiscal impact study comparing the projected tax revenue generated by the project and the added costs for services as they will affect local
governmental jurisdictions.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 351/416
2. School impact study indicating the number of new students generated by the project. This information will be used in the fiscal impact study above to
determine the project's impact on the local school district.
3. Traffic impact study indicating the daily and peak traffic generation and the impact of this added traffic on existing local traffic patterns. This traffic
study shall also evaluate the adequacy of the internal street system.
4. Market study to evaluate the economic feasibility of the proposed development, including market acceptance of the proposed development products,
competitive alignment and market absorption. The market study shall be prepared by a qualified, independent market research firm.
5. Other technical studies deemed necessary to permit the plan commission to adequately assess the impacts of the proposed project. (Ord. O-44-02,
8-12-2002)
9-6-3: ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES:
A planned development shall be granted as a conditional use in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. In the event that a conflict arises between
the requirements of this chapter and the remainder of the zoning ordinance, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. (Ord. O-44-02, 8-12-2002)
A. Preapplication Meeting: Prior to submission of a petition for a planned development, the applicant shall schedule a preapplication meeting with the
director of public health and safety. At the preapplication meeting, the applicant shall submit a sketch plan for review and comment by village staff.
Village staff shall review and evaluate the sketch plan and shall report to the applicant at the meeting or as soon thereafter to the merit and feasibility of
the planned development and its improvements indicated by the sketch plan. Staff shall also inform the applicant of the required standards,
documentation submittals and procedures to follow should the applicant decide to submit a formal petition. (Ord. O-44-02, 8-12-2002; amd. Ord. O-24-
05, 6-13-2005)
B. Preapplication Submittals: The information that should be included for the preapplication meeting shall be as follows:
1. A written letter of intent from the petitioner describing the intentions for developing the site.
2. Sketch plans describing proposed land use(s), dwelling type(s) and density.
3. Building outlines (footprints) of all structures except single-family detached dwellings proposed on subdivided lots.
4. Internal private circulation drives and parking areas.
5. Conceptual landscaping plan, open space/common areas and buffer areas between the proposed development and adjacent properties.
6. Identification of types and general quantities of proposed development. (Ord. O-44-02, 8-12-2002)
C. Plan Commission Work Session: Prior to formal application for a conditional use, the applicant may submit the sketch plan for review at a work session
held with the plan commission. This work session is not mandatory, but is highly encouraged. A meeting will be arranged by the director of public health
and safety.(Ord. O-44-02, 8-12-2002; amd. Ord. O-24-05, 6-13-2005)
9-6-4: PRELIMINARY DEVELOPMENT PLAN:
A. Purpose: The purpose of the preliminary plan submission is to obtain approval and commitment from the village that the developer's plan, design and
program are acceptable and that the developer may proceed with the submission of a final plan.
The preliminary plan is mandatory. The applicant may elect to combine the preliminary and final plans if the requirements for both procedures are met.
Application fees for both the preliminary and final plans shall apply.
B. Preliminary Planned Development Submittal Requirements: The preliminary planned development submittal shall include the following as applicable:
(Ord. O-44-02, 8-12-2002)
1. Petition Content:
a. Project Identification And Description:
(1) The owner, contract purchaser or others having an economic interest, for which a planned development conditional use is sought, must file an
application with the director of public health and safety. (Ord. O-44-02, 8-12-2002; amd. Ord. O-24-05, 6-13-2005)
(2) Each application must include ten (10) copies of all full sized documents and drawings. For all graphic and plan drawings, a scale of not less
than one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') shall be used. In no event, shall individual sheets or drawings exceed thirty inches by forty two
inches (30" x 42"). In addition, one set of reduced copies sized at eleven inches by seventeen inches (11" x 17") shall be submitted. All sets of
drawings submitted must be folded. The submission may be composed of one or more sheets and shall include the following:
(A) Name, address and telephone number of the owner. If property ownership is in trust, the name and address of each person or entity
owning an interest in the property, and the extent of such ownership interest unless any of such entities is a corporation or a partnership, in
which case only those persons owning an interest in excess of ten percent (10%) in such corporation or partnership need be identified by
name, address and extent of interest.
(B) Name, address and telephone number of the applicant including the name and address of each person or entity owning an interest in the
property and the extent of such ownership interest unless any of such entities is a corporation or a partnership, in which case only those
persons owning an interest in excess of ten percent (10%) in such corporation or partnershipneed be identified by name, address and extent
of interest. For purposes of this section, the term "ownership interest" shall include any legal or equitable interest held at the time of the
application in the real property which is the subject of the application. The application must include the signature of the owner(s).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 352/416
(C) Graphic scale not smaller than one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100').
(D) North point, designated as true north.
(E) Date of preparation of original drawing and the date of any revisions.
(F) A nonrefundable fee in the amount of four hundred fifty dollars ($450.00).
(3) Every application must be accompanied by a fee in such an amount as established from time to time by the village council to defray the costs
of contracting with independent professional to review applications as required. Such professional costs may include, but are not limited to, the
cost of newspaper publication, planning, engineering, legal, traffic analyses, environmental impact or other similar studies. Additional services
may be required during the review of a proposed planned development, if deemed necessary by the village administrator or village council.
b. Existing Conditions Documentation:
(1) A legal description of each parcel of property subject to the petition.
(2) A current plat of survey prepared by a land surveyor registered in the state of Illinois for all property subject to the petition.
(3) Existing zoning districts and current use of land on the site and on adjacent property within four hundred feet (400') of the subject site.
(4) All existing or previously platted streets on the site, indicating their location, width, sidewalks, curbs and gutters, culverts, centerline elevation
and name.
(5) Other rights of way, including railroads and utility ROWs, showing existing improvements, if any.
(6) Existing permanent buildings and structures on the site.
(7) Utilities on the site indicating the location, size and invert elevations of storm and combined sewers; the size and location of sanitary sewers;
the size and location of water mains; the location of fire hydrants; the direction and distanceto the nearest usable water mains and sewers; and
the location of private utilities such as gas, electric, and telephone lines and easements.
(8) A community location map showing the site boundary lines.
(9) Topographic data for the site consisting of existing contours at one foot (1') intervals.
(10) Hydrologic conditions including watercourses, floodplains and wetlands.
(11) Locations of or reference to existing monuments or survey markers used in preparation of survey and the grade elevation of each monument
and marker. (Ord. O-44-02, 8-12-2002)
(12) Other existing conditions data as may be required by the director of public health and safety, plan commission or the village council. (Ord. O-
44-02, 8-12-2002; amd. Ord. O-24-05, 6-13-2005)
c. Project Design Features:
(1) Gross and net area of tract.
(2) Maximum number of dwelling units allowed under existing zoning and as recommended in the comprehensive plan.
(3) Total number of dwelling units proposed.
(4) Project density.
(5) Number of off street parking spaces required and proposed.
(6) The location and distance between buildings and structures.
(7) The proposed location and general use of common ground (if any), including recreational areas, plazas, pedestrianways and major landscape
areas including buffer areas.
(8) Landscaping plan, containing the location, quantity, size and name, both botanical and common names, of all proposed planting materials.
(9) Quantification of site area by building coverage, parking, loading and driveways, and common retention/detention, floodplain and/or natural
areas.
(10) The location and details of all retaining walls, fences and earth berms.
(11) The location of all refuse collection facilities including screening to be provided.
(12) Illustrative site cross sections (2 minimum) indicating edge conditions and internal grade changes in relation to principalvariations of building
elevations and site lines to adjacent properties' structures.
(13) Typical building elevations of sufficient scale and detail to illustrative building mass, exterior construction materials and signage if applicable.
(14) Project report to include an explanation of the character of the proposed development, verification of the applicant's ownership or contractual
interest in the subject site and proposed development schedule.
(15) The applicant may be required to provide, at the applicant's expense, additional clarification and/or further detail of the site plan as determined
necessary by the planning director or the plan commission.
(16) Proposed covenants, if any, to govern the use and maintenance of the development and ensure the continued observance of the provisions of
the planned development.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 353/416
(17) Narrative description of the planned development describing the intent and desired effect of the development, the manner in which the
development has been planned to take advantage of the flexibility of the planned development regulations, the superior benefits that would
accrue to the residents/user of the development, and all relief sought from the standard application of district requirements in conjunction with
the project.
(18) Design of all project signage, including project marketing signage.
(19) Site lighting plan and cut sheets.
(20) Proposed construction schedule.
(21) The petitioner shall clearly show the location and general design of any proposed streets, major storm water drainage facilities, main utility
lines and facilities, and other features deemed necessary by the plan commission and village council on all of the contiguous property holdings
of such developer, his agents, trustees, beneficiaries or owners, whether or not said contiguous land holdings are intended for immediate
development.
C. Preliminary Planned Development Review Procedures: The review procedure for a preliminary planned development shall be consistent with the
procedures described below:
1. Initiation: The owner of the property, lessee or contract purchaser for which a planned development conditional use permit is sought may initiate a
request for a conditional use permit.
a. Written notice is to be made by the petitioner.
(1) The petitioner shall provide an affidavit in which the applicant: a) lists the names and addresses of the record ownersand occupants of each
parcel of property located within two hundred fifty feet (250') of the subject property, excluding public streets and rights of way; and b) states
under oath that the list is true and correct to the best of the applicant's knowledge and belief. An original notice shall be submitted to the village
to be filed and a copy of the notice is to be mailed to such property owners, said notice to be in the form set forth below:
You are hereby notified that the undersigned has filed an application for a planned development with the Village of Forest Park. The purpose of
this application is to (provide brief description of project). This matter will be considered by the plan commission at the Forest Park Village Hall,
517 Des Plaines Avenue, Forest Park, IL 60130, on (day of week, month, date, year at time - A.M. or P.M.). The plan commission meetings are
open to the public and you are welcome to participate in this meeting. (Signature of applicant).
(Ord. O-44-02, 8-12-2002)
(2) After a completed application has been filed for a planned development conditional use permit and accepted as complete to form and
substance, the director of public health and safety shall set the date for a public hearing thereon before the plan commission, and shall cause
notice thereof no less than fifteen (15) nor more than thirty (30) days prior thereto to be published in a newspaper of general circulation. The
applicant shall pay the cost of publication. (Ord. O-44-02, 8-12-2002; amd. Ord. O-24-05, 6-13-2005)
2. Procedure For Decision; Plan Commission And Village Council Action:
a. Public Hearing: The plan commission shall hold a public hearing on an application for a planned development conditional use permit in compliance
with the notice requirements of subsection 9-10-4C of this title. At the hearing, all interested parties shall have an opportunity to be heard. (Ord. O-
50-07, 11-13-2007)
b. Plan Commission Action:
(1) Within ninety (90) days after the close of the public hearing, the plan commission shall vote to recommend approval or denial, or approval with
conditions on the planned development to the village council by a simple majority of those plan commissioners present and voting.
(2) The village council shall act to approve, deny, or approve with conditions the planned development conditional use permit within ninety (90)
days of the village council's first meeting following receipt of the plan commission recommendation.
3. Written Findings Of Fact: The plan commission in its recommendations with regard to an application for a planneddevelopment must set forth
specific written findings of fact on each standard, as expressed in section 9-6-2 of this chapter.
4. Conditions On Planned Development: The plan commission may recommend and the village council may impose conditions in authorizing a planned
development to make such use more compatible with the use, enjoyment and development of adjacent and nearby properties, to make the use more
compatible with the character of the area in which it is located and to eliminate any adverse effect on adjacent and nearby properties and the
neighborhood. Any such conditions must be set forth as part of the action approving the planned development.
D. Public Hearing And Actions On Preliminary Development Plan:
1. Review and actions on the part of the plan commission and village council shall take place in accordance with this chapter. The plan commission
may recommend approval, disapproval or approval with amendments, conditions or restrictions with respect to the preliminary development plan.
2. If the preliminary development plan is approved by the village council, it shall adopt a conditional use approving said preliminary development plan
and plat, if applicable, with conditions as specified and authorizing the preparation of the final development plan and plat, if applicable.
3. All conditions imposed as part of any planned development shall run with the land and shall not lapse or be waived as a result of a subsequent
change in tenancy or ownership of any or all of said areas, provided, however, that nothing herein shall be construed to limit the right of the
developer, his successors or assignee to sell property in said planned development, except for such conditions imposed upon said common open
space areas.
4. Approval of the preliminary development plan by the village council does not constitute development approval, but authorizes submission of a final
plan for approval. Approval of the preliminary development plan shall be valid for a period of two (2) years from the date of village council approval. If
an application for final plan approval for all or a part of a geographic portion of the preliminary plan has not been filed within the two (2) year period,
or if a developer has not requested and received approval of a one year extension from the village council, then a resubmission of the preliminary
development plan shall be required if the applicant intends to file for final plan approval. In no case shall a building permit be issued prior to final
development plan approval. (Ord. O-44-02, 8-12-2002)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 354/416
9-6-5: FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN:
A. Purpose: The final development plan process is intended to address technical and documentation issues which may have arisen in the preparation of
the preliminary plan. The final plan alsorequires complete documentation of all elements of the preliminary plan, including documents and instruments
to be prepared for recording the plan in the Cook County recorder of deeds office.
B. Final Planned Development Submittal Requirements: The final development plan shall include the required information described in section 9-6-6 of this
chapter. In addition to these submittal requirements, the following shall be submitted:
1. The final landscape plan with specific location of all plant material, specifying size and species.
2. A statement that with the exception of the minimum lot requirements of the zoning and subdivision control ordinances of the village, all requirements
of these ordinances have been complied with by the applicant and owner.
3. A statement placed on the plat indicating that the operation and maintenance of designated common areas, common facilities, common buildings
and open spaces shall be under the control of a homeowners' association in accordance with the laws of the village governing such associations as
provided for in title 10, chapter 2 of this code.
4. Construction activities plan indicating how construction activity will be controlled by addressing contractor ingress/egress, construction parking, street
cleaning and pest control.
5. Financial information including a copy of lender's commitment; MAI appraisals on the existing site before and after development completion,
certificate of no delinquent taxes and financial pro forma.
6. Finalized copy of covenants, if any, to govern the use and maintenance of the development and ensure the continued observance of the provisions
of the planned development.
C. Final Planned Development Review Procedures: Once the conditional use permit has been granted, the applicant may submit for a review meeting by
the plan commission to ensure that the final plan is consistent with the preliminary plan. (Ord. O-44-02, 8-12-2002)
1. Plan Commission Procedures For Review:
a. Public Meeting: The final plan and supporting data shall be filed with the director of public health and safety and forwarded to the plan commission
for determination whether the final plan is in conformity with these regulations and in agreement with the approved preliminary plan. (Ord. O-44-02,
8-12-2002; amd. Ord. O-24-05, 6-13-2005)
b. Plan Commission Action: Within sixty (60) days of the date the item first appears on the plan commission agenda, the plancommission shall vote
to recommend approval or denial, or approval with conditions of the planned development conditional use permit to the village council by a simple
majority of those plan commissioners present and voting.
2. Written Findings Of Fact: The plan commission in its recommendations with regard to an application for a planned development conditional use
permit must set forth specific written findings of fact on each standard, as expressed in section 9-6-4 of this chapter.
D. Village Council Procedures For Review: The village council shall hold a meeting to act to approve, deny or approve with conditions the planned
development conditional use permit within ninety (90) days of the village council's first meeting following receipt of the plan commission
recommendation. (Ord. O-44-02, 8-12-2002)
9-6-6: REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES PRIOR TO RECORDING PLAN:
Approval of the final development plan by the village council shall authorize the plan to be recorded in the Cook County recorder's office. Permits are
issued only after the final planned development and any required supporting data have been recorded with the Cook County recorder, and shall be issued
in full conformance with the planned development. Proof of the recordings of the final development plan shall be provided to the director of public health
and safety. The construction authorized by the building permit shall be in full compliance with the final planned development plat, as recorded. (Ord. O-44-
02, 8-12-2002; amd. Ord. O-24-05, 6-13-2005)
9-6-7: DEDICATION OFFERS ACCEPTANCE:
Approval of a planned development does not constitute acceptance by the village of any offer of dedication of any streets, utilities, sidewalks, parks or
other public facilities shown on the plan. However, the village council may accept any such offer of dedication by resolution and may delay such
acceptance until such time that the director of public works or his/her designee determines that the public improvements have been completed in a
satisfactory manner, and accepted or approved by the appropriate authority. (Ord. O-36-04, 9-13-2004)
9-6-8: FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN AMENDMENTS:
A. Major Changes To Approved Planned Development: Major changes in an approved planned development shall require approval of an amended
development plan in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Major changes shall be those which:
1. Alter the use or character of the development;
2. Increase the overall coverage by five percent (5%);
3. Increase intensity of use over ten percent (10%);
4. Any reduction in allocated open space;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 355/416
5. A reduction in off street parking or loading below the minimum otherwise required by this chapter;
6. Changes in project design where documented as part of the approved plan; or
7. Where a change results in the need for a variation. (Ord. O-44-02, 8-12-2002)
Whether a change to the planned development constitutes a major change shall be determined by the director of public health and safety. (Ord. O-
44-02, 8-12-2002; amd. Ord. O-24-05, 6-13-2005)
B. Minor Changes: Changes which are not major changes will be considered minor changes. The village administrator may approve minor changes. The
village administrator, at his discretion, may notify and discuss such minor changes with the village council prior to authorization. (Ord. O-44-02, 8-12-
2002)
9-6-9: CONSTRUCTION COMMENCEMENT:
No approval of a final development plan shall be valid for a period longer than three (3) years from the date of approval unless within such period a
building permit is obtained.
The village council may grant a one year extension upon written request of the original applicant if the application submitted is substantially the same as
the initially approved application. At such time as the period of validity of an approved final development plan lapses, the final development plan and all
uses, terms and conditions thereof may be declared null and void. (Ord. O-44-02, 8-12-2002)
9-6-10: RECORDING PLANNED DEVELOPMENT PLAT:
At the expense of the applicant, the planned development plat and attachments shall be recorded in the Cook County office of recorder of deeds prior to
the issuance of any building permits. Evidence of recording shall be provided to the community development department prior to the issuance of any
permit for the project. (Ord. O-44-02, 8-12-2002)
9-6-11: FEES:
Any person who shall file an application for amendment or application for an appeal, variation, or special use or for anyother certificate or license required
under the terms of this chapter, shall be charged a fee in accordance with a schedule of fees as set out in this code. (Ord. O-44-02, 8-12-2002)
9-6-12: IMPACT OF PLANNED DEVELOPMENT:
Where the plan commission makes a finding that the planned development may increase the demand for village services or the need for open space, the
village council may require that a portion of the planned development shall be dedicated to public purposes. Where the village council determines that the
resulting public land area would not be functionally appropriate due to its small area or location, the village may require the developer to pay cash in lieu of
the land required. The cash contributions in lieu of land shall be based upon the fair market value of the areas of land in the planned development that
otherwise would have been dedicated as public lands. The developer shall submit an independent appraisal showing the fair market value of such
improved land in the area of the development or other evidence thereof and final determination of said fair market value per acre of such improved land
shall be made by the village council based upon such information submitted by the developer and from other sources which may be submitted to the
village council at its request.
The village council may also consider the dedication by the developer of lands outside the planned development and/or the provision by the developer of
community facilities such as police or firefighting equipment required to service the development, provided that the total contribution is equal to the value
as determined above herein. (Ord. O-44-02, 8-12-2002)
9-6-13: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY:
Enforcement and penalty of these planned development regulations shall be as is outlined in chapter 10 of this title. (Ord. O-44-02, 8-12-2002)
Footnote 1: See title 8, chapter 6 of this code.
Chapter 7
SITE PLANS
9-7-1: PURPOSE:
Site plan approval is required to promote orderly development and redevelopment in the village and to ensure that such development is in harmony with
surrounding properties and consistent with the general welfare and the policies in the comprehensive plan. The procedures set forth in this chapter are
used for determining whether new development or redevelopment is in compliance with the standards of the village's zoning ordinance. This chapter
provides standards by which submission and approval of site plans, for access control, lighting, signage and landscaping of a lot or parcel of land in order
to achieve the following purposes:
A. Compatibility of land uses, buildings and structures;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 356/416
B. Protection and enhancement of property values;
C. Efficient use of land;
D. Minimization of traffic, safety and overcrowding; and
E. Minimization of environmental problems. (Ord. O-44-02, 8-12-2002)
9-7-2: APPLICABILITY AND AUTHORITY:
A. Site plan approval shall be required for any nonresidential and multi-family development, prior to the issuance of a building permit for the following
development situations:
1. Any new principal structures;
2. An existing principal structure is proposed to be expanded more than twenty five percent (25%) of the gross area of the existing structure; (Ord. O-
44-02, 8-12-2002)
3. Any new or modified building and/or site improvements for a zoning lot which has previously received site plan approval under this chapter.
Reapproval of the plan is required for components of the plan which depart from the approved site plan. The extent of required documentation of any
proposed changes to be incorporated in the submittal for reapproval shall be determined by the director of public health and safety; (Ord. O-44-02, 8-
12-2002; amd. Ord. O-24-05, 6-13-2005)
4. Any new or modified off street parking or loading area improvements;
5. A site plan shall not be required solely because of a change in the use except where such change of use results in increased off street parking
requirements that cannot currently be met on the site;
6. In accordance with section 9-2-4 of this title, no building or structure which has been damaged by fire, explosion, act of God or the public enemy, to
the extent of more than fifty percent (50%) of its value, shall be restored except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located.
B. Upon recommendations by the plan commission, site plans may be approved by the village council in accordance with the procedural provisions of this
chapter. Any application for site plan approval which is accompanied by an application for a variance, conditional use, or zoning map amendment shall
not be acted upon by the village council until after a public hearing and recommendation before the zoning board of appeals, to the village council.
(Ord. O-44-02, 8-12-2002)
9-7-3: INITIATION:
An application for site plan approval may be made by the owner or owner's representative intending to request a building permit under the requirements of
this chapter. (Ord. O-44-02, 8-12-2002)
9-7-4: APPLICATION FOR SITE PLAN APPROVAL:
The owner of the property or a duly authorized representative of the owner shall file an application for site plan approval with the director of public health
and safety, on a completed application form, to be provided by the village. It shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee as established from
time to time by the village council. The owner shall provide the following information with the application: (Ord. O-44-02, 8-12-2002; amd. Ord. O-24-05, 6-
13-2005)
A. Name, address and telephone number of the applicant including the name and address of each person or entity owning an interest in the property and
the extent of such ownership interest unless any of such entities is a corporation or a partnership, in which case only those persons owning an interest
in excess of tenpercent (10%) in such corporation or partnership need to be identified by name, address and extent of interest. For purposes of this
section, the term "ownership interest" shall include any legal or equitable interest held at the time of application in the real property which is the subject
of the application. The application shall include the notarized signatures of the owner(s).
B. A site plan in accordance with section 9-7-5 of this chapter. All documents and information submitted as part of an application for site plan approval
constitute a statement by the applicant that he intends and agrees to be bound to develop in accordance with such information upon approval. (Ord. O-
44-02, 8-12-2002)
9-7-5: CONTENTS OF SITE PLAN:
Site plans shall include the following information:
A. Completed application form provided by the village.
B. Each application shall include twenty five (25) copies of all full sized documents and drawings. For all graphic and plan drawings, a scale of not less
than one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') shall be used. Individual sheets or drawings may not exceed thirty inches by thirty six inches (30" x
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 357/416
36"). In addition, one set of reduced copies sized at eleven inches by seventeen inches (11" x 17") shall be submitted. All sets of drawings submitted
shall be folded.
C. The names and addresses of persons and/or firm responsible for preparing the plan.
D. A site plan drawing including the following:
1. Date of preparation of original drawings and any revisions, north point and scale;
2. The dimensions of all lot and property lines, showing the relationship of the subject property to abutting properties and buildings within one hundred
feet (100');
3. Legal description of the parcel;
4. Existing and proposed topography with contours at two foot (2') intervals;
5. Existing and proposed easements;
6. The location of existing and/or proposed fire hydrants;
7. For a site which includes existing structures or improvements, an indication of those improvements that are to remain and those which will be
removed;
8. Underground storage tanks, if any;
9. General alignment and lengths of all streets and all property lines;
10. All building restriction lines, highway setback lines, easements, covenants, reservations and rights of way;
11. Streets, alleys, easements and utilities, including street lighting and underground conduits for street lighting;
12. Driveways, entrances, exits, parking areas and sidewalks;
13. Calculations of the following, as applicable:
a. Total lot acreage;
b. Number of dwelling units or square footage of nonresidential uses;
c. Number of parking spaces;
d. Number of handicapped accessible parking spaces;
e. Number of loading spaces; and
f. Total lot coverage.
14. A lighting and photometric plan indicating all exterior building mounted and freestanding lights and structures including overall height, type of lamp,
luminaries;
15. Preliminary exterior building elevations of all proposed structures and exterior elevations of existing buildings when existing buildings are proposed
to be structurally altered. Elevations shall indicate the materials to be used in the design of the structure and the proposed color scheme;
16. Elevations of proposed signs as well as the materials and colors intended for the sign. Typical elevations shall be provided for wall mounted signs
including renderings of all sign faces; views of supporting members, poles, bases and pedestals; side views which indicate both signage depth and
projections; method of illumination, materials indications, and dimensions of all sign elements;
17. Supplementary explanation of the specific type(s) of activities proposed on the site. Such information shall include, but is not limited to:
a. Estimated number of employees, resident shoppers, residents, etc.;
b. Hours of operation;
c. Any changes anticipated in terms of dust, odor, smoke, fumes, noise, light, etc.;
d. Modifications to vegetative cover, drainage patterns, earthwork, problem areas;
e. Any ancillary improvements that the applicant proposed to remedy or prevent problems created by the development; and
f. Draft version of any covenants and design guidelines, if applicable. (Ord. O-44-02, 8-12-2002)
E. Landscaping Plan: A landscape plan shall be required for all developments requiring site plan approval, except for permitted uses in the DBD downtown
business district. Such landscape plan shall conform with the requirements specified in this subsection; provided, however, that such requirements may
be modified on a case by case basis as part of the site plan approval process by the plan commission and village council after considering site
conditions and special circumstances.
1. Entryways And Building Perimeter Landscaping: Entryways and the perimeter within the development shall be landscaped. The scale and nature of
landscaping materials shall be appropriate to the size of the structures. Large scale buildings, for example, should generally be complemented by
larger scaled plants. Plant material shall be selected for its form, texture, color, pattern of growth and adaptability to local conditions.
2. Site Perimeter Landscaping: Shade trees shall be provided around the perimeter of the site. Tree spacing along the front lot line shall be at a rate of
the greater of one tree or one tree for every forty (40) linear feet within a minimum five feet (5') wide planting area; and spacing along each of the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 358/416
side lot lines and the rear lot line combined shall be at a rate of one tree for every seventy five (75) linear feet within a minimum three foot (3')
planting area. The required number of trees based on the length of the side and rear property lines may be grouped anywhere on the perimeter
where space is available subject to the review and approval as part of the site plan approval process. Approved driveways and other features
approved by the plan commission and the village council that interfere with required landscaping may be excluded when calculating the linear
footage of any lot line.
3. Parking Lot Landscaping: For proposed off street parking areas, the following landscape requirements are intended to screen parking areas from
adjoining use areas and prevent the creation of large expanses of unlandscaped parking surfaces. The approval of any such alternative groupings of
landscaping shall be subject to discretionary approval as part of the site plan approval process by the plan commission and the village council. The
requirements are established for two (2) areas, the parking lot landscape islands and the parking lot perimeter:
a. Parking Lot Landscape Islands:
(1) Parking lot landscape islands are encouraged in parking lots greater than twenty (20) spaces in size at the end of each parking row, and one
every twenty (20) spaces when rows have forty (40) or more parking spaces.
(2) When provided, parking lot landscape islands shall be the same size as a parking space and planted with one shade tree and shall be provided
with suitable ground cover.
(3) No landscaping within the landscape islands may obstruct visibility for vehicles entering, maneuvering in or exiting the parking area.
b. Perimeter Parking Lot Landscaping:
(1) A perimeter parking lot landscape area shall be at least three feet (3') wide and extending the full length of the landscaped area.
(2) Landscaped areas outside of shrub masses shall be planted with grass or other ground cover.
c. Across From Or Adjoining Nonresidential Property: Where a parking lot is located across a dedicated public right of way from or adjoins property
zoned for a nonresidential use, or designated for nonresidential use in the comprehensive plan, landscaping shall be provided across fifty percent
(50%) of the street frontage to a minimum of three feet (3') in height at maturity. Such landscaping may consist of shrubbery, decorative masonry
walls or decorative fencing (excluding wood and chainlink).
d. Across From Residential Property: Where a parking lot is located across a dedicated public right of way from property zoned for a residential
district, or designated for a residential use in the comprehensive plan, landscaping shall be provided across one hundred percent (100%) of the
parking lot perimeter facing the public street (except for intersecting drives, signs and other obstructions to landscaping) to a minimum of three feet
(3') in height at maturity. Such landscaping may consist of shrubbery, decorative masonry walls or decorative fencing (excluding wood and
chainlink).
4. Contents Of Landscape Plan: All landscape plans submitted for approval shall contain or have attached thereto the following information:
a. The location, quantity, size and name, both botanical and common names, of all proposed planting materials;
b. Proposed grading of any berms at one foot (1') intervals;
c. Specifications of the type and boundaries of all proposed ground cover;
d. Elevations of all fences proposed for location on the site;
e. Elevations, cross sections and other details as determined by the director of public health and safety. (Ord. O-71-09, 12-14-2009)
F. Additional Information: Other information that may reasonably be required by the director of public health and safety, plan commission or village council
to adequately assess the proposal which may include: (Ord. O-44-02, 8-12-2002; amd. Ord. O-24-05, 6-13-2005)
1. A traffic study examining the impacts of development, as well as any new roads/intersections on current and projected traffic flow and level of
service;
2. A report examining the estimated impacts of the proposed development on the school district or a letter from the school district outlining its estimates
of the impacts of the proposed development;
3. Estimated impacts on and capabilities of emergency services including, but not limited to, fire, police and emergency medical services, and their
respective response time;
4. An examination of the impacts of the proposed development on available recreational facilities in the village, as well as any proposed mitigation
measures. (Ord. O-44-02, 8-12-2002)
9-7-6: ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES:
A. Preapplication Meeting: Prior to submission of an application for site plan approval, the applicant may schedule a preapplication meeting with the
director of public health and safety. The purpose of this meeting is to minimize development planning costs, avoid misunderstanding or
misinterpretation, and ensure compliance with the requirements of the zoning and subdivision ordinances.
B. Applications: Applications shall be filed with the director of public health and safety or his designee in conformance with the regulations set forth in this
chapter.
C. Supplemental Data: Whenever supplemental data in connection with a previously filed application is required by the village or offered by the applicant, it
shall be submitted at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date on which it is to be considered or acted upon in connection with such application. The filing
of such data shall, in the discretion of the director of public health and safety and of the body hearing the application, be cause to delay a requested or
scheduled hearing or decision date. (Ord. O-44-02, 8-12-2002; amd. Ord. O-24-05, 6-13-2005)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 359/416
D. Professional Fees: Every application must be accompanied by a fee in such an amount as established from time to time by the village council to defray
the costs of contracting with independent professional to review applications as required. Such professional costs may include, but are not limited to,
the cost of newspaper publication, planning, engineering, legal, traffic analyses, environmental impact or other similar studies. Additional services may
be required during the review of a proposed site plan, if deemed necessary by the village administrator or village council, and at the expense of the
applicant. (Ord. O-44-02, 8-12-2002)
E. Special Requests: In addition to the minimum data and information required by this chapter, every applicant shall submit such other additional data,
information or documentationas the director of public health and safety or any body before which its application is pending may deem necessary or
appropriate to achieve a full and proper consideration of that application.
F. Notice: The applicant shall provide a written affidavit in which the applicant: 1) lists the names and addresses of the owners of record and occupants of
each parcel of property immediately adjoining the subject property, excluding public streets and rights of way; and 2) states under oath that the list is
true and correct to the best of the applicant's knowledge and belief. One original of a notice is to be mailed to the director of public health and safety
and copies to such property owners, said notice to be in the form set forth below: (Ord. O-44-02, 8-12-2002; amd. Ord. O-24-05, 6-13-2005)
You are hereby notified that the undersigned has filed a site plan approval application with the Village of Forest Park. The purpose of this application
is to (provide brief description of project). This matter will be considered by the plan commission at the Forest Park Village Hall, 517 Des Plaines
Avenue, Forest Park, IL 60130, on (day of week, month, date, year at (time - A.M. or P.M.). The plan commission meetings are open to the public and
you are welcome to participate in this meeting. (Signature of applicant).
(Ord. O-44-02, 8-12-2002)
9-7-7: PLAN COMMISSION REVIEW:
A. Plan Commission Recommendation: Within sixty (60) days of the date the site plan first appears on the agenda of the plan commission for action, the
plan commission may vote to recommend approval or denial of the site by a majority of those plan commissioners present and voting. If the plan
commission fails to vote within ninety (90) days after the item has first appeared on the plan commission's agenda, the plan commission shall be
deemed to have recommended denial, unless such date is extended as mutually agreed upon by the applicant and the commission. Any decision by
the plan commission shall be provided to the village council in written form detailing its findings based on the review of the site plan standards.
B. Plans Involving Variations, Conditional Uses And Map Amendments: Site plans involving variations, conditional uses, or map amendments shall first
receive action by the zoning board of appeals prior to final plan commission action on the site plan applications. Plans may be reviewed concurrently by
the plan commission and zoning board of appeals, however, the plan commission action cannot be taken until appropriate action is taken by the zoning
board of appeals. (Ord. O-44-02, 8-12-2002)
9-7-8: VILLAGE COUNCIL ACTION:
Upon recommendation of the plan commission, the village council may take the following actions:
A. Village Council Action To Approve: Upon recommendation of the plan commission, if the village council determines that the site plan meets all the
requirements of this chapter, the village council shall approve the application by the adoption of an ordinance authorizing such site plan. A copy of the
ordinance approving the site plan shall be sent regular mail to the applicant and property owner.
B. Village Council Action To Disapprove: If the site plan does not meet all the requirements of this section, the village's zoning ordinance, subdivision
ordinance or other applicable village ordinances and special items raised during the review of the application, the village council may deny the
application and record the reasons for denial.
C. Conditional Approval: If minor corrections to the site plan are necessary for it to meet the standards set for village council approval, and such minor
corrections can be clearly noted, then the village council may so note such conditions and shall approve the application by the adoption of an ordinance
authorizing such site plan and record such approval. A copy of the ordinance approving the site plan shall be sent regular mail to the applicant and
property owner.
D. Table Approval: If the site plan is found to be in violation of the requirements of this chapter, or incomplete with respect to necessary information, the
village council may table action on the site plan until compliance is shown or required additional information is provided. (Ord. O-44-02, 8-12-2002)
9-7-9: STANDARDS FOR SITE PLAN APPROVAL:
In reviewing and determining whether to approve or disapprove a site plan, the plan commission and village council shall consider the following criteria
listed below, as appropriate:
A. The application shall comply with the provisions of this chapter and other ordinances of the village.
B. The plan shall be in reasonable conformity with the comprehensive plan.
C. Reasonable provision shall be made to ensure that development will be served by essential public facilities and services such as highways, streets,
parking spaces, police and fire protection, drainage structures, refuse disposal, water and sewers or septic and schools.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 360/416
D. Any building or structure shall be reasonably accessible to fire, police, emergency and service vehicles. When deemednecessary for access,
emergency vehicle easements shall be provided. The access for fire, police and emergency vehicles shall be unobstructed at all times.
E. Adequate provision shall be made to ensure the compatibility of the proposed development, including mass, scale, site layout and site design with the
character of the surrounding property and the neighborhood.
F. Open space provided is configured to make that open space usable, functional, and appropriate to the development proposed.
G. Streets and sidewalks shall, insofar as reasonably practicable, provide access and good traffic circulation to and from adjacent lands, existing streets
and sidewalks.
H. Provision shall be made to ensure that adequate access roads or entrance or exit drives will be provided and will be designed and improved so as to
prevent traffic hazards or problems and to minimize traffic congestion in public streets.
I. Adequate provision shall be made to ensure that the vehicular circulation elements of the proposed development will not create hazards to the safety of
vehicular or pedestrian traffic on or off the site, disjointed vehicular or pedestrian circulation paths on or off the site, or undue interference and
inconvenience to vehicular and pedestrian travel.
J. Adequate water mains and fire hydrants shall be provided in accessible places in accordance with good firefighting and fire prevention practice.
K. Adequate provision shall be made for the collection and disposition of all on and off site storm water and natural water, including, but not limited to, on
site drainage retention facilities.
L. Adequate provision shall be made for the collection and disposition of sanitary sewage.
M. Adequate provision shall be made to avoid an increase in hazard to adjacent property from flood, increased runoff or water damage. (Ord. O-44-02, 8-
12-2002)
N. Adequate provision shall be made to clean, control and otherwise alleviate contamination or environmental hazards on land when the site is in an area
found by the director of public health and safety to be contaminated by a toxic substance or otherwise to contain environmental hazards which are
detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. O-44-02, 8-12-2002; amd. Ord. O-24-05, 6-13-2005)
O. Adequate provision shall be made to avoid glare of vehicular and stationary lights that would affect the established character of the neighborhood, and
to the extent such lights will be visible across from any property line, the performance standardsfor illumination shall be met.
P. Adequate provision shall be made to ensure that the location, lighting and type of signs and the relationship of signs to traffic control is appropriate for
the site and will not have an adverse effect on any adjacent properties. (Ord. O-44-02, 8-12-2002)
9-7-10: CONDITIONS ON PLANS:
A. General Conditions: In considering any site plan, the plan commission may recommend and the village council may establish reasonable and
appropriate conditions upon the approval of a site plan.
B. Expiration Of Plan Approval: Site plans for approval shall expire if no building permit has been issued by the department of health and safety within one
year of the date the village council has granted such site plan approval. (Ord. O-44-02, 8-12-2002)
9-7-11: PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT PERFORMANCE GUARANTEES:
To ensure compliance with any condition(s) imposed under this chapter, the village council may require that a cash certified check, irrevocable bank letter
of credit or surety bond acceptable to the village, equaling one hundred ten percent (110%) of the estimated cost of public improvements associated with
the project, as approved by the village engineer, be deposited with the village to ensure faithful completion of the improvements and also be subject to the
following:
A. The performance guarantee shall be deposited prior to the onset of any construction, clearing of land or earth moving related to the site plan. The
village may establish procedures whereby a rebate of any cash deposits in reasonable proportion to the ratio of work completed on the required
improvements will be made as work progresses. Any partial release of funds shall be less than ten percent (10%) which shall be retained by the village
until all work has been completed and subsequently inspected and approved by the village or its agents. This does not relieve the applicant from
satisfying all applicable maintenance warranties and/or guarantees necessary to ensure the proper functioning of said public improvements.
B. As used in this section, "improvements" mean those features and actions associated with a project which are considered necessary by the village
council, to protect natural resources, or the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the village and future users or inhabitants of the proposed
project or project area, including roadways, lighting, utilities, sidewalks, screening, landscaping and surface drainage. Improvements do not include the
entire project, which is the subject of site plan approval. (Ord. O-44-02, 8-12-2002)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 361/416
Chapter 8
OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING
9-8-1: OFF STREET PARKING:
A. Location: In all districts at the time of erection, conversion or enlargement of any main building or structure, automobile off street parking spaces shall
be provided as follows:
1. For residential buildings, off street parking shall be provided on the lot or in a building thereon. (Ord. O-16-63, 10-14-1963)
2. For all commercial buildings and all buildings combining commercial and residential uses, off street parking shall be provided on the lot or in a
building on the lot, or on a lot or in a building on a lot within two hundred fifty feet (250') thereof.
3. All off street parking spaces shall have adequate access and egress and all off street parking spaces and maneuvering and access areas shall be
surfaced with a dustproof or hard surface meeting the standard specifications of the village. (Ord. O-30-65, 10-25-1965)
B. General Requirements:
1. For the purpose of this title, a required parking space shall consist of an area in the form of a rectangle measuring not less than nine feet (9') in width
by nineteen feet (19') in depth, and such additional space as shall be necessary for maneuvering and access area. Each such space shall be
accessible from streets, alleys or private driveways or aisles leading to streets and driveways. In any residential district, no required off street parking
space, except that area required for access to such parking space, shall occupy any portion of a front yard or a side yard. (Ord. O-4-66, 2-28-1966)
2. "Floor area" shall mean the gross floor area and the open land area required for service to the public as customers, patrons, clients or patients,
including areas occupied by fixtures and equipment used for display or sale of merchandise. It shall not include areas used as restrooms, or areas or
parts of areas used principally for nonpublic purposes, such as storage, automobile parking, incidental repairs, processing or packaging of
merchandise, show windows or for offices incidental to the management or maintenance of stores or buildings.
3. Every parcel of land hereafter used as a parking space or a loading space shall have an all weather surface. All public off street parking spaces shall
be illuminated, and all lights used to illuminate said parking spaces shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away from adjoining lots in residential
districts. No signs other than those necessary for orderly parking control are to be erected or displayed in any public parking area. (April 1969)
The standard specifications for the construction of certain municipally owned parking lots, including the lots located at 7418 Randolph and 415 Beloit
in the village, and such other locations as may be designated from time to time by the corporate authorities, are hereby declared to be satisfied by
the installation of a gravel parking surface, provided that such gravel parking surface shall be replaced with a surface meeting the standard
specifications of the village, as provided in this subsection B3, at such time as the corporate authorities authorize the expenditure of funds for the
construction of such standard parking surface. (Ord. O-44-03, 10-27-2003)
4. The parking of more than one commercial vehicle, or the parking of a commercial vehicle of more than one ton capacity, on any lot in any residential
district shall be considered a commercial use and is hereby prohibited. (April 1969)
5. For the purpose of providing off street parking spaces as required in accordance with this title, plans must be submitted to and approved by the
director of public health and safety before issuance of a building permit. The plans shall show how the required off street parking spaces shall be
arranged and shall indicate sufficient space for turning maneuvers, as well as adequate ingress and egress to the parking area.
6. Before issuance of a building permit, the director of public health and safety shall obtain the approval of the plan commission for all such plans
requiring six (6) or more off street parking spaces. (April 1969; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
7. Whenever a building permit has been granted and the plans so approved for off street parking, the subsequent use of such property shall be
deemed to be conditional upon the unqualified continuance and availability of the parking provisions contained in such plans. Any use of such
property in violation hereof shall be deemed a violation of this title. Should the owner or occupant of any building to whom a building permit has been
granted containing off street parking requirements so change the use to which such building is put as to increase off street parking as required under
this title, it shall be unlawful and a violation of this title to begin or maintain such altered use until such time as the increased off street parking
provisions of this chapter are complied with.
8. No addition, conversion or enlargement of an existing building or use shall be permitted unless the parking requirements of this title are met for the
entire building or use.
9. In the case of mixed uses, the total requirements for off street parking space shall be the sum of the requirements of the various uses computed
separately as specified in this chapter, and the off street parking space for one use shall not be considered as providing the required off street
parking for any other use. (April 1969)
9-8-2: PARKING SPACE REQUIREMENTS:
Automobile parking spaces shall be provided according to the following schedule and shall be subject to the following conditions in any district in which
any of the following uses shall be established, except the DBD downtown business district, for which such standards are set forth in section 9-4C-6 of this
title: (Ord. O-23-06, 4-10-2006)
Residential:
Dwellings 2 parking spaces for each dwelling unit
Commercial:
Banks, savings and loan associations, businesses or professional offices
1 parking space for each 50 square feet of floor area, plus 1 space
for each 2 employees
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 362/416
Barbershops and beauty parlors 3 off street parking spaces for each operator
Community shopping district areas 1 parking space for each 50 square feet of floor area
Furniture and appliance stores, wholesale stores, household equipment,
furniture repair offices or machinery sales
1 parking space for each 75 square feet of floor area
Medical cannabis dispensary 1 parking space for each 250 square feet of floor area
Medical or dental offices 5 parking spaces per doctor engaged in clinic
Motels and tourist homes 1 off street parking space for each guestroom, plus 1 additional
space for the owner or manager
Motor freight terminals and local cartage companies 1 space for each 2 employees, based on the maximum number of
persons to be employed for any work period, plus 1 adequate
space for each vehicle used in the conduct of such operations
Restaurants, bars, taverns, nightclubs and all other similar dining and/or
drinking establishments
1 off street parking space for each 50 square feet of floor area
exclusive of kitchen, restroom and storage area
Retail stores 1 parking space for each 75 square feet of floor area
Public places and schools:
Churches 1 off street parking space for each 5 seats and/or 1 off street
parking space for each 90 linear inches of pew space in said
church
Places of public assembly including private clubs, lodges, and fraternal
buildings not providing overnight accommodations; assembly halls,
auditoriums, skating rinks, dance halls, bowling alleys, theaters,
stadiums, gymnasiums, amusement parks, funeral homes, community
centers, libraries
1 off street parking space for each 4 seats provided for patron use
and/or 1 off street parking space for each 50 square feet of floor
area used as public assembly but not containing fixed seats
Schools, including elementary, junior high schools, high schools and all
other similar institutions of learning
1 off street parking space for each 2 employees, based on the
maximum number of persons to be employed for any work period,
plus 1 off street parking space for each 10 high school, college or
university students predicated upon the designed capacity of the
physical plant
Industrial:
Manufacturing and industrial uses 1 parking space for each 2 employees based upon the maximum
number of persons to be employed at any 1 work period during the
day or night, plus 1 adequate space for each vehicle used in the
conduct of such operation
Other uses:
All other uses not specifically provided for in this section 1 parking space provided for each 200 square feet of floor area
(April 1969; amd. Ord. O-4-66, 2-28-1966; Ord. O-48-02, 8-26-2002; Ord. O-22-14, 9-8-2014)
9-8-3: OFF STREET LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
A. General Requirements:
1. For the purpose of this title, an off street loading space shall mean an on the property space for the standing, loading and unloading of vehicles to
avoid undue interference with the public use of streets, alleys and sidewalks. Such space shall be not less than twelve feet in width and thirty feet in
length (12' x 30'), exclusive of access aisles and loading space; and such loading space shall have a minimum overhead clearance of fourteen feet
(14').
2. All area provided in accordance with the off street requirements shall be surfaced with a bituminous or other all weather dust free surface.
3. Within any commercial or light manufacturing district, all vehicular entrances and exits on public streets, alleys and highways shall be designed and
constructed in a manner to best facilitate the flow of traffic to and from the premises and such entrances and exits shall be subject to the approval of
the traffic or highway authority having jurisdiction over the street or highway on which they are located.
4. The off street loading facilities required shall in all cases, be on the same lot or parcel of land as the structure they are intended to serve. In no case
shall the required off street loading space be part of the area used to satisfy the off street parking requirements of this title.
B. Off Street Loading Space Required: In the use of land for any purpose other than residential, no building or structure shall be erected unless provision is
made for the location on the lot of off street loading space on the basis of one off street loading space for each twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of
gross floor area. (April 1969)
Chapter 9
NONCONFORMING USES, BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 363/416
9-9-1: GENERAL STATEMENT:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the regulation of nonconforming uses, buildings and structures, and to specify those circumstances and
conditions under which nonconforming buildings, structures and uses shall be gradually eliminated upon reaching the end of their respective normal useful
life. (Ord. O-46-10, 10-12-2010)
9-9-2: GENERAL STANDARDS:
A. Authority To Continue: Any existing legal nonconforming building, structure, or use and any building, structure, or use which becomes nonconforming
after October 12, 2010, may continue subject to the provisions of this chapter, so long as it complies with all other laws, codes, rules and regulations
applicable to the building, structure or use.
B. Burden On Property Owner To Establish Legality: In all cases, the burden of establishing the legality of a nonconformity under the provisions of this
chapter shall be upon the property owner of the nonconforming building, structure, or use. (Ord. O-46-10, 10-12-2010)
9-9-3: NONCONFORMING USES:
This section regulates land, buildings and structures that, on October 12, 2010, are used in whole or in part for a purpose is not a permitted use or
conditional use in the zoning district in which property is located or in a planned unit development for the property, or are not otherwise authorized by the
village council ordinance.
A. Expansion Of Use: A nonconforming use of land, or a nonconforming use within a building or a structure shall not be expanded, extended, enlarged or
increased in intensity. Such prohibited activity shall include, without limitation:
1. An expansion or extension of a nonconforming use or its accessory uses to any land area other than that area occupied by the nonconforming use
on October 12, 2010.
2. An expansion or extension of the nonconforming use or its accessory uses within a building or other structure, to any portion of the building or
structure that was not occupied by the nonconforming use on October 12, 2010.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, a single-family or two-family residential use in any residential zoning district may be expanded in conformance with
the requirements of the underlying zoning district in which it is located.
B. Relocation: A nonconforming use of land, or a nonconforming use within a building or structure shall not be relocated, in whole or in part, to any other
location on the same lot or parcel, or to any other lot or parcel unless said lot or parcel is located in a zoning district which the permitted or conditional
use and the conditional use has been approved pursuant to this title.
C. Change Of Use: A nonconforming use shall not be changed to any use other than: 1) a use permitted by right within the zoning district, or PUD in which
it is located, or 2) a use allowed as a conditional use, for which a conditional use applicable to the property has been granted. Thereafter, that part of
the land, building or structure occupied by the permitted use or granted conditional use shall not thereafter be changed back to a use that is not allowed
within the zoning district or PUD in which it is located. Any change in use in violation of this chapter shall be deemed an abandonment of the previously
existing legal nonconforming use.
D. Abandonment: Except as provided in subsection 9-4C-5D of this title, if that part of a building, structure or land occupied by a nonconforming use is not
used or is vacant for one hundred eighty (180) continuous days or more, such nonconforming use shall be deemed abandoned and shall not be
reestablished or resumed. Any subsequent use or occupancy of such building, structure or land shall comply with all regulations of the zoning district in
which such building, structure or land is located.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the use in a residential structure is discontinued for a period of time by reason of bankruptcy or foreclosure, such
period of time shall not be included for purposes of calculating the length of discontinuance.
E. Damage Or Destruction: Except as provided herein below, a building, structure, or portion thereof, all or substantially all of which is designed or
intended for a use which is not allowed in the zoning district in which it is located and which is destroyed or damaged by fire or other casualty or act of
God to the extent that the cost of restoration to the condition in which it was before the occurrence will exceed fifty percent (50%) of the total cost of
reconstructing the entire building or structure, shall not be restored unless said building or structure and the use thereof shall conform to all regulations
of the zoning district in which it is located. In the event that such damage or destruction is less than fifty percent (50%) of the total cost of reconstructing
the entire building or structure, restoration of the building or structure may be made only if such restoration work is started within one year from the date
of the damage to the building or structure and is completed within one year of the issuance of the building permit for such restoration.
In any residential zoning district, if a legal nonconforming single-family or two-flat use in a principal structure (excluding coach homes) is destroyed or
damaged by fire, explosion, acts of God or by any means not within the control of the property owner or tenant, to the extent that the cost of restoring
the building or structure to its original condition prior to incurring the damage exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the cost of the replacement value of the
entire building or structure, it may nevertheless, be rebuilt to its original use as a single-family or two-flat before such casualty or loss. (Ord. O-46-10,
10-12-2010)
9-9-4: NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES:
This section regulates buildings and structures existing on October 12, 2010, that do not conform to the yard, height, lot coverage, or other dimensional or
bulk provisions of this title.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 364/416
A. Ordinary Repairs And Maintenance: Normal maintenance and incidental repairs, and installation or relocation of nonbearing walls, nonbearing
partitions, fixtures, wiring or plumbing may be performed on any legal, nonconforming building or structure. No repairs or nonstructural alterations shall
be made that will create any new nonconformity or increase the degree of any previously existing nonconformity.
B. Structural Alterations: Structural alterations, other than additions and enlargements, may be performed on a legal, nonconforming building or structure,
only in the following situations:
1. When the alteration is required by law or is necessary to restore the building or structure to a safe condition upon the order of an official charged with
protecting the public safety;
2. When the alterations will not create any new nonconformity or increase the degree of any existing nonconformity; or
3. When the alteration will result in the elimination of the nonconformity.
C. Structural Additions And Enlargements: A building or structure, which is nonconforming with respect to its bulk shall not be enlarged or added onto
except as follows:
1. Zoning Administrator Authorization:
a. Accessory Garages To Single-Family Uses: The zoning administrator or his designee is authorized to approve an application to allow a maximum
of one existing accessory garage structure on a lot which is legally nonconforming due only to lot coverage and/or side or rear yard requirements,
to be replaced in kind or smaller, when greater compliance cannot reasonably be achieved, provided that no part of the new garage, including any
eaves, extends beyond the property line, and further provided that, in the opinion of the zoning administrator, the garage cannot be resized and/or
repositioned on the lot to better conform or comply with one or more requirements of this title. The approval granted by this section does not
change the status of the new structure from its legal nonconforming status.
b. Additions Or Enlargements To Single-Family Or Two-Family Uses: In any zoning district, the zoning administrator or his designee may authorize
an addition or enlargement to a single-family or two-family principal structure (excluding coach homes), or for any structure being legally converted
to a single-family or two-family principal structure, in the following instances if the current automobile parking satisfies or can be modified to satisfy
the requirements of chapter 8 of this title:
(1) If the addition or enlargement complies with all other regulations of this title and does not increase the number of dwelling units. (Example: An
addition to a nonconforming structure that is located on that part of the structure that is conforming, if it otherwise complies with all other zoning
standards.)
(2) If such structure is nonconforming due only to an encroachment into a required side yard area and the addition or enlargement along said
nonconforming setback satisfy all of the following criteria:
(A) It does not increase the number of dwelling units; and
(B) The addition or enlargement does not further encroach into the nonconforming side yard; and
(C) The addition or enlargement does not require any other variation or relief pursuant to this title; and
(D) The addition or enlargement does not increase the building area as defined in chapter 1 of this title; and
(E) The addition or enlargement is one foot (1') or more from the side lot line; and
(F) The addition or enlargement is greater than five feet (5') from any other principal structure.
2. Zoning Administrator Hearing:
a. In any zoning district, an addition to or an enlargement of a single-family or two-family principal structure (excluding coach homes), or for any
structure being legally converted to a single-family or two-family principal structure, may be made to the nonconforming structure when authorized
by the village council by ordinance pursuant to a public hearing conducted by the zoning administrator or his designee, provided the
nonconforming structure satisfies the following:
The structure is nonconforming due only to an encroachment into required front, side and/or rear yards, and/or automobile parking does not satisfy
chapter 8 of this title and all of the following apply:
(1) The addition or enlargement does not increase the number of dwelling units; and
(2) The addition or enlargement will not further encroach into the nonconforming yard; and
(3) The addition or enlargement does not result in less than seventy five percent (75%) of the required front yard area pursuant to subsection 9-3A-
3C1 or 9-3B-3C1 or 9-3C-3C of this title or required rear yard area pursuant to subsection 9-3A-3C3 or 9-3B-3C3 or 9-3C-3C of this title; and
(4) The addition or enlargement does not require any other variation or relief; and
(5) The addition or enlargement is at least one foot (1') or more from any side lot line; and
(6) The addition or enlargement is greater than five feet (5') from any other principal structure.
3. Zoning Board Of Appeals Hearing: An application for an addition or enlargement to a nonconforming structure that does not meet the provisions of
subsection C1 or C2 of this section, may be authorized by the village council by ordinance after a public hearing conducted by the zoning board of
appeals, as provided in subsection 9-10-4C of this title.
D. Relocation: A nonconforming building or structure shall not be relocated, in whole or in part, to any other location on the same zoning lot or parcel, or to
any other zoning lot or parcel, unless the building or structure shall thereafter conform to all regulations of the zoning district in which it is located.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 365/416
E. Damage Or Destruction:
1. Except as provided herein below, no legal nonconforming building or structure which has been damaged by fire, explosion, act of God by any means
not within the control of the property owner or tenant, to the extent of more than fifty percent (50%) of its replacement value at the time of destruction,
shall be restored except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located.
The replacement value of the building or structure shall be determined the lesser of: a) the gross sale price of the building or structure within the
previous year; b) the value of the structure as determined by an MAI appraisal not less than two (2) years from the date of damage or destruction; c)
when insured, the amount for which the building, structure or property was insured prior to the date of the damage or destruction; or d) an alternative
method determined acceptable by the zoning administrator.
If a nonconforming single-family or two-family structure is destroyed or damaged by fire, casualty or act of God to such an extent that the cost of
restoring it to its original condition prior to incurring the damage exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the replacement value, it may nevertheless, be rebuilt
to a condition that conforms to those standards of the zoning district in which it is located as required by the zoning administrator, but shall in no
instance be more nonconforming than its original condition before such casualty or loss.
2. When a nonconforming building or structure is damaged or destroyed by any means not within the control of the property owner or tenant to the
extent of less than fifty percent (50%) of the replacement value at that time, it may be repaired or reconstructed provided that no new
nonconformities are created and that the degree of nonconformity existing prior to the damage or destruction is not increased. A building permit shall
be obtained for such rebuilding, restoration, repair or reconstruction within one year of the date of damage or destruction, and the construction shall
be completed within one year of issuance of the building permit.
3. In the event that a building permit is not obtained within one year, or that repairs are not completed within one year of the issuance of the building
permit, then the building or structure shall not be restored unless it conforms to all regulations of the district in which it is located.
4. In the event that any nonconforming building or structure or part thereof is removed, demolished or destroyed by means within the control of the
property owner or tenant, the building or structure or part thereof that was removed, demolished or destroyed, as restored or repaired, shall comply
with all requirements of this title. (Ord. O-46-10, 10-12-2010)
9-9-5: PROCEDURES:
A. Application: Applications for a change to a nonconforming building, structure or use shall be filed in accordance with the requirements of section 9-10-8
of this title.
B. Public Hearing: When required, a public hearing shall be set, noticed, and conducted by the zoning board of appeals or the zoning administrator or his
designee in accordance with subsection 9-10-4C of this title.
C. Action By Zoning Board Of Appeals: Within sixty (60) days after the conclusion of the public hearing, the zoning board of appeals shall render a written
recommendation to the village council, recommending either granting the application for a change to the nonconforming building, structure or use;
granting the application with conditions; granting a change to the nonconforming building, structure or use less than or different from that sought in the
application; or denying the application. The failure of the zoning board of appeals to act within sixty (60) days, or such further time to which the
applicant may agree, shall be deemed a recommendation for the denial of the application for a change to the nonconforming building, structure or use.
D. Action By Zoning Administrator: Within thirty (30) days after the conclusion of the public hearing held by the zoning administrator, the zoning
administrator shall render a written recommendation to the village council either granting the application for a change to the nonconforming building,
structure or use; granting the application with conditions; granting a change to the nonconforming building, structure or use less than or different from
that sought in the application; or denying the application. The failure of the zoning administrator to act within thirty (30) days, or such further time to
which the applicant may agree, shall be deemed a recommendation for the denial of the application for a change to the nonconforming building,
structure or use.
E. Action By Village Council: Within forty five (45) days after the receipt of the recommendation of the zoning board of appeals or the zoning administrator
or his designee, or their failure to act as above provided, the village council shall either deny the application or, by ordinance duly adopted, shall grant
the application with or without modification or conditions. The failure of the village council to act within such forty five (45) days, or such further time to
which the applicant may agree, shall be deemed a denial of the application for a change to the nonconforming building, structure or use. (Ord. O-46-10,
10-12-2010)
Chapter 10
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
9-10-1: ENFORCING AUTHORITY:
It shall be the duty of the director of public health and safety to enforce this title. (April 1969; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
9-10-2: OCCUPANCY PERMITS:
A. Subsequent to the effective date hereof, no change in the use of land, nor any change of use in an existing building shall be made, nor shall any new
building be occupied for any purpose until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the director of public health and safety stating that the building
and use comply with the provisions of this title. (April 1969; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 366/416
B. Certificates of occupancy shall be applied for coincidentally with the application for a building permit, and shall be issued within seven (7) days after the
lawful erection or alteration of any building shall have been completed. No building or premises shall be occupied until such certificate has been issued.
(April 1969; amd. 2004 Code)
C. A certificate of occupancy shall be required of all nonconforming uses of land or building created by the passage of this title. Application for such
certificate of occupancy for nonconforming uses shall be filed with the director of public health and safety by the owner or lessee of the land or building
occupied by such nonconforming use within one year from the effective date hereof. It shall be the duty of the director of public health and safety to
issue a certificate of occupancy for a nonconforming use created by the passage of this title. Any use which does not conform to the requirements of
the district in which it is located and for which an occupancy permit has not been obtained in conformity with the requirements of this section shall be
presumed to be operating in violation of this title.
D. A record of a certificate of occupancy shall be kept on file in the office of the director of public health and safety, and copies shall be furnished on
request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in land or in a building affected by such certificate of occupancy. (April 1969; amd. Ord.
O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
E. A fee of two dollars ($2.00) shall be charged for each original certificate and one dollar ($1.00) for each copy thereof. (April 1969)
9-10-3: PLATS REQUIRED WITH BUILDING PERMITS:
Each application for a building permit shall be accompanied by a plat of survey in duplicate prepared by a registered land surveyor, drawn to scale,
showing the actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon. Such application should also show the size and location of the building or buildings to be erected
or altered and such other information as may be necessary to provide for the enforcement of this title. A careful record of such applications and plats shall
be kept in the office of the director of public health and safety. (April 1969; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
9-10-4: AMENDMENTS:
A. Petitions; Fees: Petitions for amendments to this title, when made by a private party, shall be accompanied by a filing fee of one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00), plus the cost of any required legal notice publication(s) and the cost of the hearing transcripts. (Ord. O-50-07, 11-13-2007)
B. Hearing And Revision: Petitions for amendments shall be referred to the board of appeals or such other commission or committee as the village council
shall designate to hold a public hearing thereon and to recommend to the village council the adoption of an ordinance granting the amendment or the
denial of said petition. The petition, together with a recommendation, shall be forwarded to the village council within forty five (45) days of the time at
which it was submitted to the review body, unless it is withdrawn by the petitioner. Where an amendment is sought and a written protest against the
proposed amendment is signed and acknowledged by the owners of twenty percent (20%) of the frontage proposed to be altered, or by the owners of
twenty percent (20%) of the frontage immediately adjoining or across the alley therefrom, or by the owners of twenty percent (20%) of the frontage
directly opposite the frontage proposed to be altered as to such regulations or districts is filed with the village administrator, such amendment shall not
be passed except by the favorable vote of two-thirds (2/3) of all the members of the village council. (Ord. O-68-05, 12-19-2005)
C. Notice:
1. Publication: The director of public health and safety shall see that notice of public hearings is published not more than thirty (30) nor less than fifteen
(15) days prior to the hearing in one or more newspapers with a general circulation within the village of Forest Park.
2. Adjoining Property Owners: Prior to the hearing, the director of public health and safety shall provide written notice of public hearings to all owners of
property located within two hundred fifty feet (250') of a property that is the subject of a public hearing; except that, in the case of hearings conducted
by the zoning administrator in accordance with subsection 9-10-6D2 of this chapter, only immediately adjacent property owners need to be notified.
For the purposes of identifying owners for notification, the taxpayer of record shall be used, and a list of those notified shall become part of the public
record. The notice herein required shall contain the address of the location for which the relief is requested, a brief statement of the nature of the
requested action, and the date, time and location of the hearing. A good faith effort shall be made to send these notices as required, however,
compliance with these requirements shall not be considered as jurisdictional or mandatory public notice.
3. Public Notice Signs:
a. In any case where a property owner, or a person or persons acting on behalf of said property owner completes and submits a duly authorized
application requesting a public hearing under this subsection for any zoning action, the property owner authorizes the director of public health and
safety to post no more than two (2) signs on said property, visible from an adjacent roadway or roadways, to notify the public about the public
hearing. If conditions warrant, the director of public health and safety may also place sign(s) on adjoining rights of way.
b. Public notice signs shall be required for hearings conducted by the zoning administrator in accordance with subsection 9-10-6D2 of this chapter.
c. Said signs shall contain the words "notice of public hearing" at the top of the sign as well as general information about how to find out more about
the date, time and location of the public hearing.
d. Said sign(s) shall be posted not less than ten (10) days, nor more than thirty (30) days prior to the date of the public hearing. A good faith effort
shall be made to keep the sign in place until the date of the hearing, however, compliance with these requirements shall not be considered as
jurisdictional or mandatory public notice.
e. Said signs shall be removed no later than ten (10) days after the completion of council action. (Ord. O-50-07, 11-13-2007)
9-10-5: APPEALS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 367/416
A. Authority: The zoning board of appeals shall hear and decide appeals from, and review orders, decisions, determinations or the failure to act of the
director of public health and safety acting pursuant to his authority and duties under this title, and to that end the zoning board of appeals shall have the
same powers and be subject to the same standards and limitations as the director of public health and safety with respect to any order, decision or
determination being appealed.
B. Purpose: The appeal procedure is provided as a safeguard against arbitrary, ill considered or erroneous administrative decisions. It is intended to avoid
the need for resort to legal action by establishing local procedures to review and correct administrative errors. It is not, however, intended as a means
to subvert the clear purposes, meanings or intents of this title or the rightful authority of the director of public health and safety to enforce the
requirements of this title. To these ends, the reviewing body should give all proper deference to the spirit and intent embodied in the language of this
title and to the reasonable interpretations of that language by those charged with the administration of this title.
C. Parties Entitled To Appeal: An application for appeal to the zoning board of appeals may be filed by any person aggrieved by an order, decision,
determination or failure to act of the director of public health and safety acting pursuant to his authority and duties under this title. (Ord. O-17-97, 12-8-
1997; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
D. Procedures:
1. Application: An application for appeal to the zoning board of appeals shall be filed not later than forty five (45) days after the action being appealed
and in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. O-17-97, 12-8-1997)
2. Action By Director Of Public Health And Safety: Upon receipt of a properly completed application for an appeal, the director of public health and
safety shall forthwith transmit to the zoning board of appeals the application together with all papers constituting the record upon which the action
appealed from was taken. (Ord. O-17-97, 12-8-1997; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
3. Public Hearing: A public hearing shall be set, noticed and conducted by the zoning board of appeals in accordance with subsection 9-10-4B of this
chapter.
4. Action By Zoning Board Of Appeals: Within sixty (60) days after the close of the public hearing, the zoning board of appeals shall render a decision
on the appeal in the manner and form as the board may establish. Such decision may reverse, affirm or modify, in whole or in part, the action
appealed from and may include such order or determination as, in the opinion of the zoning board of appeals, is proper to be made in the premises.
The failure of the zoning board of appeals to act within such sixty (60) days, or such further time to which the applicant may agree, shall be deemed
to be a decision denying the appeal. (Ord. O-17-97, 12-8-1997)
E. Stay Of Proceedings: An application for appeal properly filed pursuant to subsection D of this section, shall stay all proceedings in the furtherance of the
action appealed from, unless the director of public health and safety certifies to the zoning board of appeals after the application for appeal has been
filed with the director of public health and safety that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in the director of public health and
safety's opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case the proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order which may
be granted by the zoning board of appeals or by the circuit court on application, upon reasonable written notice to the director of public health and
safety and on due cause shown.
F. Right To Hear Variation In Deciding Appeals: In any case where the application for appeal is accompanied by an application for variation in such form as
determined by the director of public health and safety, the zoning board of appeals shall hear, review and make a recommendation to the village council
on such variation in such form as may be established by the zoning board of appeals. (Ord. O-17-97, 12-8-1997; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
G. Conditions And Limitations On Rights Granted By Appeal: In any case where this title imposes conditions and limitations upon any right, any such right
granted by the zoning board of appeals on appeal shall be subject to such conditions and limitations in the same manner and to the same extent as if
secured without the necessity of an appeal. (Ord. O-17-97, 12-8-1997)
9-10-6: VARIATIONS:
A. Authority: The village council, in accordance with the procedures and standards set out in this section and by ordinance duly adopted, shall have the
authority to grant variations from the provisions of this title, but only in those specific instances enumerated in subsection E of this section and then only
in accordance with each of the standards enumerated in subsection F of this section.
B. Purpose: The variation procedure is intended to provide a narrowly circumscribed means by which relief may be granted from unforeseen particular
applications of this title that create practical difficulties or particular hardship. When such difficulties or hardships are more appropriate for remedy, if at
all, pursuant to other provisions of this chapter, the variation procedure is necessarily inappropriate. (Ord. O-17-97, 12-8-1997)
C. Parties Entitled To Seek Variations: Applications for variations may be filed by the owner of, or person having a contractual interest in, the subject
property, if authorized by the owner in writing. (Ord. O-50-07, 11-13-2007)
D. Procedures:
1. Application: Applications for variations shall be filed in accordance with the requirements of section 9-10-8 of this chapter. (Ord. O-68-05, 12-19-
2005)
2. Public Hearing: A public hearing shall be set, noticed, and conducted by the Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with subsection 9-10-4C of this
chapter. (Ord. O-50-07, 11-13-2007)
3. Action By Zoning Board Of Appeals: Within sixty (60) days after the conclusion of the public hearing, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall render a
written recommendation to the Village Council, recommending either granting the application for a variation; granting the application with conditions;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 368/416
granting a variation less than or different from that sought in the application; or denying the application. The failure of the Zoning Board of Appeals to
act within sixty (60) days, or such further time to which the applicant may agree, shall be deemed a recommendation for the denial of the variation.
4. Action By Zoning Administrator: Within thirty (30) days after the conclusion of the public hearing held by the Zoning Administrator, the Zoning
Administrator shall render a written recommendation to the Village Council either granting the application for a variation; granting the application with
conditions; granting a variation less than or different from that sought in the application; or denying the application. The failure of the Zoning
Administrator to act within thirty (30) days, or such further time to which the applicant may agree, shall be deemed a recommendation for the denial
of the variation.
5. Action By Village Council: Within forty five (45) days after the receipt of the recommendation of the Zoning Board of Appeals or the Zoning
Administrator, or their failure to act as above provided, the Village Council shall either deny the application or, by ordinance duly adopted, shall grant
the variation with or without modification or conditions. The failure of the Village Council to act within such forty five (45) days, or such further time to
which the applicant may agree, shall be deemed a decision denying the variation. (Ord. O-68-05, 12-19-2005)
E. Authorized Variations:
1. Permitted Variations: Subject to the prohibitions set forth in subsection E2 of this section, and subject to the other provisions of this section, the
Village Council may vary the provisions of this Code in the following cases and in no others. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to create
any right or entitlement in any applicant to a variation of any kind or magnitude:
a. To reduce the dimension of any required yard, setback or building spacing, including, without limitation, the yards required pursuant to this title.
(Ord. O-17-97, 12-8-1997)
b. Reserved. (Ord. O-16-17, 6-12-2017)
c. To increase by not more than twenty percent (20%) the maximum allowable building coverage or lot coverage.
d. To vary the location and size of, and to reduce by not more than twenty five percent (25%) or one space (whichever is greater) the minimum
number of, off street parking spaces or loading spaces otherwise required.
e. To vary the number of parking or loading spaces required in connection with a change of use or an increase in use intensity.
f. To increase the maximum distance that required parking is permitted to be located from the zoning lot of the use for which such parking is
provided.
g. To reduce by not more than fifty percent (50%) the amount of perimeter landscaped open space otherwise required.
h. To increase the maximum allowable height and location of any fence.
i. To allow the moving of a nonconforming structure to an extent or in a manner not permitted by chapter 9 of this title.
j. To allow the otherwise prohibited restoration of a partially damaged or destroyed nonconforming structure, structure devoted to a nonconforming
use, sign or fence.
k. To vary the bulk, yard, and space requirements when a zoning lot, whether vacant or legally used, is reduced in size, by reason of the exercise of
the right of eminent domain by an authorized government body or by reason of a conveyance made under the specific threat of an eminent domain
proceeding, so that the remainder of said zoning lot, or any structure or use on said zoning lot, does not conform with one or more of such bulk,
yard or space requirements of the district in which said zoning lot is located.
2. Prohibited Variations: Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, no variation shall be granted that is greater than the minimum variation
necessary to relieve the particular hardship or practical difficulty demonstrated by the applicant.
F. Standards For Variations:
1. General Standard: No variation shall be granted pursuant to this section unless the applicant shall establish that carrying out the strict letter of the
provisions of this title would create a particular hardship or a practical difficulty. Such a showing shall require proof that the variation being sought
satisfies each of the standards set forth in this subsection.
2. Unique Physical Condition: The subject property is exceptional as compared to other lots subject to the same provision by reason of a unique
physical condition, including presence of an existing use, structure or sign, whether conforming or nonconforming; irregular or substandard shape or
size; exceptional topographical features; or other extraordinary physical conditions peculiar to and inherent in the subject property that amount to
more than a mere inconvenience to the owner and that relate to or arise out of the lot rather than the personal situation of the current owner of the
lot.
3. Not Self-Created: The aforesaid unique physical condition is not the result of any action or inaction of the owner or its predecessors in title and
existed at the time of the enactment of the provisions from which a variation is sought or was created by natural forces or was the result of
governmental action, other than the adoption of this title, for which no compensation was paid.
4. Denied Substantial Rights: The carrying out of the strict letter of the provision from which a variation is sought would deprive the owner of the subject
property of substantial rights commonly enjoyed by owners of other lots subject to the same provision.
5. Special Privilege: The alleged hardship or difficulty is not merely the inability of the owner or occupant to enjoy some special privilege or additional
right not available to owners or occupants of other lots subject to the same provision, nor merely an inability to make more money from the use of the
subject property; provided, however, that where the standards herein set out exist, the existence of an economic hardship shall not be a prerequisite
to the granting of an authorized variation.
6. Title And Plan Purposes: The variation would not result in a use or development of the subject property that would not be in harmony with the
general and specific purposes for which this title and the provision from which a variation is sought were enacted or the general purpose and intent of
the official comprehensive plan.
7. Essential Character Of Area: The variation would not result in a use or development on the subject property that:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 369/416
a. Would be materially detrimental to the public welfare or materially injurious to the enjoyment, use, development or value of property or
improvements permitted in the vicinity; or
b. Would materially impair an adequate supply of light and air to the properties and improvements in the vicinity; or
c. Would substantially increase congestion in the public streets due to traffic or parking; or
d. Would unduly increase the danger of flood or fire; or
e. Would unduly tax public utilities and facilities in the area; or
f. Would endanger the public health or safety.
8. No Other Remedy: There is no means other than the requested variation by which the alleged hardship or difficulty can be avoided or remedied to a
degree sufficient to permit a reasonable use of the subject property.
G. Variation Less Than Requested: A variation less than or different from that requested may be granted when the record supports the applicant's right to
some relief but not to the relief requested.
H. Conditions On Variations: The village council may impose such specific conditions and limitations concerning use, construction, character, location,
landscaping, screening and other matters relating to the purposes and objectives of this title upon the premises benefited by a variation as may be
necessary or appropriate to prevent or minimize adverse effects upon other property and improvements in the vicinity of the subject property or upon
public facilities and services. Such conditions shall be expressly set forth in the resolution granting the variation. Violation of any such condition or
limitation shall be a violation of this title and shall constitute grounds for revocation of the variation. (Ord. O-17-97, 12-8-1997)
I. Affidavit Of Compliance With Conditions; Fee: Whenever any variation authorized pursuant to this section is made subject to conditions and limitations to
be met by the applicant, the applicant shall, upon meeting such conditions, file an affidavit with the director of public health and safety so stating. Such
affidavit shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee, to be fixed in each case by the director of public health and safety, to recover the village's actual
direct cost of an inspection to verify that such conditions and limitations have been met. (Ord. O-17-97, 12-8-1997; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
J. Effect Of Grant Of Variation: The grant of a variation shall not authorize the establishment or extension of any use nor the development, construction,
reconstruction, alteration or moving of any building or structure, but shall merely authorize the preparation, filing and processing of applications for any
permits and approval that may be required by the codes and ordinances of the village including, but not limited to, a building permit, a certificate of
zoning compliance, subdivision approval and site plan approval.
K. Limitations On Variations: No variation from the provisions of this title shall be valid for a period longer than one year unless a building permit is issued
and construction is actually begun within that period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion or unless a certificate of zoning compliance is
issued and a use is commenced within that period.
A variation shall be deemed to authorize only the particular construction or development for which it was issued and shall automatically expire and cease
to be of any force or effect if such construction or development shall be removed and not replaced within six (6) months after such removal. (Ord. O-17-97,
12-8-1997)
9-10-7: CONDITIONAL USES:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this section is based upon the division of the village into districts, within which districts the use of land and buildings, and the
use, bulk and location of buildings and structures in relation to the land are substantially uniform. It is recognized, however, that there are certain uses
which, because of their unique characteristics, cannot be properly classified in any particular district or districts, without consideration, in each case, of
the impact of those uses upon neighboring land and of the public need for the particular use in the particular location. Such conditional uses fall into
two (2) categories:
1. Uses publicly operated or traditionally affected with a public interest.
2. Uses entirely private in character, but of such an unusual nature that their operation may give rise to unique problems with respect to their impact
upon neighboring property or public facilities.
B. Initiation Of Conditional Use: Any person evidencing and having a fee simple interest in land, or a possessory interest entitled in exclusive possession,
or a contractual interest which may become a freehold interest or an exclusive possessory interest, and which is specifically enforceable, may file an
application to use such land for one or more of the conditional uses provided for in this title in the zoning district in which the land is located.
C. Application For Conditional Use: An application for a conditional use shall be filed with the zoning administrator.
The application shall contain such information as the zoning administrator and zoning board of appeals may require, but shall include, at a minimum:
1. Legal description and common address for the property;
2. Current plat of survey locating lot lines and all existing structures;
3. Consent and satisfactory evidence of possessory interest and/or ownership by affidavit, lease or contract to purchase and disclosure of beneficial
trust, as applicable;
4. Existing zoning on subject property and within two hundred fifty feet (250'), exclusive of rights of way and alleys;
5. Proposed zoning and land use;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 370/416
6. Site plan; and
7. Project impact statement describing the reasons for the conditional use and stating how the standards contained in subsection H of this section have
been met.
The application shall be accompanied by such plans and/or data prescribed by the zoning board of appeals, and shall include a statement in writing
by the applicant and adequate evidence showing that the proposed conditional use will conform to the standards set forth in subsection H of this
section.
D. Hearing On Application For Conditional Use: The zoning board of appeals shall hold a public hearing on each application, at such time and place as
shall be established by the board. Such hearing shall be attended by the applicant or his authorized representative.
E. Notice Of Hearing: A public hearing shall be set, noticed, and conducted by the zoning board of appeals in accordance with subsection 9-10-4C of this
chapter.
F. Action By Zoning Board Of Appeals: Within sixty (60) days of the conclusion of the public hearing, the zoning board of appeals shall render a written
recommendation to the village council, recommending either granting the application for conditional use; granting the application with conditions; or
denying the application. The failure of the zoning board of appeals to act within sixty (60) days or such further time to which the applicant may agree,
shall be deemed a recommendation for the denial of the conditional use.
G. Action By Village Council: Within forty five (45) days after the receipt of the recommendation of the zoning board of appeals, or their failure to act as
above provided, the village council shall either deny the application or, by ordinance duly adopted, shall grant the conditional use with or without
modification or conditions.
1. The village council may stipulate such conditions and restrictions upon the establishment, location, construction, maintenance, and operation of the
conditional use as is deemed necessary for the protection of the public interest and to secure compliance with the standards and requirements
specified in subsection H of this section. In all cases in which conditional uses are granted, the village council shall require such evidence and
guarantees as they may deem necessary as proof that the conditions stipulated in connection therewith are being and will be complied with.
2. In all cases where the village council permits the establishment of a conditional use, the terms of the relief granted shall be specifically set forth in
the ordinance or resolution, separate from any findings of fact in the case.
3. In all cases where the village council permits the establishment of a conditional use, the terms of the relief granted shall be deemed to relate to the
particular zoning lot or lots, and not to individual owners of said lot or lots; provided, however, that such change in ownership be recorded with the
zoning administrator, and provided that said new owner, through duly notarized documentation, agrees to the terms and conditions set forth in the
resolution or ordinance granting such conditional use.
H. Standards: No conditional use shall be recommended by the zoning board of appeals, unless they shall find:
1. That the establishment, maintenance, or operation of the conditional use will not be detrimental to, or endanger the public health, safety, morals,
comfort, or general welfare;
2. That the conditional use will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of other property in the immediate vicinity for the purposes already permitted,
nor substantially diminish and impair property values within the neighborhood;
3. That the establishment of the conditional use will not impede the normal and orderly development and improvement of the surrounding property for
uses permitted in the district;
4. That adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and/or necessary facilities have been or are being provided;
5. That adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress and egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets;
6. That the proposed conditional use is not contrary to the objectives of the current comprehensive plan for the village of Forest Park; and
7. That the conditional use shall, in all other respects, conform to the applicable regulations of the district in which it is located, except as such
regulations may, in each instance, be modified pursuant to the recommendations of the board.
I. Expiration Of Conditional Use: Once authorized by ordinance, a conditional use shall expire if such use is not commenced within one hundred eighty
(180) days of the effective date of the ordinance by the authority of properly issued village permits, if construction and occupancy is not completed
within twelve (12) months of the date permits were issued by the village, or if such use is abandoned for a period of one hundred eighty (180)
consecutive days.
J. Maintenance Of Conditional Use: Every property that is governed by a conditional use shall at all times be maintained, used and kept in full
conformance with the provisions of this code and those plans, specifications and special conditions expressly incorporated in any ordinance or
resolution governing the construction and development permitted under such conditional use. The village council may, by ordinance, revoke any
conditional use for failure to adhere to any of the conditions attached to the conditional use. (Ord. O-18-12, 5-14-2012)
9-10-8: HEARINGS; FEES:
Any person who may hereafter file with the zoning administrator or with the zoning board of appeals an application for a change in zoning regulations, for a
change to a nonconforming building or use, or any variation of the application of this title provided by law, shall pay to the village a fee of one hundred fifty
dollars ($150.00), plus shall pay the cost of any required legal notice publication and the cost of the hearing transcripts. (Ord. O-68-05, 12-19-2005; amd.
Ord. O-18-12, 5-14-2012)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 371/416
9-10-9: VIOLATIONS; PENALTY:
A. Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with the provisions of this title, shall, upon conviction, be fined as provided in
the general penalty in section 1-3-1 of this code for each offense. Each day that a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. (April 1969; amd.
2004 Code)
B. In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any building, structure or land is
used in violation of this title, in addition to other remedies, the director of public health and safety or other authorized village official may institute any
proper action or proceedings in the name of the village to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion,
maintenance or use, to restrain, correct or abate such violation, to prevent the use, to prevent the occupancy of said building, structure or land, or
prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about said premises. (April 1969; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010; Ord. O-18-12, 5-14-2012)
Title 10
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
GENERAL SUBDIVISION PROVISIONS
10-1-1: SCOPE; SHORT TITLE:
The rules and regulations set forth in this title are hereby adopted as the SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS of the village and may be cited as such, and shall
be part of the official comprehensive plan of the village. (Ord. O-11-98, 3-9-1998)
10-1-2: PURPOSE OF REGULATIONS:
In order to promote the realization of the official comprehensive plan of the village; in order to provide reasonable requirements governing the location,
width, course and surfacing of public streets and highways, alleys, ways for public service facilities, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, street lights, parks,
playgrounds, school grounds, size of lots to be used for residential purposes, stormwater drainage, water supply and distribution, sanitary sewers and
sewage collection and treatment; the regulations set out in this title establishing reasonable standards of design for subdivisions and for resubdivisions of
unimproved land and of areas subject to redevelopment within the village and contiguous unincorporated area under its jurisdiction are hereby adopted.
(Ord. O-11-98, 3-9-1998)
10-1-3: JURISDICTION:
These subdivision regulations shall be applicable to all subdivisions and resubdivisions of unimproved land and of area subject to redevelopment within
the corporate limits of the village and contiguous unincorporated area under its jurisdiction within one and one-half (11/2) miles of the boundary of said
village, in accordance with the provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-12-5, 5/11-12-9, and subsequent amendments thereto. (Ord. O-11-98, 3-9-
1998)
10-1-4: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this title following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them:
ALLEY: A strip of land, smaller than a minor street, along the side of or in the rear of properties intended as access tothese properties.
APPLICABLE ELEVATION: The high water elevation applicable to a building, building site or part of a lot, parcel or other area of land shall be the elevation
established for:
A. The adjoining or nearest stream of other floodgate runoff channel measured at right angles to the general direction of flow in the stream or channel; or
B. The adjoining or nearest floodgate detection pond or basin, whichever is the highest.
BUILDING LINE: A line within a lot or other parcel of land, so designated on the plat of the proposed subdivision, between which and the adjacent
boundary of the street upon which the lot abuts, the erection of an enclosed structure or portion thereof is to be prohibited.
COMMISSION: The plan commission of the village1.
CROSSWALKWAY: An area, dedicated to public use, which cuts across a block to provided pedestrian access to adjacent areas.
CUL-DE-SAC: A street having one open end and being permanently terminated by a vehicle turnaround.
DATUM: All elevations are in feet above mean sea level datum at New York City, or, when so noted on the profile, in feet above the stream bed of the
stream or channel or above some other described point or mark in or near the channel2.
DETENTION POND OR BASIN: A land area, so designated, which will detain storm water runoffs.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 372/416
EASEMENT: A grant by a property owner of the use, for a specific purpose or purposes, of a strip of land by the general public, a corporation or a
certain person or persons.
HIGH WATER ELEVATION: The highest level of floodgate observed during past floods.
LESSER CHANNEL: Tributaries which carry water to main channels or streams and which are above the floodplains.
LOT: A portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended for transfer of ownership or for building development.
OFFICIAL BENCHMARKS: The identifying designation, description, location and elevation of the points or marks constituting a system of official
benchmarks are a system of points or marks ofknown elevations above the mean sea level datum at New York City from which elevations shall
hereafter be taken by engineers, surveyors, architects and contractors when making topographical surveys and maps and settings, grades and
elevations for buildings, pavements, drainage facilities and other structures or work publicly built or regulated by the village.
PARCEL: Refers broadly to a lot, tract, or any other piece of land.
PLAT: A map, drawing or chart on which the subdivision plans of the subdivision are presented and which is submitted for approval first in preliminary
then in final form.
STREET: An area which serves or is intended to serve as a vehicular and pedestrian access to abutting lands or to other streets.
STREET, COLLECTOR: A street which is designed to carry traffic generated in a neighborhood from minor streets to primary or secondary streets.
STREET, INDUSTRIAL: A street intended primarily as access to abutting industrially zoned property.
STREET, MINOR: A street intended primarily as access to abutting properties.
STREET, PRIMARY: A street of considerable continuity which serves or is intended to serve as a major traffic artery connecting large areas. Such
streets will generally have a federal, state or county route designation and interconnect one community with another.
STREET, PUBLIC: All streets designed on a plat of subdivision as heretofore dedicated or to be dedicated for public use.
STREET, SECONDARY: A street supplementary to the primary street system providing intercommunication between this system and smaller areas
and streets.
STREET WIDTH: The shortest distance between lines of lots delineating the street.
SUBDIVISION: The division of land into two (2) or more parcels for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or building
development, including all public streets, alleys, easements for public service facilities, parks, playgrounds, school grounds or other public grounds.
The following shall not be considered a subdivision and shall be exempt from the requirements of this title:
A. The division of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of five (5) acres or more in sizewhich do not involve any new streets or easements of access;
B. Sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjacent and contiguous land; provided that such transfer will not affect required setbacks or
other zoning ordinance requirements.
C. The conveyance of parcels of land or interests therein for use as right of way for railroads or other public utility facilities and other pipe lines which does
not involve any new streets or easements of access;
D. The conveyance of land owned by a railroad or other public utility which does not involve any new streets or easements of access;
E. The conveyance of land for highway or other public purposes or grants or conveyances relating to the dedication of land for public use or instruments
relating to the vacation of land impressed with a public use;
F. Conveyances made to correct description in prior conveyances;
G. Sale or exchange of parcels or tracts of land following the division into no more than two (2) parts of a particular parcel or tract of land existing on July
17, 1959, and not involving any new streets or easements of access. (Ord. O-11-98, 3-9-1998)
Chapter 2
SUBDIVISION PLATS
10-2-1: APPROVAL OF MAPS, PLATS:
No map or plat of subdivision of any block, lot, sublot or part thereof, or any piece or parcel of land within the village or contiguous unincorporated territory
under its jurisdiction shall be entitled to be recorded in the proper county or shall be valid until it has been approved by the mayor and village council and
certified by the director of public health and safety, as provided in the Illinois municipal code1. Such approval and certification, when granted, and
subsequent amendments thereto, shall be entered in writing on such map or plat of subdivision by the mayor as provided herein. (Ord. O-11-98, 3-9-1998;
amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 373/416
10-2-2: PREAPPLICATION CONFERENCE:
A. Prior to the filing of a preliminary plat, as required in article A of this chapter, the developer is encouraged to submit to the director of public health and
safety general information including sketch plans describing the proposed development. The purpose of this conference is to afford the developer an
opportunity to avail himself of the advice and assistance of the plan department before preparation of a preliminary proposal. (Ord. O-11-98, 3-9-1998;
amd. Ord. O-24-05, 6-13-2005)
B. General subdivision information should describe or outline the existing conditions of the site and the proposed development information. This
information may include data on existing covenants, land characteristics and available community facilities and utilities, number of residential lots,
typical lot width and depth, price range, business areas and other public areas, proposed protective covenants and proposed utilities and street
improvements.
C. Sketch plan, on a topographic survey, should show in simple sketch form the proposed layout of streets, lots and other features in relation to existing
conditions. The sketch plan may be a freehand pencil sketch made directly on a print of the topographic survey. (Ord. O-11-98, 3-9-1998)
ARTICLE A. PRELIMINARY PLATS
10-2A-1: APPLICATION:
A. Filing: Applications for approval of a preliminary plat shall be officially filed with the director of public health and safety who, within forty eight (48) hours
after receipt, shall transmit the same, including all documents relating thereto, to the planning commission, and shall notify the mayor in writing of such
receipt and transmittal. (Ord. O-11-98, 3-9-1998; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
B. Contents: Each application for approval of a preliminary plat shall consist of four (4) copies of each of the following:
1. Preliminary plat of proposed subdivision.
2. Key map drawn to appropriate scale (not smaller than 1 inch equals 400 feet) showing the boundaries of the proposed subdivision and its
relationship to major features such as roads, streams, section lines, and political boundaries within one-half (1/2) mile thereof.
3. Letter of transmittal requesting official consideration and approval of the preliminary plat. Such letter shall also advise intent of the developer with
respect to land use and public improvements on and adjacent to the proposed subdivision tract.
4. If such subdivision is situated within five hundred feet (500') of a watercourse serving a tributary area of six hundred forty (640) acres or more,
evidence that two (2) copies of the preliminary plat have been submitted to the state department of transportation, division of waterways, requesting
their review for flood hazards.
C. Filing Fee: The subdivider shall pay a fee at the time when the application for approval of a preliminary plat is filed. Such fee shall be in the form of a
certified check payable to the village, the amount thereof to be determined in accordance with the following schedule:
Per lot in the subdivision $ 25.00
Minimum filing fee 200.00
D. Effect Of Prior Filings: Each filing of an application for approval of a preliminary plat whether or not a preliminary plat for the same proms has been filed
previously, shall be subject to the same requirements and fees as specified for filing of the preliminary plat. (Ord. O-11-98, 3-9-1998)
10-2A-2: IDENTIFICATION AND DESCRIPTION:
Every preliminary plat filed for approval by the village shall contain the following items:
A. Proposed name of the subdivision.
B. Location by township, section, town and range, or by other legal description.
C. Names and addresses of developer and surveyor who made the plat.
D. Scale of plat, one inch to one hundred feet (1" = 100').
E. Date.
F. North point. (Ord. O-11-98, 3-9-1998)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 374/416
10-2A-3: DELINEATION OF CONDITIONS:
A. Existing Conditions: Every preliminary plat filed for approval by the village shall contain the following:
1. Boundary line of proposed subdivision indicated by solid heavy line and the total approximate acreage encompassed thereby.
2. Location, widths and names of all existing or prior platted streets or other public ways, railroad and utility rights of way, parks and other public open
spaces, permanent buildings and structures, houses or permanent easements, and section and corporation lines within or adjacent to the tract.
3. Exact locations of existing sewers, water mains, culverts or other underground facilities within the tract, and reference to the nearest such utilities on
adjacent tracts, indicating pipe sizes, grades and elevations.
4. Boundary lines of adjacent tracts of unsubdivided or subdivided lands at the perimeters of the proposed subdivision, showing owners, where
possible, of unsubdivided properties, and if such adjacent tract is subdivided, the name, recording date and number, typical lot size and dwelling
type, and approximate percentage built up.
5. Existing zoning of proposed subdivision and adjacent tracts, in zoned areas.
6. Contours at two foot (2') intervals except where contour demands one foot (1') intervals.
7. Location and results of soil percolation tests if individual sewage disposal systems are proposed.
8. Location of watercourses, marshes, rock outcrop, wooded areas and isolated preservable trees one foot (1') or more in diameter.
9. Approximate direction and gradient of ground slope on adjacent land, including any embankments or retaining walls; character and location of
buildings, railroads, power lines, towers and other nearby nonresidential land uses or adverse influences.
B. Proposed Conditions: Every preliminary plat filed for approval by the village shall contain the following:
1. Layout of streets and widths and also the widths of crosswalkways and easements.
2. Layout, numbers and dimensions of lots.
3. Parcels of land intended to be dedicated or temporarily reserved for public use or set aside for use of property owners in the subdivision.
4. Building setback lines, showing dimensions.
5. Municipal, township, county and school district boundaries where they occur within the subdivision.
6. Sites, if any, for multi-family dwellings, shopping centers, churches and industry.
7. General proposals for utilities, including locations and sizes.
8. Location of any proposed fence and a description of the height and type of fence to be erected. (Ord. O-11-98, 3-9-1998)
10-2A-4: APPROVAL:
A. Period Of Time For Consideration: The plan commission shall act to approve or disapprove any application for approval of a preliminary plat within
ninety (90) days from the date of application or the filing by the applicant of the last item of supporting data as required by this article, whichever date is
later, unless such time is extended by mutual consent of the commission and the applicant.
B. Distribution Of Copies: If the preliminary plat is approved, the action of the plan commission shall be entered on three (3) prints of the plat, one print to
be retained by the commission, one print to be returned to the applicant and one print to be transmitted to the mayor and village council accompanied
by one copy each of all supporting data and documents submitted with the application for approval.
C. Duty Of Village Engineer: Approval by the village engineer will be required of the engineering proposals for improvements before approval of the final
plat. However, in order that a determination may be had of the general feasibility of such proposals, the plan commission or village engineer may
require profiles showing existing ground surface and proposed street grades, including extensions for a reasonable distance beyond the limits of the
subdivision, typical cross sections of proposed grading, preliminary plan of proposed storm and sanitary sewers with grades and sizes indicated and
such other information as may reasonably be necessary.
D. Action By Mayor And Village Council: Within thirty (30) days after its next regular slated meeting following an action by the plan commission to approve
a preliminary plat, the mayor and village council shall act by resolution to accept or reject such plat. If accepted, the village clerk shall attach a certified
copy of the resolution of acceptance of the plat; if rejected, the resolution shall state the reasons for the rejection, specifying with particularity the its in
which the proposed plat fails to conform to the official map or maps or satisfy the requirements of this article. One copy of the resolution shall be filed in
the office of the village clerk and a copy shall be transmitted to the applicant.
E. Effect Of Approval: The approval of a preliminary plat shall not constitute acceptance of the subdivision plat for record. (Ord. O-11-98, 3-9-1998)
F. Effective Period: Approval of the preliminary plat shall be effective for a maximum of twelve (12) months from the date of such approval. The mayor and
village council may grant reasonable extensions of this period upon petition by the owner and subdivider. If the final plat has not been filed with the
director of public health and safety within the period such approval is effective and the owner and subdivider desire to continue their request for final
approval, it will be necessary for a new application for approval of a preliminary plat to be filed. (Ord. O-11-98, 3-9-1998; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 375/416
10-2A-5: DISAPPROVAL:
If the preliminary plat is disapproved, the action of the plan commission shall be entered on two (2) prints of the plat, one print to be retained by the plan
commission and one print to be transmitted to the applicant accompanied by a written statement setting forth the reason or reasons for disapproval and
specifying with particularity the aspects in which the proposed plat fails to conform to the ordinances including the official map or maps. A copy of such
statement shall be forwarded to the mayor and village council. (Ord. O-11-98, 3-9-1998)
10-2A-6: STORMWATER REQUIREMENTS:
Accompanying the preliminary plans of each proposed subdivision submitted for preliminary approval, there shall be furnished the following information
and data:
A. Contour Map: A two foot (2') interval contour map of the land to be subdivided and such adjoining land whose topography may affect the layout or
drainage of the subdivision. On such map shall be shown the following:
1. The flow lines of streams and other floodwater runoff channels, their normal shorelines and the shoreline of the established high water elevations.
2. Normal shoreline of lakes, ponds, swamps and other detention basins, the shoreline of high water elevations established herein, lines of inflow and
outflow, if any.
3. Farm drains, inlets and outfalls.
4. Storm, sanitary and combined sewers and outfalls.
5. Septic tank systems, including outlets, if any.
6. Seeps, springs, flowings and wells.
B. Channel Profiles: Profile drawings of each stream, channel, pond and basin showing elevations of the following:
1. The streambed or flow line.
2. Channel banks, if any.
3. Waterway openings of existing culverts and bridges within or near the tract.
4. Size and elevation of sewer and drain outlets into the stream, channel or basin.
5. The high water elevations established herein. Where a limited number of high water observations or determinations have been established on a
stream or channel, the subdivider's engineer shall, in drawing his profiles, extend or project the established high water elevation upstream or
downstream from a single elevation approximately parallel to the streambed or flow line as surveyed by him.
If a subdivider believes that the established high water elevation or profile unreasonably restricts the layout of his proposed subdivision or its
development or that an error has been made in its establishment, he may appeal to the plan commission for a review thereof, and for a
recommendation to the mayor and village council for an amendment to the elevations. No such amendment shall be made until a duly advertised
public hearing on the amendment has been held on the proposed amendment before the plan commission or zoning board.
C. Comprehensive Drainage Plan: A comprehensive drainage plan, first in preliminary form, designed to handle safely the floodwater runoff following the
heavier worms. The plan shall provide or be accompanied by maps or other descriptive material showing the following:
1. The extent and area of each watershed tributary to the drainage channels in the subdivision.
2. The street storm sewers and other storm drains to be built, the basis of their design, the outfall and outlet locations and elevations, receiving stream
or channel and its high water elevation and the functioning of the drains during high water conditions.
3. The parts of the proposed street storm sewer system along which overhead sewers in buildings is advised to prevent sewage backups in basements
during the heavier rain storms.
4. The parts of the proposed street system where pavements are planned to be depressed sufficiently to convey or temporarily store overflow from
storm sewers and over the curb runoff resulting from the heavier rain storms and the outlets for such overflow.
5. Existing streams and floodwater runoff channels to be maintained, enlarged, eliminated otherwise; and new channels to be constructed, their
locations, cross sections and profiles.
6. Existing culverts and bridges, drainage areas, elevation and adequacy of waterway openings; and new culverts and bridges to be built, their
materials, elevations, waterway openings and basis of design.
7. Existing detention ponds and basins to be maintained, enlarged, eliminated or otherwise altered, and new ponds or basins to be built with dams, and
their design.
D. Subdivision Design And Drainage: The following rules shall govern the design of the subdivision with respect to the drainage of floodwater runoff:
1. Design: Streets, blocks, depths of lots, parks and other public grounds shall be located and laid out in such a manner as to preserve and utilize
natural streams, channels and detention basins, including wherever practicable the larger streams and floodplains within parks or other public
grounds.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 376/416
2. Channel Straightening: Sharply meandering streams or channels may be partly straightened and minor changes made in other channels, subject to
approval of the mayor and village council, provided:
a. The floodway dimensions of the stream or channel are maintained;
b. The volume of floodwater storage outside the floodway is not reduced.
3. Lesser Channel Locations: Generally acceptable locations of the lesser floodwater runoff channels in the design of a subdivision include the
following:
a. In a depressed median of a double roadway street or parkway, provided the median is wide enough to permit side slopes of maximum three to one
(3:1) grade along the floodway and the design high water level is below the subbase of the adjacent pavements.
b. Centered on the rear lot lines in a block, or entirely within the rear yards of a single row of lots or parcels, provided in either case the lots are deep
enough to permit side slopes of maximum five to one (5:1) grade along these lesser channels and a building site on the front part of the lot above
the design high water level, plus two feet (2'), as established at the nearest identified channel.
In each of the foregoing cases, a floodway easement, at least twenty feet (20') wide shall be provided and shown on the plat. The easement shall
permit necessary public channel maintenance and improvement work and access of equipment therefor and shall prohibit buildings and other
obstructing structures from being thereon.
4. Uppermost Reaches Of Drainage Channels: The smaller uppermost reaches of drainage channels and swales forming the natural drainage system
near the watershed divide may be relocated or eliminated and incorporated into the planned system of storm sewers and/or open channels upon a
showing that the system is adequate and can safely handle the floodwater runoff following the heavier rainstorms.
5. Within Block Drainage: A continuous easement shall be provided along rear lot lines and drawn on the subdivision plat within which utility lines and
drainage may be located or built. The utility/drainage easement shall be at least fifteen feet (15') wide (71/2 feet on each lot).
6. Storm Sewer Outfalls: Storm sewer outfalls shall be so designed, by reason of elevation of the invert, piping or otherwise, that when the receiving
stream is at the high water elevation the storm sewer will continue to drain the area it is designed to serve.
7. Streets Designed As Channels: Cross sections and grades of streets above high water elevations shall be designed to temporarily store and convey
the overflow from storm sewers and over the curb runoff and be provided with adequate outlets for safe disposal of such overflow. The street cross
section shall provide a lot grade for each adjoining building at least two feet (2') higher than the crown of the pavement, and the minimum sill
elevation of openings in the outer walls of such building shall be at least two and one-half feet (21/2') above the crown elevation.
8. Base Flood Elevation: This section's protection standard is the base flood according to the best data available to the state water survey's floodplain
information repository. Whenever a party disagrees with the best available data, he may finance the detailed engineering study needed to replace
existing data with better data and submit it to the state water survey. The base flood elevation for the SFHAs of the Des Plaines River shall be as
delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the flood ice study of the village prepared by the federal insurance administration and dated May 8,
19811. (Ord. O-11-98, 3-9-1998)
9. Development Permit: No person shall commence any development in the SFHA without first obtaining a development permit from the director of
public health and safety. The director of public health and safety shall not issue a development permit if the proposed development does not meet
the requirements of this section. Application for a development permit shall be made on a form provided by the director of public health and safety.
The application shall be accompanied by drawings of the site, drawn to scale showing proms line dimensions. In those parts of the site that are
below the base flood elevation, the application shall be accompanied by a drawing showing: (Ord. O-11-98, 3-9-1998; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
a. Existing grade elevations and all changes in grade resulting from excavation or filling;
b. The direction of flow of surface drainage and flood flows;
c. The location of all watercourses and drainage facilities;
d. The location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings; and
e. The elevation of the lowest floor including the basement of all buildings subject to the requirements of subsection D11 of this section. (Ord. O-11-
98, 3-9-1998)
Upon receipt of an application for a development permit, the village engineer shall compare the elevation of the site to the base flood elevation.
Any development located on land higher than the base flood elevation is not in the SFHA and therefore not subject to the requirements of this
section. The director of public health and safety shall inform the applicant of any and all other local, state and federal permits that may be required
for this type of development activity. The development permit will not be issued until a permit is issued by the state department of transportation,
division of water resources, pursuant to 615 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/18(f). The development permit will only be issued on the condition that the
other specified permits are obtained. The director of public health and safety shall not issue a certificate of use and occupancy unless all required
permits have been obtained. The fee for development permit shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). (Ord. O-11-98, 3-9-1998; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
10. Preventing Increased Damages: No development in the SFHA shall create a damaging or potentially damaging increase in flood heights or velocity.
a. New replacement sanitary sewer lines and on site waste disposal systems may be permitted providing all manholes or other aboveground
openings located below the FPE are watertight.
b. Any development in the SFHA which eliminates space previously available for storing and moving floodwater shall be compensated for or
balanced by at least an equal volume of excavation below high water elevation. In the case of streams and channels, such excavation shall be
made opposite or just upstream from the filled in area.
11. Protecting Buildings: In addition to the damage prevention requirements of subsection D10 of this section, all buildings to be located in the SFHA
shall be protected from flood damage below the FPE. This building protection requirement shall be considered met providing:
a. A permit is issued by the Illinois department of transportation, division of water resources, pursuant to 615 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/18(f).
b. The village engineer shall ensure that the FPE used by the Illinois department of transportation, division of water resources, is the same as that
required by this section.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 377/416
c. For residential buildings, the lowest floor (including basement) shall be at or above the FPE.
12. Other Development Requirements: The village council shall take into account flood hazards, to the extent that they are known, in all official actions
related to land management, use and development.
a. The mayor and village council shall not approve any subdivision located outside of the corporate limits unless such agreement or plat is in
accordance with the provisions of this section. The village engineer shall obtain the best available SFHA maps and data for the unincorporated
areas.
b. New subdivisions and planned unit developments (PUDs) shall meet the requirements of subsections D10 and D11 of this section. Plats or plans
for new subdivisions and planned unit developments (PUDs) shall include a signed statement by a registered professional engineer that the plat or
plans account for changes in the drainage of surface waters in accordance with the plat act2.
c. Plats or plans for new subdivisions and planned unit developments (PUDs) shall display the following flood data:
(1) The boundary of the SFHA;
(2) The boundary of the floodway, if shown on available SFHA maps;
(3) Easements of lands dedicated to the village for access for channel maintenance purposes; and
(4) The FPE for each building site. Where the base flood elevation is not available from an existing study filed with the state water survey, the
applicant shall be responsible for calculating the FPE and submitting it to the state water survey for review and approval as best available
elevation data. (Ord. O-11-98, 3-9-1998)
d. Plans for the development activities to be undertaken by the village in the SFHA shall be reviewed by the village engineer to ensure that they
comply with this section. Except as exempted by law, no other local government shall commence any development activity in the SFHA without
first obtaining a development permit from the director of public health and safety. (Ord. O-11-98, 3-9-1998; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
e. The village's department of health and safety shall take the following into consideration when preparing or revising the comprehensive plan,
community development program, housing assistance plan and other land use or development programs:
(1) Preserving SFHA land for open space uses such as farming or recreation;
(2) Acquiring and removing frequently flooded buildings;
(3) Prohibiting hospitals, water treatment plants, natural gas storage and other critical or especially hazardous facilities from locating in the SFHA;
(4) Identifying the elevations of the base flood and past floods at entrances to public buildings, on street signs or other prominent locations; and
(5) Other flood hazard mitigation or floodplain management activities that could help accomplish the purposes of this section.
13. Street Pavement Near Streams: The crown of street pavements hereafter built adjoining or near streams, floodwater runoff channels or detention
basins shall be not lower than the established high-water elevation plus two feet (2') in the case of major streets, and plus one foot (1') in the case of
other streets.
14. Bridge And Culvert Waterway Openings: Waterway openings of bridges and culverts hereafter built over streams or floodwater runoff channels
shall be so designed that the flood of record can be safely passed without adversely affecting upstream high water elevations.
15. Release Of Impounded Stormwater Runoff: Dams constructed to form floodwater impoundments shall provide floodwater storage pools and shall
be provided with outlets which may be set or regulated to detain or empty slowly the storage pool following periods of runoff according to the capacity
of the downstream channel to carry the flow safely. The village will accept a release rate of not greater than that calculated from a storm of 3-year
frequency with a runoff rate coefficient of 0.15, unless the applicant can show by his detailed calculations, which are acceptable to the village
engineer that the discharge rate of the natural outlet channel serving the area is greater. (Ord. O-11-98, 3-9-1998)
10-2A-7: FLOODWATER DETENTION3:
A. A combination of storage and controlled release of floodwater runoff is required for all commercial developments exceeding five (5) acres in area, for all
residential developments exceeding ten (10) acres in area and for all residential developments between five (5) and ten (10) acres which have an
imperviousness of sixty percent (60%) or greater. However, a commercial development of five (5) acres or less and a residential development of ten
(10) acres or less must have an adequate drainage outlet as approved by the village engineer. If the outlet in those cases is not adequate, then
detention, as determined by the village engineer, shall be required to store that portion of the runoff exceeding the outlet capacity.
B. Dams constructed to form floodwater detention basins shall be designed to maintain a temporary floodwater storage pool and shall be provided with
outlets which may be set or regulated to detain or slowly empty the storage pool following periods of runoff according to the capacity of the downstream
channel to safely carry the flow. Such release rate shall not exceed the stormwater runoff rate from the area in its natural undeveloped state.
C. In this regard, the village will accept a release rate of not greater than that calculated from a storm of 3-year frequency with a run off rate coefficient of
0.15, unless the applicant can show by his detailed calculations, which are acceptable to the village, that the discharge rate of the natural outlet
channel serving the area is greater.
D. The live detention storage to be provided will be calculated on the basis of the 100-year frequency rainfall as published by the U.S. weather bureau for
this area. The detention volume required will be that necessary to handle the runoff of a 100-year rainfall, for any and all durations, from the fully
developed drainage area tributary to the reservoir, less that volume discharged during the same duration at the approved release rate.
E. A floodwater detention basin which will normally be dry should not hold more than four feet (4') of water and is to be drained in a maximum of seventy
two (72) hours following the 100-year rainfall.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 378/416
F. A floodwater detention basin which will normally contain water shall have a minimum depth of four feet (4') required at all times unless fish are to be
stocked, in which case one-fourth (1/4) of the pond must have a minimum depth of ten feet (10'). Aeration facilities must be provided as well as
allowance for gravity drainage to permit cleaning of the pond.
G. Maximum side slopes shall not exceed four to one (4:1) grade on either a dry or wet pond, and three to one (3:1) grade below the water line of a wet
pond. Lower slope ratios may be required by the village engineer. Bank slope erosion protection shall be provided by sodding, seeding or other means
approved by the village engineer. Emergency spillways shall be required as determined by the village engineer.
H. In any case where a flood detention structure is not deeded to the village, the owner shall provide an easement to the basin. If the flood detention
structure is not maintained by the owner, the village shall maintain and repair the facility at the owner's expense.
I. Floor elevations of neighboring structures shall be at least one and one-half feet (11/2') above the high water level of a neighboring detention basin.
J. One method of calculation which will be acceptable to the village for the determination of the capacity of floodwater detention reservoirs in accordance
with the requirements of this article, is as follows:
Live Detention Storage - Volume Runoff, 100-year -
(Release Rate x Duration)
(Inches) = V100 - Qrtd = ci100td- 0.15 i3td
Maximum storage volume calculated by this equation for any and all durations (td) will be the required storage. The terms of the above equation are
defined as follows:
Qr =
The maximum release rate in inches per hour from the land in its natural undeveloped state.
0.15
=
The coefficient of runoff for the undeveloped land.
i3 =
The intensity in inches per hour of the rainfall from the U.S. weather bureau curve for 3-year frequency for the time of concentration of
the undeveloped land.
i100
=
The intensity in inches per hour of rainfall from the U.S. weather bureau curve for 100-year frequency for any and all durations.
td =
The duration of the 100-year storm, which must be varied to determine the most critical and therefore maximum required detention.
c =
The coefficient of runoff for the completely developed drainage area tributary to the reservoir.
Note: i100 varies with td, however i3 is calculated using the longest time of concentration for the undeveloped land and becomes a constant in the above
equation.
The live detention storage, in inches of depth, can be converted to acre feet by multiplying the inches of depth by the drainage area in acres, and by the
factor 0.0833. (Ord. O-11-98, 3-9-1998)
10-2A-8: EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL:
Accompanying the preliminary plat shall also be the site grading plan describing the erosion and sedimentation control measures proposed. The
information must be submitted for the entire tract of land, regardless of phased or staged construction. If staged development is proposed, approval of
additional stages will not be granted until the erosion control measures for the initial stage are satisfied. (Ord. O-11-98, 3-9-1998)
ARTICLE B. FINAL PLATS
10-2B-1: CONFORM TO PRELIMINARY PLAT:
The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat accepted by the mayor and village council and, if desired by the owner and subdivider, it
may consist of only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which they propose to record and develop at that time; provided, however, that such
portion shall conform to all the requirements of these regulations. (Ord. O-11-98, 3-9-1998)
10-2B-2: APPLICATION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 379/416
A. Filing: After acceptance of the preliminary plat by the mayor and village council and within the time period set forth in subsection 10-2A-4D of this
chapter, an application may be made for approval of the final plat. Such application shall be officially filed with the director of public health and safety
who, within forty eight (48) hours after receipt, shall transmit same, including all documents relating thereto, to the plan commission, and shall notify the
mayor and village council in writing of such receipt and transmittal. (Ord. O-11-98, 3-9-1998; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
B. Contents: Each application for approval of a final plat shall consist of the following:
1. One original tracing drawn with india ink on tracing cloth, a reproduced vandyke or equivalent negative or ink on mylar, and four (4) prints of the final
plat drawn to scale of one inch to one hundred feet (1" = 100').
2. A certified statement by the village engineer that the plans, profiles and specifications for the improvements required under chapter 4 of this title
have been approved by him and that he has been furnished with satisfactory documents indicating specifically and in detail the status of completion
of such improvements. Such statement shall be accompanied by the village engineer's estimate of the cost, including the cost of engineering of such
required improvements as remain to be completed.
C. Agreement: An agreement executed by the owner and subdivider wherein they agree, in consideration of the approval of the final plat by the mayor and
village council, to construct such required improvements in accordance with such approved plans, profiles and specifications within a period of not
more than two (2) years after the date of plat recording, except as may otherwise be agreed to under the provisions of subsection 10-2A-4A of this
chapter and wherein they further agree that, after completion of such improvements and their acceptance by the appropriate public body having
jurisdiction thereof, these improvements shall become the property of and shall be maintained by such public body.
D. Guarantee Of Performance: If the certified statement in subsection 10-2B-5B of this article shows that such required improvements have not been fully
completed in accordance with such approved plans, profiles and specifications, the owner and subdivider shall present a certified statement by the
village attorney that a satisfactory guarantee of performance to install such required improvements has been provided to the village on the basis of the
cost estimate made by the village engineer. Such guarantee of performance shall consist of either:
1. A bond executed by an acceptable surety company, regularly doing business in the state, in an amount equal to the village engineer's estimate of
the cost, including the cost of engineering, of such required improvements as remain to be completed;
2. The deposit with the village clerk of cash or a certified check in the amount stated in subsection B2 of this section; or
3. In the case of lands zoned for industrial use, an agreement, acceptable to the village council alter receipt of recommendations thereon from the plan
commission, which shall commit the owner and subdivider and his successors and assigns to install the required improvements in accordance with a
specific schedule, attached to and made a part of such agreement, relating to the progress of property development within the subdivision. Such
agreement shall recite in detail the stages of property development at which it shall become the obligation of the owner and subdivider to install
specific improvements, and shall set forth a maximum time period after these obligations occur, within which time such improvements shall be
installed. Such agreement, when executed, shall be recorded by the village in the office of the recorder in the county having jurisdiction prior to the
recording of the plat.
4. When applicable, written statements from county, state or other public officials as may be concerned, indicating that proposals for storm drainage,
sewage disposal and water supply meet minimum requirements for such installations.
E. Filing Fee: The subdivider shall pay a fee at the time when the application for approval of final plat is filed. Such fee shall be in the form of a certified
check payable to the village, the amount thereof to be determined in accordance with the following schedule:
Residential subdivisions $25.00 per lot in the subdivision, or
Commercial and industrial
subdivisions
$100.00 per acre, and
Cost of review of the proposed plans and specifications by the village engineer, plus a minimum filing fee of $500.00
F. Effect Of Prior Filings: Each filing of a final plat, whether or not a final plat for the same property has been filed previously, shall be subject to the same
requirements and fees as specified for filing of the final plat. (Ord. O-11-98, 3-9-1998)
10-2B-3: IDENTIFICATION AND DESCRIPTION:
Every final plat filed for approval with the village shall contain the following:
Name of subdivision;
Location by township, section, town and range, or by other legal description;
Names of owners and surveyor;
Scale one inch to one hundred feet (1" = 100') shown graphically;
Date; and
North point. (Ord. O-11-98, 3-9-1998)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 380/416
10-2B-4: DELINEATION:
Every final plat filed for approval by the village shall contain the following:
A. Boundary of plat, based on an accurate traverse, with angular and linear dimensions.
B. Exact location, width and name of all streets within and adjoining the plat, and the exact location and widths of all crosswalkways. Proposed street
names shall be checked with the proper village officials.
C. True angles and distances to the nearest established street lines or official monuments (not less than 3) which shall be accurately described in the plat.
D. Municipal, township, county or section lines accurately tied to the lines of the subdivision by distances and angles.
E. Radii, internal angles, points of curvature, tangent bearings and lengths of all arcs.
F. All easements for rights of way provided for public services or utilities.
G. All lot numbers and lines, with accurate dimensions in feet and hundredths.
H. Accurate location of all monuments, which shall be concrete six inches by six inches by thirty inches (6" x 6" x 30") with iron pipe cast in center.
Permanent stone or concrete monuments shall be set at each corner or angle on the outside boundary. Pipes or other physical markers shall be placed
at each intersection of street center lines. All U.S., state, county or other official benchmarks, monuments or triangulation stations in or adjacent to the
property shall be retained and preserved in precise position.
I. Accurate outlines and legal description of any areas to be dedicated or reserved for public use with the purposes indicated thereon, and of any area to
be reserved by deed covenant for common uses of all property owners.
J. Building setback lines accurately shown with dimensions or specified in any covenants which may be incorporated on the plat. (Ord. O-11-98, 3-9-1998)
10-2B-5: ATTENDANT ITEMS:
Every final plat filed for approval by the village shall contain the following attendant items:
A. Protective covenants.
B. Certification by registered surveyor to the effect that the plat represents a survey made by him and that the monuments and markers shown thereon
exist as located and that all dimensional and geodetic details are correct.
C. Note certification, by the owner or owners, and/ or of any mortgagees on record of the adoption of the plat and the dedication of streets and other public
areas.
D. Certification, in accordance with state law, and the regulations of the division of waterways, indicating whether or not the proposed subdivision is within
five hundred feet (500') of a watercourse serving a tributary area of six hundred forty (640) acres or more. (Ord. O-11-98, 3-9-1998)
10-2B-6: APPROVAL OR DISAPPROVAL:
A. Action By Plan Commission:
1. Within forty (40) days from the date of the application or the filing by the applicant of the last item of supporting data required by this article,
whichever date is later, the plan commission shall transmit to the mayor and village council its recommendation to approve or disapprove the plat.
2. Such transmittal shall include two (2) copies of the final plat and of all documents, certificates and plans submitted in connection therewith and, in the
event any variances from the requirements of this article are recommended or in the event the recommendation is to disapprove the plat, the letter of
transmittal shall specifically call attention to such items and set forth the reasons therefor. A copy of the letter of transmittal shall also be forwarded to
the applicant.
3. The forty (40) day time limit for plan commission action may be modified if a time extension, as provided in subsection B of this section, is agreed to;
in which event the mayor and village council shall notify the plan commission of a new date within which its recommendation shall be transmitted.
B. Action By Mayor And Village Council: Following receipt of the plan commission's recommendations and within sixty (60) days from the date of
application for approval of a final plat or the filing by the applicant of the last item of supporting data required by this article, whichever date is later, the
mayor and village council shall act by resolution to approve or disapprove the plat. The sixty (60) day time period may be extended by mutual
agreement of the mayor and village council and the applicant.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 381/416
1. If approved, the village clerk shall attach a certified copy of the resolution of approval to the plat and the mayor shall sign and the village clerk attest
the following certificate on the face of the plat:
The within final plat approved by the Mayor and Village Council of the Village of Forest Park, Illinois, this day of 20 A.D.
VILLAGE OF FOREST PARK By
Mayor
ATTEST:
Village Clerk
2. If disapproved; the resolution shall state the reasons for disapproval, specifying with particularity the aspect, in which the proposed plat fails to
conform to the official map or maps or to satisfy the requirements of this article.
3. One copy of the resolution shall be filed in the office of the village clerk and a copy, accompanied by the tracing of the plat and the ones of any
accompanying plans and data, shall be transmitted to the applicant.
C. Effect Of Approval: Approval of the final plat shall not be deemed to constitute or effect an acceptance by any public body if the dedication of any street
or other proposed public way or area shown on the plat. (Ord. O-11-98, 3-9-1998)
10-2B-7: SPECIAL FUND ESTABLISHED:
In the event of approval of a final plat and the tendering of cash or a certified check as required under subsection 10-2B-2B2 of this article, such funds
shall be deposited in escrow or other special account on which the owner and subdivider as their interest may appear, may draw freely; subject however,
to the maintenance of a minimum balance at all times sufficient to complete construction of the still uncompleted portions of the required improvements.
The minimum balance required shall be specified by the village council, and shall be reduced from time to time as may be shown by monthly reports of the
village engineer on the progress of construction and completion. The village administrator will issue appropriate orders to the bank or other depository
agent to insure maintenance of the specified minimum balance. (Ord. O-11-98, 3-9-1998)
10-2B-8: RECORDATION:
A. Upon the approval of the final plat by the mayor and village council, the owner and subdivider shall record same and the protective covenants with the
appropriate county recorder within three (3) months of the date of such approval. If not recorded within such time, the approval shall become null and
void; provided, however; if such subdivision is situated within five hundred feet (500') of a watercourse serving a tributary area of six hundred forty
(640) acres or more, two (2) copies of the plat shall be submitted to the state department of public works and buildings, division of waterways, for
review, and such plat shall not be recorded until the flood hazard report of said division of waterways has been filed with the county recorder as
provided by statute.
B. Within ten (10) days after the final plat is recorded, the original tracing or a reproduced tracing on cloth, certified as a true copy thereof by the recorder
of deeds of the appropriate county shall be furnished by the owner and subdivider for filing in the office of the village clerk. (Ord. O-11-98, 3-9-1998)
Chapter 3
DESIGN STANDARDS
10-3-1: GENERAL DESIGN PRINCIPLES:
A. All street and lot layouts shall conform to the existing layout of the village or of adjacent areas under its jurisdiction and shall constitute reasonable
extensions of these, and shall not violate any part of the official comprehensive plan of the village.
B. It is the duty of the subdivider to furnish evidence that any proposed subdivision is in the best interest of the public.
C. The plan commission will assure the preservation of spaces and areas appropriated and required for public use.
D. The plan commission will judge as to whether sufficient regard for natural features and historic sites is evidenced by the subdivider, and whether
adequate provision for planting strips is made.
E. Where railroads are involved, provision of grade separations, buffer strips and other protective treatment shall be required to the extent and type as may
be practical. (Ord. O-11-98, 3-9-1998)
10-3-2: STREETS:
A. All rights of way shall conform to the following minimum width dimensions:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 382/416
Primary streets 100 feet
Secondary streets 100 feet
Collector streets 80 feet
Industrial streets 80 feet
Minor industrial streets 80 feet
Minor streets 66 feet
Cul-de-sac streets 66 feet
Cross walkways 15 feet
Utility easements 10 feet
B. Clear visibility, measured along the centerline of all streets, shall be provided for at least three hundred fifty feet (350') for primary streets, three hundred
feet (300') for secondary and collector streets, and one hundred fifty feet (150') for all other streets.
C. It must be evidenced that all street intersections and confluences encourage safe traffic flow.
D. Alleys shall not be permitted.
E. Unless otherwise shown on the official plan map, the arrangement of streets in a subdivision shall either:
1. Provide for the continuation of appropriate projection of existing primary and secondary streets in the surrounding areas; or
2. Conform to a plan for the neighborhood approved or adopted by the plan commission to meet a particular situation where topographic or other
conditions make such continuation or projection impractical.
F. Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed primary street, all lots shall front upon a minor, secondary or collector street. The plan
commission may require screen planting or other such treatment as may be necessary to screen the primary street activities from the subdivision to
promote the realization of the official plan or to provide for the health, safety, comfort and convenience of the residents of the village and contiguous
territory by protection of residential properties and the separation of through and local traffic.
G. No street names shall be used which will duplicate or be confused with the names of existing streets.
H. The distance between intersections of any primary street by collector or secondary streets within a proposed subdivision or any such intersection
abutting on a proposed subdivision shall not be less than one thousand two hundred fifty feet (1,250'). (Ord. O-11-98, 3-9-1998)
10-3-3: CUL-DE-SACS:
A. The maximum length of any cul-de-sac established in the village shall be four hundred feet (400') measured along the centerline at origin through center
of circle to end of right of way.
B. Each shall have a terminus of nearly circular shape with a minimum diameter of one hundred eight feet (108'). (Ord. O-11-98, 3-9-1998)
10-3-4: BLOCKS:
A. The maximum lengths of blocks established in the village shall be one thousand six hundred feet (1,600'). All blocks over eight hundred feet (800') will
ordinarily require cross walkways at the approximate centers. The use of additional cross walkways in any instance to provide reasonable access will
be specified by the plan commission.
B. No specific rule concerning the shape of blocks is made, but blocks must fit easily into the overall plan and their design must evidence consideration of
lot planning, traffic flow and public areas.
C. Blocks intended for commercial and industrial use must be designated as such. (Ord. O-11-98, 3-9-1998)
10-3-5: LOTS:
A. The minimum dimensions of all lots platted in any subdivision in the village shall be no less than the requirements provided in each zoning district of the
Forest Park zoning ordinance. In the event the Forest Park zoning ordinance does not provide for minimum lot dimensions, new lots shall be no less
than fifty feet (50') wide at the building line, one hundred twenty feet (120') deep, and six thousand two hundred fifty (6,250) square feet in area.
Excluded from these requirements are lots in a planned unit development or a homeowners' association, where the portion of the lot directly under the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 383/416
building may be platted as individual lots after approval by the village council after public hearing before the plan commission or the zoning board of
appeals, as directed by the village council. (Ord. O-65-05, 12-19-2005)
B. The depth of any lot with the exception of corner lots shall be at the maximum of three (3) times its width at the building line.
C. Corner lots shall be sufficiently larger than others to allow maintenance of building lines on both streets.
D. All lots shall abut on a public street.
E. Side lines of lots shall be approximately at right angles or radial to the street line.
F. Double frontage lots are forbidden except where lots back upon a thoroughfare and in such instances vehicular access between the lots and the
thoroughfares is prohibited. (Ord. O-11-98, 3-9-1998)
10-3-6: FLOODPLAIN PROTECTION:
A. Definitions: In addition to the following, definitions for floodplains are found in section 11-1-2 of this code:
FLOODWAY: That portion of the SFHA required to store and convey the base flood. If not prohibited, building or placing obstructions in a floodway will
increase flood damages to other properties. (Ord. O-11-98, 3-9-1998 amd. 2004 Code)
B. Purpose: It shall be the purpose of floodplains protection to:
1. Prevent unwise developments from increasing the flood or drainage hazards to others;
2. Protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from flood damage;
3. Protect human life and health from the hazards of flooding;
4. Lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control projects, repairs to flood damaged public facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and relief
operations;
5. Maintain property values and a stable tax base by minimizing the potential for creating flood blight areas;
6. Make federally subsidized flood insurance available for property in the village; and
7. Provide for the orderly growth and development (pursuant to the village's comprehensive plan) of an environment that is especially sensitive to
change from human activity.
C. Procedures For Accomplishing Purpose: All new development proposals in the special flood hazard areas shall be reviewed and approved by the
village engineer with final approval by the village council. The village engineer's review is to ensure the following:
1. New development will not change the flow of flood or other surface drainage waters so that other properties become more susceptible to damage;
2. New developments will not create special hazards or nuisances when flooded; and
3. New buildings and major improvements to existing buildings will not be subject to damage by the base flood. (Ord. O-11-98, 3-9-1998)
10-3-7: ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION:
A. Environmental Plan Required: A plan for the protection of the environment for all subdivisions must be submitted to the director of public health and
safety concurrently with the submission of a preliminary plat of subdivision. The environmental protection plan shall designate as may be applicable:
(Ord. O-11-98, 3-9-1998; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
1. Location of existing trees having a diameter of greater than six inches (6") measured at a point twelve inches (12") from grade.
2. An inventory by species of trees having a diameter of more than six inches (6") measured at a point twelve inches (12") from grade.
3. Location and sources of watercourses, ponds, lakes, marshes or swamps.
4. Inventory and location of soil types which may be satisfied with one soil test boring per acre of developable land.
5. A topographic map and any alterations in existing grade exceeding one foot (1').
6. Location of all roadways, driveways and parking areas and other paved areas.
7. Buildable area and approximate location of all buildings.
8. Location of all utilities.
9. Stormwater plans.
10. Plans for solid waste disposal.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 384/416
11. Water sources.
B. Consideration Of Plan: The plan commission shall review the proposed environmental protection plan for the proposed plat of subdivision. The zoning
board will act to approve or disapprove the proposed environmental protection plan at the time consideration is given for approval of the preliminary
plat of subdivision. If the village council determines that the proposed environmental protection plan shall be approved, it shall do so by the adoption of
an approving resolution of the preliminary plat of such subdivision. (Ord. O-11-98, 3-9-1998)
Chapter 4
REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
10-4-1: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
All provisions of this chapter shall be installed, constructed or otherwise made effective in and for each and every subdivision established within the
jurisdiction of the village. (Ord. O-11-98, 3-9-1998)
10-4-2: PLANS, PROFILES AND SPECIFICATIONS:
A. Publications Adopted: Plans, profiles and specifications for all improvements required by this chapter shall be in accordance with the standards and
specifications set forth herein. All public improvements shall meet the specifications and details as contained in the publications entitled:
1. "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer Main Construction In Illinois" fifth edition, dated May, 1996, and all revisions thereto as published by
the Illinois Society of Professional Engineers;
2. "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction" dated January 1,1997, and "Supplemental Specifications And Recurring Special
Provisions" dated January 1, 1998, as published by the Illinois department of transportation;
3. "Manual Of Procedures For The Administration Of The Sewer Permit Ordinance" of the metropolitan water reclamation district of greater Chicago,
adopted April 7, 1994, and as a supplement thereto;
4. "Specification And Details For The Design And Construction Of Public Improvements Within The Village of Forest Park, Illinois" as prepared by
Edwin Hancock Engineering Company. Effective January 1, 1998, and as amended February 9, 1998.
B. Other Additional Improvements And Specifications:
1. Pavement Width: The minimum width of the paved roadway, face to face of curbs, shall be as follows:
Minor street Not less than
26 feet
Collector streets Not less than
36 feet
Industrial streets Not less than
42 feet
Secondary streets Not less than
42 feet
Primary streets Not less than
42 feet
Minor streets bordering on properties designated or planned for uses which will substantially increase vehicular traffic (e.g.,schools,
recreation areas, public and semipublic buildings, commercial areas)
Not less than
30 feet
2. Street Name Signs: A four-way street name sign be erected at each street intersection in the subdivision at locations approved by the village
engineer. The type of sign and its installation shall conform to the following general specifications:
Sign material and mounting shall be of rust-resisting metal;
Sign shall be baked enamel finish, black embossed letters three and one-half inches (31/2") high on white background;
Sign mounting shall consist of either a two inch (2") diameter galvanized pipe ten feet (10') in length embedded in a concrete base extending three
feet (3') below ground level, or if light poles are conveniently located, an extension bracket approved by the village engineer may be used from the
pole; and
Other sign and installation of equivalent durability and legibility, as approved by the village engineer.
No improvements shall be made, installed or constructed unless and until all such plans, profiles and specifications shall have been submitted to and
approved by the village engineer, and such county, state and other public officials as may be concerned or have jurisdiction therein.
C. File Plans: Upon completion of the installation of improvements in a subdivision, one set of tracings on cloth suitable for use in reproduction and
showing all improvements as actually installed in the field (as-built plans) shall be filed with the village engineer.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 385/416
D. Utility Line Installation: All communication, power and other utility lines, except power lines carrying twelve thousand (12,000) volts or more, shall be
placed underground within easements or dedicated public ways. The installation of such facilities shall be made in compliance with applicable orders,
rules and regulations of the state commerce commission now or hereafter effective, and the owner or subdivider of any property to be served from such
underground installations shall beresponsible for compliance with the rules and regulations, now and hereafter effective and filed with such commission
pursuant to the Illinois public utilities act1, of any public utility whose services will be required with respect to the provisions of such underground
facilities. (Ord. O-11-98, 3-9-1998)
Title 11
FLOOD CONTROL
Chapter 1
DEVELOPMENT IN FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
11-1-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to the village by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2-1, 5/11-12-12, 5/11-30-8 and 5/11-31-2.
The purpose of this chapter is to maintain the village's eligibility in the national flood insurance program; to minimize potential losses due to periodic
flooding, including loss of life, loss of property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare; and
to preserve and enhance the quality of surface waters, conserve economic and natural values and provide for the wise utilization of water and related land
resources. This chapter is adopted in order to accomplish the following specific purposes: (Ord. O-22-93, 10-25-1993)
A. To meet the requirements of 615 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/4.9 et seq., an act in relation to the regulation of the rivers, lakes and streams of the state
of Illinois, approved June 10, 1911, as amended;
B. To assure that new development does not increase the flood or drainage hazards to others, or create unstable conditions susceptible to erosion;
C. To protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from flood damage;
D. To protect human life and health from the hazards of flooding;
E. To lessen the burden on the taxpayers for flood control projects, repairs to flood damaged public facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and relief
operations;
F. To make federally subsidized flood insurance available for property in the village by fulfilling the requirements of the national flood insurance program;
G. To comply with the rules and regulations of the national flood insurance program codified as 44 CFR 59-79, as amended;
H. To protect, conserve and promote the orderly development of land and water resources;
I. To preserve the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of watercourses and floodplains and to protect water quality and aquatic habitats;
J. To preserve the natural characteristics of stream corridors in order to moderate flood and stormwater impacts, improve water quality, reduce soil erosion,
protect aquatic and riparian habitat, provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance community and economic development.
(Ord. O-1-90, 1-22-1990)
11-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions are adopted:
ACT: The act in relation to the regulation of the rivers, lakes and streams of the state of Illinois1.
APPLICANT: Any person, firm, corporation or agency which submits an application.
APPROPRIATE USE: Only uses of the regulatory floodway that are permissible and will be considered for permit issuance. The only uses that will be
allowed are as specified in subsection 11-1-7B of this chapter.
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) probability of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. The base flood is also known as the 100-
year frequency flood event. Application of the base flood elevation at any location is as defined in section 11-1-5 of this chapter.
BUILDING: A structure that is principally aboveground and is enclosed by walls and a roof. The term includes a gas or liquid storage tank, a manufactured
home, a mobile home or a prefabricated building. This term also includes recreational vehicles and travel trailers to be installed on a site for more than one
hundred eighty (180) days.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 386/416
CHANNEL: Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or artificial depression, ponded area, flowage, slough, ditch, conduit, culvert, gully, ravine,
wash or natural or manmade drainageway, which has a definite bed and banks or shoreline, in or into which surface or ground water flows, either
perennially or intermittently.
CHANNEL MODIFICATION: Alteration of a channel by changing the physical dimensions or materials of its bed or banks. Channel modification includes
damming, riprapping or other armoring, widening, deepening, straightening, relocating, lining and significant removal of bottom or woody vegetation.
Channel modification does not include the clearing of dead or dying vegetation, debris or trash from the channel. Channelization is a severe form of
channel modification typically involving relocation of the existing channel (e.g. straightening).
COMPENSATORY STORAGE: An artificially excavated, hydraulically equivalent volume of storage within the SFHA used to balance the loss of natural
flood storage capacity when artificial fill or structures are placed within the floodplain. The uncompensated loss of natural floodplain storage can increase
off site floodwater elevations and flows.
CONDITIONAL APPROVAL OF A REGULATORY FLOODWAY MAP CHANGE: Preconstruction approval by DWR and the federal emergency
management agency of a proposed change to the floodway map. This preconstruction approval, pursuant to this part, gives assurances to the property
owner that once an appropriate use is constructed according to permitted plans, the floodway map can be changed, as previously agreed, upon review
and acceptance of as-built plans.
CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (CLOMR): A letter which indicates that the federal emergency management agency will revise base flood
elevations, flood insurance rate zones, flood boundaries or floodway boundaries as shown on an effective flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) or flood
insurance rate map (FIRM), once the as-built plans are submitted and approved.
CONTROL STRUCTURE: A structure designed to control the rate of flow that passes through the structure, given a specific upstream and downstream
water surface elevation.
DWR: Illinois department of natural resources, office of water resources.
DAM: All obstructions, wall embankments or barriers, together with their abutments and appurtenant works, if any, constructed for the purpose of storing or
diverting water or creating a pool. Underground water storage tanks are not included.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to real estate, including:
A. Construction, reconstruction, repair or placement of a building or any addition to a building;
B. Installing a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a manufactured home or installing a travel trailer on a site for more than one hundred
eighty (180) days;
C. Drilling, mining, installing utilities, construction of roads, bridges or similar projects;
D. Demolition of a structure or redevelopment of a site;
E. Clearing of land as an adjunct of construction;
F. Construction or erection of levees, walls, fences, dams or culverts; channel modification; filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving or other
nonagricultural alternations of the ground surface; storage of materials; deposit of solid or liquid waste;
G. Any other activity that might change the direction, height or velocity of flood or surface water, including extensive vegetation removal.
Development does not include maintenance of existing buildings and facilities such as reroofing or resurfacing of roads when there is no increase in
elevation, or gardening, plowing, and similar agricultural practices that do not involve filling, grading or construction of levees.
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY: The person employed or retained by the village and whose responsibilities include the administration of
this chapter.
ELEVATION CERTIFICATES: A form published by the federal emergency management agency that is used to certify the elevation to which a building has
been elevated.
EROSION: The general process whereby soils are moved by flowing water or wave action.
EXEMPT ORGANIZATIONS: Organizations which are exempt from this chapter pursuant to Illinois Compiled Statutes, including state, federal or local
units of government.
FEMA: Federal emergency management agency and its regulations at 44 CFR 59-79 effective as of October 1, 1986. This incorporation does not include
any later editions or amendments.
FLOOD: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from overflow of inland or tidal waves, or the
unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD FREQUENCY: A period of years, based on a statistical analysis, during which a flood of a stated magnitude may be expected to be equaled or
exceeded.
FLOOD FRINGE: That portion of the floodplain outside of the regulatory floodway.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): A map prepared by the federal emergency management agency that depicts the special flood hazard area
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 387/416
(SFHA) within a community. This map includes insurance rate zones and floodplains and may or may not depict floodways.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE): The elevation of the base flood or 100-year frequency flood plus one foot (1') of freeboard at any given
location in the SFHA.
FLOODPLAIN: That land typically adjacent to a body of water with ground surface elevations at or below the base flood or the 100-year frequency flood
elevation. Floodplains may also include detached ponding areas, etc. The floodplain is also known as the special flood hazard area (SFHA). The
floodplains are those lands within the jurisdiction of the village that are subject to inundation by the base flood or 100-year frequency flood. The SFHAs of
the village are generally identified as such on the following map number 17031c, and panels 0389, 0477, 0485 dated August 19, 2008, of the countywide
flood insurance rate map for Cook County, prepared by the federal emergency management agency. The SFHAs of those parts of unincorporated Cook
County that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village or that may be annexed into the village are generally identified as such on the following
map number 17031c dated August 19, 2008, of the countywide flood insurance study rate map for Cook County prepared by the federal emergency
management agency.
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood
damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, or structures and their contents.
FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE: A form published by the federal emergency management agency that is used to certify that a building has been
designed and constructed to be structurally dry floodproofed to the flood protection elevation.
FREEBOARD: An increment of elevation added to the base flood elevation to provide a factor of safety for uncertainties in calculations, unknown localized
conditions, wave actions and unpredictable effects such as those caused by ice or debris jams.
HYDROLOGIC AND HYDRAULIC CALCULATIONS: Engineering analyses which determine expected flood flows and flood elevations based on land
characteristics and rainfall events.
LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA): Official determination by FEMA that a specific structure is not in a 100-year flood zone; amends the effective
flood hazard boundary map or the flood insurance rate map.
LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR): Letter that revises base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevations, flood insurance rate zones, flood boundaries
or floodway boundaries as shown on an effective FHBM or FIRM.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designated for use with or
without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers and
other similar vehicles placed on site for more than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent
or sale.
MITIGATION: Includes those measures necessary to minimize the negative effects which floodplain development activities might have on the public
health, safety and welfare. Examples of mitigation include compensatory storage, soil erosion and sedimentation control and channel restoration.
NGVD: National geodetic vertical datum of 1929. Reference surface set by the national geodetic survey deduced from a continental adjustment of all
existing adjustments in 1929.
NATURAL: When used in reference to channels, means those channels formed by the existing surface topography of the earth prior to changes made by
humans. A natural stream tends to follow a meandering path; its floodplain is not constrained by levees; the area near the bank has not been cleared,
mowed or cultivated; the stream flows over soil and geologic materials typical of the area with no substantial alteration of the course or cross section of the
stream caused by filling or excavating. A modified channel may regain some natural characteristics over time as the channel meanders and vegetation is
reestablished. Similarly, a modified channel may be restored to more natural conditions by man through regrading and revegetation.
ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK (OHWM): The point on the bank or shore up to which the presence and action of surface water is so continuous so as to
leave a distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation or other easily
recognized characteristics.
PUBLIC FLOOD CONTROL PROJECT: A flood control project which will be operated and maintained by a public agency to reduce flood damages to
existing buildings and structures and which includes a hydrologic and hydraulic study of the existing and proposed conditions of the watershed. Nothing in
this definition shall preclude the design, engineering, construction or financing, in whole or in part, of a flood control project by persons or parties who are
not public agencies.
PUBLICLY NAVIGABLE WATERS: All streams and lakes capable of being navigated by watercraft.
REGISTERED LAND SURVEYOR: A land surveyor registered in the state of Illinois, under the Illinois land surveyors act2.
REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER: An engineer registered in the state of Illinois, under the Illinois professional engineering act3.
REGULATORY FLOODWAY: The regulatory floodways are designated for Des Plaines River on the following map number 17031c and panels 0389, 0477,
0485 dated August 19, 2008, of the countywide flood insurance rate map for Cook County prepared by FEMA. When two (2) floodway maps exist for a
waterway, the more restrictive floodway limit shall prevail. The regulatory floodways for those parts of unincorporated Cook County that are within
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village that may be annexed into the village are designated for Des Plaines River on the following map number 17031c
dated August 19, 2008, of the countywide flood insurance rate map for Cook County prepared by FEMA. To locate the regulatory floodway boundary on
any site, the regulatory floodway boundary should be scaled off the designated floodway map and located on a site plan, using reference marks common
to both maps. Where interpretation is needed to determine the exact location of the designated floodway boundary, DWR should be contacted for the
interpretation.
REPAIR, REMODELING OR MAINTENANCE: Development activities which do not result in any increases in the outside dimensions of a building or any
changes to the dimensions of a structure.
RETENTION/DETENTION FACILITY: A retention facility stores stormwater runoff without a gravity release. A detention facility provides for storage of
stormwater runoff and controlled release of this runoff during and after a flood or storm.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 388/416
RIVERINE SFHA: Any SFHA subject to flooding from a river, creek, intermittent stream, ditch or stream lake system or any other identified channel. This
term does not include areas subject to flooding from lakes, ponding areas, areas of sheet flow or other areas not subject to overbank flooding.
RUNOFF: The water derived from melting snow or rain falling on the land surface and then flowing over the surface of the ground or collecting in channels
or conduits.
SEDIMENTATION: The process that deposits soils, debris, and other materials either on other ground surfaces or into bodies of water or watercourses.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA): Any base flood area subject to flooding from a river, creek, intermittent stream, ditch or any other identified
channel or ponding and shown on a flood hazard boundary map or flood insurance rate map as zone A, AO, A1-30, AE, A99, AH, VO, V30, VE, V, M or E.
STRUCTURE: The results of a manmade change to the land constructed on or below the ground, including the construction, reconstruction or placement
of a building or any addition to a building; installing a manufactured home on a site; preparing a site for a manufactured home; or installing a travel trailer
on a site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the
market value of the structure either: a) before the improvement or repair is started; or b) if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before
the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor
or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not,
however, include either: a) any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications
which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or b) any alteration of a structure listed on the national register of historic places or a state
inventory of historic places.
TRANSITION SECTION: Reaches of the stream or floodway where water flows from a narrow cross section to a wide cross section or vice versa.
VILLAGE: The village of Forest Park, Illinois. (Ord. O-1-90, 1-22-1990; amd. Ord. O-43-00, 10-23-2000; Ord. O-27-08, 6-23-2008; Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
11-1-3: USE OF CRITERIA:
A. The director of public health and safety shall be responsible for fulfilling all of the duties listed in section 11-1-4 of this chapter. To fulfill those duties, the
director of public health and safety shall use the criteria listed in section 11-1-5 of this chapter to determine whether the development site is located
within a floodplain. Once it has been determined that a site is located within a floodplain, the director of public health and safety shall determine
whether the development site is within a flood fringe, a regulatory floodway or within an SFHA or floodplain on which no floodway has been identified. If
the site is within a flood fringe, the director of public health and safety shall require that the minimum requirements of section 11-1-6 of this chapter be
met. If the site is within a floodway, the director of public health and safety shall require that the minimum requirements of section 11-1-7 of this chapter
be met. If the site is located within an SFHA or floodplain for which no detailed study has been completed and approved, the director of public health
and safety shall require that the minimum requirements of section 11-1-8 of this chapter be met.
B. In addition, the general requirements of section 11-1-9 of this chapter shall be met for all developments meeting the requirements of section 11-1-6, 11-
1-7 or 11-1-8 of this chapter. The director of public health and safety shall assure that all subdivision proposals shall meet the requirements of section
11-1-10 of this chapter.
C. If a variance is to be granted for a proposal, the director of public health and safety shall review the requirements of section 11-1-11 of this chapter to
make sure they are met. In addition, the director of public health and safety shall complete all notification requirements.
D. In order to assure the property owners obtain permits as required in this chapter, the director of public health and safety may take any and all actions as
outlined in section 11-1-13 of this chapter. (Ord. O-1-90, 1-22-1990; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
11-1-4: ENFORCEMENT:
The director of public health and safety shall be responsible for the general administration and enforcement of this chapter which shall include the
following: (Ord. O-1-90, 1-22-1990; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
A. Determining Floodplain Designation: Check all new development sites to determine whether they are in a special flood hazard area (SFHA). If they are
in an SFHA, determine whether they are in a floodway, flood fringe or a floodplain on which a detailed study has not been conducted which drains more
than one square mile.
B. Professional Engineer Review: If the development site is within a floodway or in a floodplain on which a detailed study has not been conducted which
drains more than one square mile, then the permit shall be referred to a registered professional engineer under the employ or contract of the village for
review to ensure that the development meets the requirements of section 11-1-7 of this chapter. In the case of an appropriate use, the professional
engineer shall state in writing that the development meets the requirements of section 11-1-7 of this chapter.
C. Dam Safety Requirements: Ensure that a DWR dam safety permit has been issued or a letter indicating no dam safety permit is required, if the
proposed development activity includes construction of a "dam" as defined in section 11-1-2 of this chapter. Regulated dams may include weirs,
restrictive culverts or impoundment structures.
D. Other Permit Requirements: Ensure that any and all required federal, state and local permits are received prior to the issuance of a floodplain
development permit.
E. Plan Review And Permit Issuance: Ensure that all development activities within the SFHAs of the jurisdiction of the village meet the requirements of this
chapter and issue a floodplain development permit in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and other regulations of the village when the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 389/416
development meets the conditions of this chapter.
F. Inspection Review: Inspect all development projects before, during and after construction to assure proper elevation of the structure and to ensure they
comply with the provisions of this chapter.
G. Elevation And Floodproofing Certificates: Maintain in the permit files an elevation certificate certifying the elevation of the lowest floor (including
basement) of a residential or nonresidential building or the elevation to which a nonresidential building has been floodproofed, using a floodproofing
certificate for all buildings subject to section 11-1-9 of this chapter for public inspection, and provide copies of same.
H. Records For Public Inspection: Maintain for public inspection base flood data, SFHA and regulatory floodway maps, copies of federal or state permit
documents, variance documentation, conditional letter of map revision, letter of map revision, letter of map amendment and as built elevations and
floodproofing elevations or elevation and floodproofing certificates for all buildings constructed to this chapter.
I. State Permits: Ensure that construction authorization has been granted by the Illinois division of water resources, for all development projects subject to
sections 11-1-7 and 11-1-8 of this chapter, unless enforcement responsibility has been delegated to the village. Upon acceptance of this chapter by
DWR and FEMA, responsibility is hereby delegated to the village as per 92 Illinois administrative code 708 for construction in the regulatory floodway
and floodplain when floodways have not been defined in sections 11-1-7 and 11-1-8 of this chapter. However, the following review approvals are not
delegated to the village and shall require review or permits for DWR:
1. Organizations which are exempt from this chapter pursuant to the Illinois Compiled Statutes;
2. Department of transportation projects, dams or impoundment structures as defined in section 11-1-2 of this chapter and all other state, federal or
local unit of government projects, including projects of the village and Cook County, except for those projects meeting the requirements of subsection
11-1-7F of this chapter;
3. An engineer's determination that an existing bridge or culvert crossing is not a source of flood damage and the analysis indicating the proposed flood
profile, pursuant to subsection 11-1-7B2e of this chapter;
4. An engineer's analysis of the flood profile due to subsection 11-1-7B2d of this chapter;
5. Alternative transition sections and hydraulically equivalent compensatory storage as indicated in subsections 11-1-7B2a, B2b and B2h of this
chapter;
6. Permit issuance of structures within or over publicly navigable rivers, lakes and streams;
7. Any changes in the base flood elevation or floodway locations; and
8. Base flood elevation determinations where none now exist.
J. Cooperation With Other Agencies: Cooperate with state and federal floodplain management agencies to improve base flood or 100-year frequency flood
and floodway data and to improve the administration of this chapter. Submit data to DWR and the federal emergency management agency for
proposed revisions of a regulatory map. Submit reports as required for the national flood insurance program. Notify the federal emergency
management agency of any proposed amendments to this chapter.
K. Promulgate Regulations: Promulgate rules and regulations as necessary to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter, subject however to the
review and approval of DWR and FEMA for any ordinance changes. (Ord. O-1-90, 1-22-1990)
11-1-5: BASE FLOOD ELEVATIONS:
This chapter's protection standard is based on the flood insurance study for the village. If a base flood elevation or 100-year frequency flood elevation is
not available for a particular site, then the protection standard shall be according to the best existing data available in the Illinois state water survey's
floodplain information repository. When a party disagrees with the best available data, he may finance the detailed engineering study needed to replace
existing data with better data and submit it to DWR and FEMA.
A. The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for the SFHAs of Des Plaines River shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the
countywide flood insurance study for Cook County prepared by FEMA and dated August 19, 2008, and such amendments or revisions to such study
and maps as may be prepared from time to time.
B. The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for each SFHA delineated as an AH zone or AO zone shall be that elevation or depth delineated
on the flood insurance rate map of the village effective August 19, 2008.
C. The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for each of the remaining SFHAs delineated as an A zone on the countywide flood insurance rate
map for Cook County prepared by FEMA effective August 19, 2008, shall be according to the best existing data available in the Illinois state water
survey floodplain information repository. (Ord. O-27-08, 6-23-2008)
11-1-6: OCCUPATION AND USE OF FLOOD FRINGE AREAS:
Development in and/or filling of the flood fringe will be permitted if protection is provided against the base flood or 100-year frequency flood by proper
elevation and compensatory storage and other provisions of this chapter are met. No use will be permitted which adversely affects the capacity of drainage
facilities or systems. Developments located within the flood fringe shall meet the requirements of this section, along with the requirements of section 11-1-9
of this chapter. (Ord. O-1-90, 1-22-1990)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 390/416
A. Development Permit: No person or governmental body not exempted by state law shall commence any development in the SFHA without first obtaining
a development permit from the director of public health and safety.
1. Application for a development permit shall be made on a form provided by the director of public health and safety. The application shall be
accompanied by drawings of the site, drawn to scale, showing property line dimensions and legal description for the property and sealed by a
licensed engineer, architect or land surveyor, existing grade elevations in MSL 1929 adjustment datum or NGVD and all changes in grade resulting
from excavation or filling, and the location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings. For all proposed buildings, the elevation of the
lowest floor (including basement) and lowest adjacent grade shall be shown on the submitted plans and the development will be subject to the
requirements of section 11-1-9 of this chapter.
2. Upon receipt of a development permit application, the director of public health and safety shall compare the elevation of the site to the base flood or
100-year frequency flood elevation. Any development located on land that can be shown to have been higher than the base flood elevation as of the
site's first flood insurance rate map identification, is not in the SFHA and, therefore, not subject to the requirements of this chapter. The director of
public health and safety shall maintain documentation of the existing ground elevation at the development site and certification that this ground
elevation existed prior to the date of the site's first flood insurance rate map identification. (Ord. O-1-90, 1-22-1990; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
3. A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan for disturbed areas shall be submitted. This plan shall include a description of the sequence of grading
activities and the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a
description of final stabilization and revegetation measures, and the identification of a responsible party to ensure postconstruction maintenance.
(Ord. O-1-90, 1-22-1990)
4. The director of public health and safety shall be responsible for obtaining from the applicant copies of all other local, state and federal permits,
approvals or permit not required letters that may be required for this type of activity. The director of public health and safety shall not issue a permit
unless all other local, state and federal permits have been obtained. (Ord. O-1-90, 1-22-1990; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
B. Preventing Increased Damages: No development in the flood fringe shall create a threat to public health and safety.
1. If fill is being used to elevate the site above the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation, the applicant shall submit sufficient data and obtain
a letter of map revision (LOMR) from FEMA for the purpose of removing the site from the floodplain.
2. Whenever any portion of a floodplain is authorized for use, the volume of space which will be occupied by the authorized fill or structure below the
base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation shall be compensated for and balanced by a hydraulically equivalent volume of excavation taken
from below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation. The excavation volume shall be equal to the volume of storage lost due to the fill or
structure. In the case of streams and watercourses, such excavation shall be made opposite or adjacent to the areas so filled or occupied. All
floodplain storage lost below the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced below the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All floodplain storage
lost above the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced above the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All such excavations shall be
constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse. (Ord. O-1-90, 1-22-1990)
11-1-7: OCCUPATION AND USE OF IDENTIFIED FLOODWAYS:
This section applies to proposed development, redevelopment, site modification or building modification within a regulatory floodway. The regulatory
floodway for Des Plaines River shall be as delineated on the regulatory floodway maps designated by DWR and referenced in section 11-1-2 of this
chapter. Only those uses and structures will be permitted which meet the criteria in this section. All floodway modifications shall be the minimum necessary
to accomplish the purpose of the project. The development shall also meet the requirements of section 11-1-9 of this chapter. (Ord. O-1-90, 1-22-1990)
A. Development Permit: No person or governmental body not exempted by state law shall commence any development in a floodway without first
obtaining a development permit from the director of public health and safety.
1. Application for a development permit shall be made on a form provided by the director of public health and safety. The application shall include the
following information: (Ord. O-1-90, 1-22-1990; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
a. Name and address of applicant;
b. Site location (including legal description) of the property, drawn to scale, on the regulatory floodway map, indicating whether it is proposed to be in
an incorporated or unincorporated area;
c. Name of stream or body of water affected;
d. Description of proposed activity;
e. Statement of purpose of proposed activity;
f. Anticipated dates of initiation and completion of activity;
g. Name and mailing address of the owner of the subject property if different from the applicant;
h. Signature of applicant or the applicant's agent;
i. If the applicant is a corporation, the president or other authorized officer shall sign the application form;
j. If the applicant is a partnership, each partner shall sign the application form;
k. If the applicant is a land trust, the trust officer shall sign the name of the trustee by him as trust officer. A disclosure affidavit shall be filed with the
application, identifying each beneficiary of the trust by name and address and defining the respective interests therein.
l. Plans of the proposed activity shall be provided which include as a minimum:
(1) A vicinity map showing the site of the activity, name of the waterway, boundary lines, names of roads in the vicinity of the site, graphic or
numerical scale and north arrow;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 391/416
(2) A plan view of the project and engineering study research showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the
structure or work, elevations in mean sea level (1929 adjustment) datum or NGVD, adjacent property lines and ownership, drainage and flood
control easements, location of any channels and any existing or future access roads, distance between proposed activity and navigation channel
(when the proposed construction is near a commercially navigable body of water), regulatory floodway limit, floodplain limit, specifications and
dimensions of any proposed channel modifications, location and orientation of cross sections, north arrow and a graphic or numerical scale;
(3) Cross section views of the project and engineering study research showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of
the work as shown in plan view, existing and proposed elevations, normal water elevation, 10-year frequency flood elevation, 100-year
frequency flood elevation, and graphic or numerical scales (horizontal and vertical);
(4) A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan for disturbed areas. This plan shall include a description of the sequence of grading activities and
the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a description of
final stabilization and revegetation measures, and the identification of a responsible party to ensure postconstruction maintenance;
(5) A copy of the regulatory floodway map, marked to reflect any proposed change in the regulatory floodway location.
m. Any and all other local, state and federal permits or approval letters that may be required for this type of development;
n. Engineering calculations and supporting data shall be submitted showing the proposed work will meet the permit criteria of subsection B of this
section;
o. If the regulatory floodway delineation, base flood, or 100-year frequency flood elevation will change due to the proposed project, the application
will not be considered complete until DWR has indicated conditional approval of the regulatory floodway map change. No structures may be built
until a letter of map revision has been approved by FEMA;
p. The application for a structure shall be accompanied by drawings of the site, drawn to scale, showing property line dimensions and existing ground
elevations; all changes in grade resulting from any proposed excavation or filling; floodplain and floodway limits, sealed by a registered
professional engineer, licensed architect or registered land surveyor; the location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings; and
the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all proposed buildings subject to the requirements of section 11-1-9 of this chapter;
q. If the proposed project involves a channel modification, the applicant shall submit the following information:
(1) A discussion of the purpose of and need for the proposed work;
(2) A discussion of the feasibility of using alternative locations or methods to accomplish the purpose of the proposed work;
(3) An analysis of the extent and permanence of the impacts the project would have on the physical and biological conditions of the body of water
affected;
(4) An analysis of the extent and permanence of the impacts each feasible alternative identified in subsection B2d(1) of this section would have on
the physical and biological conditions of the body of water affected; and
(5) An analysis of the impacts of the proposed project, considering cumulative effects on the physical and biological conditions of the body of water
affected. (Ord. O-1-90, 1-22-1990)
2. The director of public health and safety shall be responsible for obtaining from the applicant copies of all other local, state and federal permits and
approvals that may be required for this type of activity.
The director of public health and safety shall not issue the development permit unless all required federal and state permits have been obtained. A
registered professional engineer, under the employ or contract of the village, shall review and approve applications reviewed under this section. (Ord.
O-1-90, 1-22-1990; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
B. Preventing Increased Damages; List Of Appropriate Uses:
1. Uses Permitted: The only developments allowed in a floodway are appropriate uses, which will not cause a rise in the base flood elevation, not
create a damaging or potentially damaging increase in flood heights or velocity or be a threat to public health and safety and welfare or impair the
natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of the floodway or channel, or permanently impair the existing water quality or aquatic habitat.
Construction impacts shall be minimized by appropriate mitigation methods as called for in this chapter. Only those appropriate uses listed in 92
Illinois administrative code 708 will be allowed. Appropriate uses do not include the construction or placement of any new structures, fill, building
additions, buildings on stilts, excavation or channel modifications done to accommodate otherwise nonappropriate uses in the floodway; fencing
(including landscaping or planting designed to act as a fence); and storage of materials except as specifically defined above as an appropriate use.
The approved appropriate uses are as follows:
a. Flood control structures, dikes, dams, and other public works or private improvements relating to the control of drainage, flooding, erosion or water
quality or habitat for fish and wildlife;
b. Structures or facilities relating to the use of, or requiring access to, the water or shoreline, such as pumping and treatment facilities, and facilities
and improvements related to recreational boating, commercial shopping and other functionally water dependent uses;
c. Storm and sanitary sewer outfalls;
d. Underground and overhead utilities;
e. Recreational facilities such as playing fields and trail systems including any related fencing (at least 50 percent open when viewed from any 1
direction) built parallel to the direction of flood flows, and including open air pavilions;
f. Detached garages, storage sheds or other nonhabitable accessory structures without toilet facilities to existing buildings that will not block flood
flows, nor reduce floodway storage;
g. Bridges, culverts, roadways, sidewalks, railways, runways and taxiways, and any modification thereto;
h. Parking lots and any modifications thereto (where depth of flooding at the 100-year frequency flood event will not exceed 1.0 foot) and aircraft
parking aprons built at or below ground elevation;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 392/416
i. Regulatory floodway regrading, without fill, to create a positive nonerosive slope toward a watercourse;
j. Floodproofing activities to protect previously existing lawful structures including the construction of watertight window wells, elevating structures or
constructing floodwalls around residential, commercial or industrial principal structures where the outside toe of the floodwall shall be no more than
ten feet (10') away from the exterior wall of the existing structure, and, which are not considered substantial improvements to the structures;
k. In the case of damaged or replacement buildings, reconstruction or repairs made to a building that are valued at less than fifty percent (50%) of
the market value of the building before it was damaged or replaced and which do not increase the outside dimensions of the building;
l. Additions to existing buildings above the BFE that do not increase the buildings' footprints and are valued at less than fifty percent (50%) of the
market values of the buildings.
2. Engineering And Mitigation Criteria: Within the regulatory floodway as identified on the regulatory floodway maps designated by DWR, the
construction of an appropriate use will be considered permissible provided that the proposed project meets the following engineering and mitigation
criteria and is so stated in writing with supporting plans, calculations, and data by a registered professional engineer and provided that any structure
meets the protection requirements of section 11-1-9 of this chapter:
a. Preservation Of Flood Conveyance So As Not To Increase Flood Stages Upstream: For appropriate uses other than bridge or culvert crossings,
on-stream structures, or dams, all effective regulatory floodway conveyance lost due to the project will be replaced for all flood events up to and
including the 100-year frequency flood. In calculating effective regulatory floodway convenience, the following factors shall be taken into
consideration: (Ord. O-1-90, 1-22-1990)
(1) Regulatory floodway conveyance,
'K' = 1.486 AR 2/3
n
where "n" is Manning's roughness factor, "A" is the effective area of the cross section, and "R" is the ratio of the area to the wetted perimeter.
(See Open Channel Hydraulics, Ven Te Chow, 1959, McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York.) (Ord. O-22-93, 10-25-1993)
(2) The same Manning's "n" value shall be used for both existing and proposed conditions unless a recorded maintenance agreement with a
federal, state or local unit of government can assure the proposed conditions will be maintained or the land cover is changing from a vegetative
to a nonvegetative land cover.
(3) Transition sections shall be provided and used in calculations of effective regulatory floodway conveyance. The following expansion and
contraction ratios shall be used unless an applicant's engineer can prove to DWR through engineering calculations or model tests that more
abrupt transitions may be used with the same efficiency:
(A) When water is flowing from a narrow section to a wider section, the water should be assumed to expand no faster than at a rate of one foot
(1') horizontal for every four feet (4') of the flooded stream's length.
(B) When water is flowing from a wide section to a narrow section, the water should be assumed to contract no faster than at a rate of one foot
(1') horizontal for every one foot (1') of the flooded stream's length.
(C) When expanding or contracting flows in a vertical direction, a minimum of one foot (1') vertical transition for every ten feet (10') of stream
length shall be used.
(D) Transition sections shall be provided between cross sections with rapid expansions and contractions and when meeting the regulatory
floodway delineation on adjacent properties.
(E) All cross sections used in the calculations shall be located perpendicular to flood flows.
b. Preservation Of Floodway Storage So As Not To Increase Downstream Flooding: Compensatory storage shall be provided for any regulatory
floodway storage lost due to the proposed work from the volume of fill or structures placed and the impact of any related flood control projects.
Compensatory storage for fill or structures shall be equal to the volume of floodplain storage lost. Artificially created storage lost due to a reduction
in head loss behind a bridge shall not be required to be replaced. The compensatory regulatory floodway storage shall be placed between the
proposed normal water elevation and the proposed 100-year flood elevation. All regulatory floodway storage lost below the existing 10-year flood
elevation shall be replaced below the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All regulatory floodway storage lost above the existing 10-year flood
elevation shall be replaced above the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All such excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and openly to the
watercourse. If the compensatory storage will not be placed at the location of the proposed construction, the applicant's engineer shall
demonstrate to DWR through a determination of flood discharges and water surface elevations that the compensatory storage is hydraulically
equivalent. Finally, there shall be no reduction in floodway surface area as a result of a floodway modification, unless such modification is
necessary to reduce flooding at existing structure.
c. Preservation Of Floodway Velocities So As Not To Increase Stream Erosion Or Flood Heights: For all appropriate uses, except bridges or culverts
or on-stream structures, the proposed work will not result in an increase in the average channel or regulatory floodway velocities or stage, for all
flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency event. However in the case of bridges or culverts or on-stream structures built for the
purpose of backing up water in the stream during normal or flood flows, velocities may be increased at the structure site if scour, erosion and
sedimentation will be avoided by the use of riprap or other design measures.
d. Construction Of New Bridges Or Culvert Crossings And Roadway Approaches: The proposed structure shall not result in an increase of upstream
flood stages greater than 0.1 foot when compared to the existing conditions for all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency event;
or the upstream flood stage increases will be contained within the channel banks (or within existing vertical extensions of the channel banks) such
as within the design protection grade of existing levees or floodwalls or within recorded flood easements. If the proposed construction will increase
upstream flood stages greater than 0.1 foot, the developer must contact the dam safety section of DWR for a dam safety permit or waiver.
(1) The engineering analysis of upstream flood stages must be calculated using the flood study flows, and corresponding flood elevations for
tailwater conditions for the flood study specified in section 11-1-5 of this chapter. Culverts must be analyzed using the U.S. DOT, FHWA
hydraulic chart for the selection of highway culverts. Bridges must be analyzed using the U.S. DOT/federal highway administration hydraulics of
bridge waterways calculation procedures.
(2) Lost floodway storage must be compensated for per subsection B2b of this section.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 393/416
(3) Velocity increases must be mitigated per subsection B2c of this section.
(4) If the crossing is proposed over a public water that is used for recreational or commercial navigation, an Illinois department of transportation
(IDOT) permit must be received.
(5) The hydraulic analysis for the backwater caused by the bridge showing the existing condition and proposed regulatory profile must be
submitted to DWR for concurrence that a CLOMR is not required by this subsection.
(6) All excavations for the construction of the crossing shall be designed per subsection B2h of this section.
e. Reconstruction Or Modification Of Existing Bridges, Culverts And Approach Roads:
(1) The bridge or culvert and roadway approach reconstruction or modification shall be constructed with no more than 0.1 foot increase in
backwater over the existing flood profile for all flood frequencies up to and including the 100-year event, if the existing structure is not a source
of flood damage.
(2) If the existing bridge or culvert and roadway approach is a source of flood damage to buildings or structures in the upstream floodplain, the
applicant's engineer shall evaluate the feasibility of redesigning the structure to reduce the existing backwater, taking into consideration the
effects on flood stages on upstream and downstream properties.
(3) The determination as to whether or not the existing crossing is a source of flood damage and should be redesigned must be prepared in
accordance with the Illinois department of transportation rules 92 Illinois administrative code 708 (floodway construction in Northeastern Illinois)
and submitted to the DWR for review and concurrence before a permit is issued.
f. On-Stream Structures Built For Purpose Of Backing Up Water: Any increase in upstream flood stages greater than 0.0 foot, when compared to the
existing conditions, for all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency event shall be contained within the channel banks (or within
existing vertical extensions of the channel banks) such as within the design protection grade of existing levees or flood walls or within recorded
flood easements. A permit or letter indicating a permit is not required must be obtained from DWR, dam safety section, for a dam safety permit or
waiver for any structure built for the purpose of backing up water in the stream during normal or flood flow. All dams and impoundment structures
as defined in section 11-1-12 of this chapter shall meet the permitting requirements of 92 Illinois administrative code 702 (construction and
maintenance of dams). If the proposed activity involves a modification of the channel or floodway to accommodate an impoundment, it shall be
demonstrated that:
(1) The impoundment is determined to be in the public interest by providing flood control, public recreation or regional stormwater detention;
(2) The impoundment will not prevent the migration of indigenous fish species, which require access to upstream areas as part of their life cycle,
such as for spawning;
(3) The impoundment will not cause or contribute to degraded water quality or habitat conditions. Impoundment design should include gradual
bank slopes, appropriate bank stabilization measures and a presedimentation basin.
(4) A nonpoint source control plan has been implemented in the upstream watershed to control the effects of sediment runoff as well as minimize
the input of nutrients, oil and grease, metals and other pollutants. If there is more than one municipality in the upstream watershed, the
municipality in which the impoundment is constructed should coordinate with upstream municipalities to ensure comprehensive watershed
control;
(5) The project otherwise complies with the requirements of this section.
g. Floodproofing Of Existing Habitable, Residential And Commercial Structures: If construction is required beyond the outside dimensions of the
existing building, the outside perimeter of the floodproofing construction shall be placed no further than ten feet (10') from the outside of the
building. Compensation of lost storage and conveyance will not be required for floodproofing activities.
h. Excavation In The Floodway: When excavation is proposed in the design of bridges and culvert openings, including the modifications to and
replacement of existing bridge and culvert structures, or to compensate for lost conveyance for other appropriate uses, transition sections shall be
provided for the excavation. The following expansion and contraction ratios shall be used unless an applicant's engineer can prove to DWR
through engineering calculations or model tests that more abrupt transitions may be used with the same efficiency:
(1) When water is flowing from a narrow section to a wider section, the water should be assumed to expand no faster than at a rate of one foot (1')
horizontal for every four feet (4') of the flooded stream's length;
(2) When water is flowing from a wide section to a narrow section, the water should be assumed to contract no faster than at a rate of one foot (1')
horizontal for every one foot (1') of the flooded steam's length; and
(3) When expanding or contracting flows in a vertical direction, a minimum of one foot (1') vertical transition for every ten feet (10') of stream length
shall be used.
(4) Erosion/scour protection shall be provided inland upstream and downstream of the transition sections.
i. Channel Modification: If the proposed activity involves a channel modification, it shall be demonstrated that:
(1) There are no practicable alternatives to the activity which would accomplish its purpose with less impact to the natural conditions of the body of
water affected. Possible alternatives include levees, bank stabilization, floodproofing of existing structures, removal of structures from the
floodplain, clearing the channel, high flow channel or the establishment of a stream side buffer strip or green belt. Channel modification is
acceptable if the purpose is to restore natural conditions and improve water quality and fish and wildlife habitat;
(2) Water quality, habitat, and other natural functions would be significantly improved by the modification and no significant habitat area may be
destroyed, or the impacts are offset by the replacement of an equivalent degree of natural resource values;
(3) The activity has been planned and designed and will be constructed in a way which will minimize its adverse impacts on the natural conditions
of the body of water affected, consistent with the following criteria:
(A) The physical characteristics of the modified channel shall match as closely as possible those of the existing channel in length, cross section,
slope and sinuosity. If the existing channel has been previously modified, restoration of more natural physical conditions should be
incorporated into channel modification design, where practical.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 394/416
(B) Hydraulically effective transitions shall be provided at both the upstream and downstream ends of the project, designed such that they will
prevent erosion.
(C) One sided construction of a channel shall be used when feasible. Removal of streamside (riparian) vegetation should be limited to one side
of the channel, where possible, to preserve the shading and stabilization effects of the vegetation.
(D) Clearing of vegetation shall be limited to that which is essential for construction of the channel.
(E) Channel banks shall be constructed with a side slope no steeper than three to one (3:1) horizontal to vertical, wherever practicable. Natural
vegetation and gradual side slopes are the preferred methods for bank stabilization. Where high velocities or sharp bends necessitate the use
of alternative stabilization measures, natural rock or riprap are preferred materials. Artificial materials such as concrete, gabions or
construction rubble should be avoided unless there are no practicable alternatives.
(F) All disturbed areas associated with the modification shall be seeded or otherwise stabilized as soon as possible upon completion of
construction. Erosion blanket or an equivalent material shall be required to stabilize disturbed channel banks prior to establishment of the
vegetative cover.
(G) If the existing channel contains considerable bottom diversity such as deep pools, riffles and other similar features, such features shall be
provided in the new channel. Spawning and nesting areas and flow characteristics compatible with fish habitat shall also be established,
where appropriate.
(H) A sediment basin shall be installed at the downstream end of the modification to reduce sedimentation and degradation of downstream water
quality.
(I) New or relocated channels should be built in the dry and all items of construction, including vegetation, should be completed prior to diversion
of water into the new channel.
(J) There shall be no increases in stage or velocity as the channel enters or leaves the project site for any frequency flood unless necessitated
by a public flood control project or unless such an increase is justified as part of a habitat improvement or erosion control project.
(K) Unless the modification is for a public flood control project, there shall be no reduction in the volume of floodwater storage outside the
floodway as a result of the modification; and
(4) The project otherwise complies with the requirements of this section.
j. Seeding And Stabilization Plan: For all activities located in a floodway, a seeding and stabilization plan shall be submitted by the applicant.
k. Soil Erosion And Sedimentation Measures: For all activities in the floodway, including grade, filling and excavation, in which there is potential for
erosion of exposed soil, soil erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be employed consistent with the following criteria:
(1) The construction area shall be minimized to preserve the maximum vegetation possible. Construction shall be scheduled to minimize the time
soil is exposed and unprotected. In no case shall the existing natural vegetation be destroyed, removed, or disturbed more than fifteen (15) days
prior to the initiation of improvements.
(2) Temporary and/or permanent soil stabilization shall be applied to denuded areas as soon as possible. As a minimum, soil stabilization shall be
provided within fifteen (15) days after final grade is reached on any portion of the site, and within fifteen (15) days to denuded areas which may
not be at final grade but will remain undisturbed for longer than sixty (60) days.
(3) Sedimentation control measures shall be installed before any significant grading or filling is initiated on the site to prevent the movement of
eroded sediments off site or into the channel. Potential sediment control devices include filter fences, straw bale fences, check dams, diversion
ditches and sediment basins.
(4) A vegetated buffer strip of at least twenty five feet (25') in width shall be preserved and/or reestablished, where possible, along existing
channels4. Construction vehicle use of channels shall be minimized. Temporary stream crossings shall be constructed, where necessary, to
minimize erosion. Necessary construction in or along channels shall be restabilized immediately.
(5) Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be designed and implemented consistent with "Procedures and Standards For Urban
Soil Erosion And Sedimentation Control In Illinois" (1988) also known as the "Green Book" and "Standards And Specifications And Soil Erosion
And Sediment Control" (IEPA, 1987).
l. Public Flood Control Projects: For public flood control projects, the permitting requirements of this section will be considered met if the applicant
can demonstrate to DWR through hydraulic and hydrologic calculations that the proposed project will not singularly or cumulatively result in
increased flood heights outside the project rights of way or easements for all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency event.
m. General Criteria For Analysis Of Flood Elevations:
(1) The flood profiles, flows and floodway data in the regulatory floodway study, referenced in section 11-1-5 of this chapter, must be used for
analysis of the base conditions. If the study data appears to be in error or conditions have changed, DWR shall be contacted for approval and
concurrence on the appropriate base conditions data to use.
(2) If the 100-year regulatory floodway elevation at the site of the proposed construction is affected by backwater from a downstream receiving
stream with a larger drainage area, the proposed construction shall be shown to meet the requirements of this section for the 100-year
frequency flood elevations of the regulatory floodway conditions and conditions with the receiving stream at normal water elevations.
(3) If the applicant learns from DWR, local governments or a private owner that a downstream restrictive bridge or culvert is scheduled to be
removed, reconstructed, modified or a regional flood control project is scheduled to be built, removed, constructed or modified within the next
five (5) years, the proposed construction shall be analyzed and shown to meet the requirements of this section for both the existing conditions
and the expected flood profile conditions when the bridge, culvert or flood control project is built.
n. Conditional Letter Of Map Revision: If the appropriate use would result in a change in the regulatory floodway location or the 100-year frequency
flood elevation, the applicant shall submit to DWR and to FEMA all the information, calculations and documents necessary to be issued a
conditional regulatory floodway map revision and receive from DWR a conditional approval of the regulatory floodway change before a permit is
issued. However, the final regulatory floodway map will not be changed by DWR until as-built plans or record drawings are submitted and accepted
by FEMA and DWR. In the case of nongovernmental projects, the municipality in incorporated areas and the county in unincorporated areas shall
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 395/416
concur with the proposed conditional regulatory floodway map revision before DWR approval can be given. No filling, grading, dredging or
excavating shall take place until a conditional approval is issued. No further development activities shall take place until a final letter of map
revision (LOMR) is issued by FEMA and DWR.
o. Professional Engineer's Supervision: All engineering analyses shall be performed by or under the supervision of a registered professional
engineer.
p. Construction Activities: For all activities in the floodway involving construction within twenty five feet (25') of the channel, the following criteria shall
be met:
(1) A natural vegetation buffer strip shall be preserved within at least twenty five feet (25') of the ordinary high water mark of the channel.
(2) Where it is impossible to protect this buffer strip during the construction of an appropriate use, a vegetated buffer strip shall be established
upon completion of construction.
(3) The use of native riparian vegetation is preferred in the buffer strip. Access through this buffer strip shall be provided, when necessary, for
stream maintenance purposes.
After receipt of conditional approval of the regulatory floodway change and issuance of a permit and a conditional letter of map revision,
construction as necessary to change the regulatory floodway designation may proceed but no buildings or structures or other construction that is
not an appropriate use may be placed in that area until the regulatory floodway map is changed and a final letter of map revision is received.
The regulatory floodway map will be revised upon acceptance and concurrence by DWR and FEMA of the as built plans.
C. State Review: For those projects listed below located in a regulatory floodway, the following criteria shall be submitted to DWR for their review and
concurrence prior to the issuance of a permit:
1. DWR will review an engineer's analysis of the flood profile due to a proposed bridge pursuant to subsection B2d of this section.
2. DWR will review an engineer's determination that an existing bridge or culvert crossing is not a source of flood damage and the analysis indicating
the proposed flood profile, pursuant to subsection B2e of this section.
3. The DWR will review alternative transition sections and hydraulically equivalent storage pursuant to subsections B2a, B2b and B2h of this section.
4. The DWR will review and approve prior to the start of construction any department projects, dams (as defined in section 11-1-2 of this chapter) and
all other state, federal or local units of government projects, including projects of the village or Cook County.
D. Other Permits: In addition to the other requirements of this chapter, a development permit for a site located in a floodway shall not be issued unless the
applicant first obtains a permit or written documentation that a permit is not required from DWR, issued pursuant to 615 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/4.9
et seq. No permit from DWR shall be required if the division has delegated this responsibility to the village. (Ord. O-1-90, 1-22-1990)
E. Dam Safety Permits: Any work involving the construction, modification or removal of a dam, as defined in section 11-1-2 of this chapter, pursuant to 92
Illinois administrative code 702 (rules for construction of dams) shall obtain an Illinois division of water resources dam safety permit prior to the start of
construction of a dam. If the director of public health and safety finds a dam that does not have a DWR permit, the director of public health and safety
shall immediately notify the dam safety section of the division of water resources. If the director of public health and safety finds a dam which is
believed to be in unsafe condition, the director of public health and safety shall immediately notify the owner of the dam, DWR, dam safety section, in
Springfield and the Illinois emergency services and disaster agency (ESDA). (Ord. O-1-90, 1-22-1990; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
F. Activities Not Requiring A Registered Professional Engineer's Review: The following activities may be permitted without a registered professional
engineer's review. Such activities shall still meet the other requirements of this chapter, including the mitigation requirements:
1. Underground and overhead utilities that:
a. Do not result in any increase in existing ground elevations; or
b. Do not require the placement of aboveground structures in the floodway; or
c. In the case of underground stream crossings, the top of the pipe or encasement is buried a minimum of three feet (3') below the existing
streambed; and
d. In the case of overhead utilities, supporting towers are not placed in the watercourse and are designed in such a fashion as not to catch debris.
2. Storm and sanitary sewer outfalls that:
a. Do not extend riverward or lakeward of the existing adjacent natural bank slope; and
b. Do not result in an increase in ground elevation; and
c. Are designed so as not to cause stream erosion at the outfall location.
3. Construction of sidewalks, athletic fields (excluding fences), properly anchored playground equipment and patios at grade.
4. Construction of shoreline and streambank protection that:
a. Does not exceed one thousand feet (1,000') in length.
b. Materials are not placed higher than the existing top of bank.
c. Materials are placed so as not to reduce the cross section area of the stream channel or bank of the lake.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 396/416
d. Vegetative stabilization and gradual side slopes are the preferred mitigation methods for existing erosion problems. Where high channel velocities,
sharp bends or wave action necessitate the use of alternative stabilization measures, natural rock or riprap are preferred materials. Artificial
materials such as concrete, construction rubble and gabions should be avoided unless there are no practicable alternatives.
5. Temporary stream crossings in which:
a. The approach roads will be one-half foot (0.5') or less above natural grade.
b. The crossing will allow stream flow to pass without backing up the water above the stream bank vegetation line or above any drainage tile or
outfall invert.
c. The top of the roadway fill in the channel will be at least two feet (2') below the top of the lowest bank. Any fill in the channel shall be nonerosive
material, such as riprap or gravel.
d. All disturbed stream banks will be seeded or otherwise stabilized as soon as possible upon installation and again upon removal of construction.
e. The access road and temporary crossings will be removed within one year after authorization. (Ord. O-1-90, 1-22-1990)
11-1-8: OCCUPATION AND USE OF SFHA AREAS WHERE FLOODWAYS NOT IDENTIFIED:
In SFHA or floodplains (including AO zones, AH zones or unnumbered A zones), where no floodways have been identified and no base flood or 100-year
frequency flood elevations have been established by FEMA, and draining more than one square mile, no development shall be permitted unless the
cumulative effect of the proposals, when combined with all other existing and anticipated uses and structures, shall not significantly impede or increase the
flow and the passage of the floodwaters nor significantly increase the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation. (Ord. O-1-90, 1-22-1990)
A. Development Permit:
1. No person or governmental body, not exempted by state law, shall commence any development in an SFHA or floodplain without first obtaining a
development permit from the director of public health and safety. Application for a development permit shall be made on form provided by the director
of public health and safety. The application shall be accompanied by drawings of the site, drawn to scale, showing property line dimensions, existing
grade elevations and all changes in grade resulting from excavation or filling; be sealed by a licensed engineer, architect or surveyor; show the
locations and dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings; and show the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all proposed
buildings subject to the requirements of section 11-1-9 of this chapter. (Ord. O-1-90, 1-22-1990; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
The application for a development permit shall also include the following information:
a. A detailed description of the proposed activity, its purpose and intended use;
b. Site location (including legal description) of the property, drawn to scale, on the regulatory floodway maps, indicating whether it is proposed to be
in an incorporated or unincorporated area;
c. Anticipated dates or initiation and completion of activity;
d. Plans of the proposed activity shall be provided which include at a minimum:
(1) A vicinity map showing the site of the activity, name of the waterway, boundary lines, names of roads in the vicinity of the site, graphic or
numerical scale and north arrow;
(2) A plan view of the project and engineering study research showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the
structure of work, elevations in mean sea level (1929 adjustment) datum or NGVD, adjacent property lines and ownership, drainage and flood
control easements, distance between proposed activity and navigation channel (when the proposed construction is near a commercially
navigable body of water), floodplain limit, location and orientation of cross sections, north arrow, and a graphical or numerical scale;
(3) Cross section views of the project and engineering study research showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of
the work as shown in plan view, existing and proposed elevations, normal water elevation, 10-year frequency flood elevation, 100-year
frequency flood elevation and graphical or numerical scales (horizontal and vertical); and
(4) A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan for disturbed areas. This plan shall include a description of the sequence of grading activities and
the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a description of
final stabilization and revegetation measures, and the identification of a responsible party to ensure postconstruction maintenance.
e. Engineering calculations and supporting data shall be submitted showing that the proposed work will meet the criteria of subsection B of this
section.
f. Any and all other local, state, and federal permits or approvals that may be required for this type of development. (Ord. O-1-90, 1-22-1990)
2. Based on the best available existing data according to the Illinois state water survey's floodplain information repository, the director of public health
and safety shall compare the elevation of the site to the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation. Should no elevation information exist for
the site, the developer's engineer shall calculate the elevation according to subsection 11-1-5C of this chapter. Any development located on land that
can be shown to have been higher than the base flood elevation, as of the site's first flood insurance rate map identification, is not in the SFHA and,
therefore, not subject to the requirements of this chapter. The director of public health and safety shall maintain documentation of the existing ground
elevation at the development site and certification that this ground elevation existed prior to the date of the site's first flood insurance rate map
identification.
3. The director of public health and safety shall be responsible for obtaining from the applicant copies of all other local, state and federal permits,
approvals or permit not required letters that may be required for this type of activity. The director of public health and safety shall not issue the
development permit unless all required local, state and federal permits have been obtained. (Ord. O-1-90, 1-22-1990; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
B. Preventing Increased Damages: No development in the SFHA, where a floodway has not been determined, shall create a damaging or potentially
damaging increase in flood heights or velocity or threat to public health, safety and welfare or impair the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 397/416
the floodway or channel, or impair existing water quality or aquatic habitat. Construction impacts shall be minimized by appropriate mitigation methods
as called for in this chapter.
1. Standards: Within all riverine SFHAs where the floodway has not been determined, the following standards shall apply:
a. The developer shall have a registered professional engineer state in writing and show, through supporting plans, calculations and data, that the
project meets the engineering requirements of subsections 11-1-7B2a through B2l of this chapter for the entire floodplain as calculated under the
provisions of subsection 11-1-5C of this chapter. As an alternative, the developer should have an engineering study performed to determine a
floodway and submit that engineering study to DWR for acceptance as a regulatory floodway. Upon acceptance of his floodway by the department,
the developer shall then demonstrate that the project meets the requirements of section 11-1-7 of this chapter for the regulatory floodway. The
floodway shall be defined according to the definition in section 11-1-2 of this chapter.
b. A development permit shall not be issued unless the applicant first obtains a permit from DWR or written documentation that a permit is not
required from DWR.
c. No permit from DWR shall be required if the division has delegated permit responsibility to the village per 92 Illinois administrative code, part 708
for regulatory floodways, per DWR statewide permit entitled "Construction In Floodplains With No Designated Floodways In Northeastern Illinois".
(Ord. O-1-90, 1-22-1990)
d. Any work involving the construction, modification or removal of a dam or an on stream structure to impound water as defined in section 11-1-2 of
this chapter shall obtain an Illinois division of water resources dam safety permit or letter indicating a permit is not required prior to the start of
construction of a dam. If the director of public health and safety finds a dam that does not have a DWR permit, the director of public health and
safety shall immediately notify the dam safety section of the division of water resources. If the director of public health and safety finds a dam
which is believed to be in unsafe condition, the director of public health and safety shall immediately notify the owner of the dam and the Illinois
emergency services and disaster agency (ESDA), and the DWR, dam safety section, in Springfield. (Ord. O-1-90, 1-22-1990; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-
8-2010)
e. The following activities may be permitted without a registered professional engineer's review or calculation of a base flood elevation and regulatory
floodway. Such activities shall still meet the other requirements of this chapter:
(1) Underground and overhead utilities that:
(A) Do not result in any increase in existing ground elevations; or
(B) Do not require the placement of aboveground structures in the floodway; or
(C) In the case of underground stream crossings, the top of the pipe or encasement is buried a minimum of three feet (3') below the existing
streambed; and
(D) In the case of overhead utilities, supporting towers are not placed in the watercourse and are designed in such a fashion as not to catch
debris.
(2) Storm and sanitary sewer outfalls that:
(A) Do not extend riverward or lakeward of the existing adjacent natural bank slope; and
(B) Do not result in an increase in ground elevation; and
(C) Are designed so as not to cause stream bank erosion at the outfall location.
(3) Construction of shoreline and streambed protection that:
(A) Does not exceed one thousand feet (1,000') in length or two (2) cubic yards per linear foot of streambed.
(B) Materials are not placed higher than the existing top of bank.
(C) Materials are placed so as not to reduce the cross sectional area of the stream channel by more than ten percent (10%).
(D) Vegetative stabilization and gradual side slopes are the preferred mitigation methods for existing erosion problems. Where high channel
velocities, sharp bends or wave action necessitate the use of alternative stabilization measures, natural rock or riprap are preferred materials.
Artificial materials such as concrete, construction rubble and gabions should be avoided unless there are no practicable alternatives.
(4) Temporary stream crossings in which:
(A) The approach roads will be one-half foot (0.5') or less above natural grade.
(B) The crossing will allow stream flow to pass without backing up the water above the stream bank vegetation line or above any drainage tile or
outfall invert.
(C) The top of the roadway fill in the channel will be at least two feet (2') below the top of the lowest bank. Any fill in the channel shall be
nonerosive material, such as riprap or gravel.
(D) All disturbed stream banks will be seeded or otherwise stabilized as soon as possible upon installation and again upon removal of
construction.
(E) The access road and temporary crossings will be removed within one year after authorization.
(5) The construction of light poles, signposts and similar structures;
(6) The construction of sidewalks, driveways, athletic fields (excluding fences), patios and similar surfaces which are built at grade;
(7) The construction of properly anchored, unwalled, open structures such as playground equipment, pavilions and carports built at or below
existing grade that would not obstruct the flow of floodwaters;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 398/416
(8) The placement of properly anchored buildings not exceeding seventy (70) square feet in size, nor ten feet (10') in any one dimension (e.g.,
animal shelters and tool sheds);
(9) The construction of additions to existing buildings which do not increase the first floor area by more than twenty percent (20%), which are
located on the upstream or downstream side of the existing building, and which do not extend beyond the sides of the existing building that are
parallel to the flow of floodwaters;
(10) Minor maintenance dredging of a stream channel where:
(A) The affected length of stream is less than one thousand feet (1,000');
(B) The work is confined to reestablishing flows in natural stream channels; or
(C) The cross sectional area of the dredged channel conforms to that of the natural channel upstream and downstream of the site.
f. The flood carrying capacity within any altered or relocated watercourse shall be maintained.
2. Compensatory Storage: Whenever any portion of a floodplain is authorized for use, the volume of space which will be occupied by the authorized fill
or structure below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation shall be compensated for and balanced by a hydraulically equivalent volume
of excavation taken from below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation. The excavation volume shall be equal to the volume of storage
lost due to the fill or structure. In the case of streams and watercourses, such excavation shall be made opposite or adjacent to the areas so filled or
occupied. All floodplain storage lost below the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced below the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All
floodplain storage lost above the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced above the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All such excavations
shall be constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse. (Ord. O-1-90, 1-22-1990)
11-1-9: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE TO ALL FLOODPLAIN AREAS:
In addition to the requirements found in sections 11-1-6, 11-1-7 and 11-1-8 of this chapter for development in flood fringes, regulatory floodways and SFHA
or floodplains where no floodways have been identified (Zones A, AO, AH, AE, A1-A30, A99, VO, V1-30, VE, V, M or E), the following requirements shall
be met:
A. Public Health Standards:
1. No developments in the SFHA shall include locating or storing chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, animal wastes, fertilizers, flammable
liquids, pollutants or other hazardous or toxic materials below the FPE.
2. New and replacement water supply systems, wells, sanitary sewer lines and on site waste disposal systems may be permitted providing all
manholes or other aboveground openings located below the FPE are watertight.
B. Carrying Capacity And Notification: For all projects involving channel modification, fill or stream maintenance (including levees), the flood carrying
capacity of the watercourse shall be maintained. In addition, the village shall notify adjacent communities in writing thirty (30) days prior to the issuance
of a permit for the alternation or relocation of the watercourse.
C. Protecting Buildings: All buildings located within a 100-year floodplain, also known as a SFHA, shall be protected from flood damage below the flood
protection elevation. However, existing buildings located within a regulatory floodway shall also meet the more restrictive appropriate use standards
included in section 11-1-7 of this chapter. This building protection criteria applies to the following situations:
*Construction or placement of a new building;
*A structural alteration to an existing building that either increases the first floor area by more than twenty percent (20%) or the building's market value
by more than fifty percent (50%);
*Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured home on an existing site. This building protection requirement does not apply to
returning a mobile home to the same site it lawfully occupied before it was removed to avoid flood damage; and
*Installing a travel trailer on a site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days.
This building protection requirement may be met by one of the following methods:
1. A residential or nonresidential building, when allowed, may be constructed on permanent landfill in accordance with the following:
a. The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at or above the flood protection elevation.
b. The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than one foot (1') deep before compaction and should extend at least ten feet (10') beyond the
foundation of the building before sloping below the flood protection elevation. The top of the fill shall be above the flood protection elevation.
However, the ten foot (10') minimum may be waived if a structural engineer certifies an alternative method to protect the building from damages
due to hydrostatic pressures. The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour. The fill shall not adversely effect the flow or surface drainage
from or onto neighboring properties.
2. A residential or nonresidential building may be elevated in accordance with the following:
a. The building or improvements shall be elevated on crawl space, stilts, piles, walls or other foundation that is permanently open to floodwaters and
not subject to damage by hydrostatic pressures of the base flood or 100-year frequency flood. The permanent openings shall be no more than one
foot (1') above grade, and consist of a minimum of two (2) openings. The openings must have a total net area of not less than one square inch for
every one square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding below the base flood elevation.
b. The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored and aligned in relation to flood flows and adjoining structures so as to minimize
exposure to known hydrodynamic forces such as current, waves, ice and floating debris.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 399/416
c. All areas below the flood protection elevation shall be constructed of materials resistant to flood damage. The lowest floor (including basement)
and all electrical, heating, ventilating, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and utility meters shall be located at or above the flood protection
elevation. Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines, submersible pumps and other waterproofed service facilities may be located
below the flood protection elevation.
d. No area below the flood protection elevation shall be used for storage of items or materials.
e. Manufactured homes and travel trailers to be installed on a site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days shall be elevated to or above the
flood protection elevation and shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by being tied down in accordance with the rules
and regulations for the Illinois mobile home tie down act5 issued pursuant to 77 Illinois administrative code 870.
3. Only a nonresidential building may be structurally dry floodproofed (in lieu of elevation) provided that a registered professional engineer shall certify
that the building has been structurally dry floodproofed below the flood protection elevation and that the structure and attendant utility facilities are
watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the base flood or 100-year frequency flood. The building design shall take into account flood
velocities, duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy and impacts from debris or ice. Floodproofing
measures shall be operable without human intervention and without an outside source of electricity (levees, berms, floodwalls and similar works are
not considered floodproofing for the purpose of this subsection).
Toolsheds and detached garages on an existing single-family platted lot may be constructed with the lowest floor below the flood protection elevation
in accordance with the following:
a. The building is not used for human habitation.
b. All areas below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation shall be constructed with waterproof material. Structures located in a
regulatory floodway shall be constructed and placed on a building site so as not to block the flow of floodwaters and shall also meet the
appropriate use criteria of section 11-1-7 of this chapter. In addition, all other requirements of sections 11-1-6, 11-1-7 and 11-1-8 of this chapter
must be met.
c. The structure shall be anchored to prevent flotation.
d. Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall be elevated or floodproofed to the flood protection elevation.
e. The building shall be valued at less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) and be less than five hundred (500) square feet in floor size.
f. The building shall be used only for the storage of vehicles or tools and may not contain workshops, greenhouses, or other rooms for similar uses.
4. Nonconforming structures located in a regulatory floodway may remain in use, but may not be enlarged, replaced or structurally altered. A
nonconforming structure damaged by flood, fire, wind or other natural or manmade disaster may be restored unless the damage exceeds fifty
percent (50%) of its market value before it was damaged, in which case it shall conform to this chapter. (Ord. O-1-90, 1-22-1990)
11-1-10: OTHER DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS:
The village shall take into account flood hazards, to the extent that they are known in all official actions related to land management, use and development.
A. New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation agreements and planned unit developments (PUDs) within the SFHA shall be reviewed to
assure that the proposed developments are consistent with sections 11-1-6, 11-1-7, 11-1-8 and 11-1-9 of this chapter and the need to minimize flood
damage. Plats or plans for new subdivisions, manufactured home parks and planned unit developments (PUDs) shall include a signed statement by a
registered professional engineer that the plat or plans account for changes in the drainage of surface waters in accordance with the plat act6.
B. Proposals for new subdivisions, manufactured home parks, travel trailer parks, planned unit developments (PUDs), additions to manufactured home
parks and additions to subdivisions shall include base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation data and floodway delineations. Where this
information is not available from an existing study filed with the Illinois state water survey, the applicant's engineer shall be responsible for calculating
the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation per subsection 11-1-5C of this chapter and the floodway delineation per the definition in section
11-1-2 of this chapter and submitting it to state water survey and DWR for review and approval as best available regulatory data.
C. Streets, blocks, lots, parks and other public grounds shall be located and laid out in such a manner as to preserve and utilize natural streams and
channels. Wherever possible, the floodplains shall be included within parks or other public grounds.
D. The village shall not approve any planned unit development (PUD) or plat of subdivision located outside the corporate limits unless such agreement or
plat is in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. O-1-90, 1-22-1990)
11-1-11: VARIANCES:
No variances shall be granted to any development located in a "regulatory floodway", as defined in section 11-1-2 of this chapter. However, when a
development proposal is located outside of a regulatory floodway, and whenever the standards of this chapter place undue hardship on a specific
development proposal, the applicant may apply to the village for a variance. The director of public health and safety shall review the applicant's request for
a variance and shall submit its recommendation to the village. (Ord. O-1-90, 1-22-1990; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
A. No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates that:
1. The development activity cannot be located outside the SFHA;
2. An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not granted;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 400/416
3. The relief requested is the minimum necessary;
4. There will be no additional threat to public health, safety, beneficial stream uses and functions, especially aquatic habitat or creation of a nuisance;
5. There will be no additional public expense for flood protection, lost environmental stream uses and functions, rescue or relief operations, policing or
repairs to streambeds and banks, roads, utilities or other public facilities;
6. The provisions of subsections 11-1-6B and 11-1-8B of this chapter shall still be met;
7. The activity is not in a regulatory floodway;
8. The applicant's circumstances are unique and do not represent a general problem; and
9. The granting of the variance will not alter the essential character of the area involved including existing stream uses. (Ord. O-1-90, 1-22-1990)
B. The director of public health and safety shall notify an applicant in writing that a variance from the requirements of section 11-1-9 of this chapter that
would lessen the degree of protection to a building will: (Ord. O-1-90, 1-22-1990; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
1. Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty five dollars ($25.00) for one hundred dollars ($100.00) of
insurance coverage;
2. Increase the risks to life and property; and
3. Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks and that he will acknowledge in writing that he assumes the risk and liability.
C. Variances requested in connection with restoration of a site or building listed on the national register of historical places or documented as worthy of
preservation by the Illinois historic preservation agency may be granted using criteria more permissive than the requirements of subsections A and B of
this section. (Ord. O-1-90, 1-22-1990)
11-1-12: DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available information derived
from engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur or flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter
does not imply that development, either inside or outside of the SFHA, will be free from flooding or damage. This chapter does not create liability on the
part of the village or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that results from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision made
lawfully thereunder. (Ord. O-1-90, 1-22-1990)
11-1-13: PENALTY:
Failure to comply with the requirements of a permit or conditions of a variance resolution shall be deemed to be a violation of this chapter. Upon due
investigation, the director of public health and safety may determine that a violation of the minimum standards of this chapter exist. The director of public
health and safety shall notify the owner in writing of such violation. (Ord. O-1-90, 1-22-1990; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
A. If such owner fails after ten (10) days' notice to correct the violation:
1. The village may make application to the circuit court for an injunction requiring conformance with this chapter or make such other order as the court
deems necessary to secure compliance with this chapter.
2. Any person who violates this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for each offense.
3. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
4. The village may record a notice of violation on the title to the property. (Ord. O-1-90, 1-22-1990)
B. The director of public health and safety shall inform the owner that any such violation is considered a wilful act to increase flood damages and,
therefore, may cause coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to be suspended. (Ord. O-1-90, 1-22-1990; amd. Ord. O-7-10, 2-8-2010)
C. Nothing herein shall prevent the village from taking such other lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected therewith shall
accrue to the person or persons responsible. (Ord. O-1-90, 1-22-1990)
11-1-14: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. Where this chapter and other
ordinances, easements, covenants or deed restrictions conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. This chapter is
intended to repeal the original ordinance O-33-85 entitled "An Ordinance Regulating Development In Special Flood Hazard Areas" and passed by a roll
call vote of the village council on November 25, 1985, which was adopted to meet the national flood insurance program regulations, but is not intended to
repeal the resolution which the village passed in order to establish initial eligibility for the program. (Ord. O-1-90, 1-22-1990)
Title 12
HISTORIC PRESERVATION
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 401/416
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
12-1-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this title is to promote historic and architectural preservation in the village. The village seeks to protect, enhance, and perpetuate those
historical structures, buildings, sites, and areas valued by the village and its residents that are significant to the village's history, culture, and architecture.
(Ord. O-1-06, 1-9-2006)
12-1-2: GOALS:
This title is created in order to:
A. Foster civic pride in the beauty and accomplishments of the past as represented in the village's landmarks;
B. Preserve, promote, maintain and enhance the village's historic resources and character as a community comprised principally of well maintained singlefamily
residential neighborhoods and thriving business areas oriented to serve the day to day needs of local residents;
C. Protect and enhance the village's attractiveness to residents, businesses, visitors, and prospective home buyers and businesses;
D. Maintain and improve property values in the village;
E. Protect, preserve, and enhance the village's aesthetic appearance and character;
F. Encourage the designation of landmark status upon structures, buildings, sites, and areas on a local, state, and national level;
G. Help record owners of designated landmarks obtain grants and loans, from any source, to maintain designated landmarks; and
H. Educate the general public as to the significance of historic preservation. (Ord. O-1-06, 1-9-2006)
12-1-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this title, and the interpretation and enforcement thereof, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings, unless the
context of the sentence in which they are used shall indicate otherwise:
ADDITION: Any act or process that changes the exterior architectural appearance of a structure or building by adding to, joining with, or increasing the
size or capacity of the structure or building.
ALTERATION: Any act or process, other than demolition, that changes the exterior architectural appearance of a landmark, historic district or any
structure, building, or site designated as historic, including, without limitation, the erection, construction, reconstruction, addition, repair, rehabilitation,
renovation, removal, restoration, or relocation of any structure or building. Repainting all or any portion of the exterior of a structure or building with paint of
the same kind, color and texture is not an alteration for the purposes of this title.
AREA: A specific geographic division of the village.
BUILDING: A structure having a roof that is supported by columns or walls for the shelter, support, or enclosure of persons, animals, or chattels.
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS: A certificate issued by the commission approving plans for the addition, alteration, construction, removal, or
demolition of a landmark or structure, building, or site within a designated historic district.
COMMISSION: The Forest Park historic preservation commission.
COMMISSIONERS: Members of the Forest Park historic preservation commission.
CONSTRUCTION: The act of adding an addition to, reconstructing, or otherwise altering an existing structure or building, or the act of erecting a new
principal or accessory structure or building on a lot or property.
DEMOLITION: Any act or process that destroys, in part or in whole, a landmark, historic district or a site.
DESIGN GUIDELINES: The standards of appropriate activity that will preserve the historic and architectural character of a structure or area.
DRAWING: Illustrations of any kind; or renderings such as those used before the development of or in place of photographs as records; not limited to
architectural renderings.
EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL APPEARANCE: The architectural character, general composition, and general arrangement of the exterior of a structure,
building, or site, including, without limitation, the kind, color, and texture of the building material and the type, design, and character of all windows, doors,
light fixtures, signs, and appurtenant elements.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 402/416
HISTORIC DISTRICT: An area designated as a historic district by ordinance of the village council that may contain, within definable geographic
boundaries, one or more landmarks and which may have within its boundaries other structures, buildings, or sites that, while not of such historic and/or
architectural significance to be designated as landmarks, nevertheless contribute to the overall visual characteristics of the landmark or landmarks located
within the historic district.
LANDMARK: Any building, structure, or site designated as a landmark by ordinance of the village council, pursuant to procedures prescribed herein, that is
worthy of rehabilitation, restoration, and preservation because of its historic and/or architectural significance to the village.
OWNER OF RECORD: The person, corporation, or other legal entity listed as the holder of legal title on the records of the recorder of deeds of Cook
County. If a site has more than one owner of record, and action by the owner of record is required by this title, there shall be a rebuttable presumption that
action has been taken by the owner of record where the written consent of a majority of the owners of record for that site is submitted.
REHABILITATION: The process of returning a structure, building, or site to a state of utility through repair, construction, or alteration, that makes possible
an efficient contemporary use while preserving those portions and features of the property which are significant to its historic and architectural values.
RELOCATION: The process of moving a structure or building on its site or to another site.
REMOVAL: See definition of Relocation.
REPAIR: Any change that does not require a building permit that is not construction, relocation, or alteration.
RESTORATION: The process of restoring, repairing, or reconstructing a property through repair, construction, or alteration, to a former or original condition
that enhances those portions and features of the property that are significant to its historic and architectural values.
SITE: A single lot or parcel of property. For the purpose of determining any action by an owner of record pursuant to this title, site also includes a "lot", as
that term is defined in the Forest Park zoning code.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires permanent or temporary location on or in the ground or attached to something
having a permanent location on or in the ground. (Ord. O-1-06, 1-9-2006; amd. Ord. O-21-08, 5-27-2008)
12-1-4: PROCEDURES FOR NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARINGS AND MEETINGS:
A. Clerk To Give Notice: The village clerk shall cause notice to be given of public hearings and public meetings held pursuant to this title, in the form and
manner and to the persons herein specified.
B. Content Of Notice: All notices shall include the date, time, and place of such hearing or meeting, a description of the matter to be heard or considered, a
legal description of the subject property, and the common address or particular location of the subject property.
C. Persons Entitled To Notice:
1. Notice of every public hearing or public meeting set pursuant to this title shall be provided:
a. By mail or personal delivery to the applicant and, if a specific parcel is the subject of the application, to the owner of the subject property.
b. By mail to any newspaper or person that shall have filed a written request, for notice of all public hearings or public meetings held pursuant to this
code. Such written request shall automatically expire on December 31 of the year in which it is made, unless a written request for renewal is
submitted prior to such date.
c. By mail, personal delivery, or interdepartmental delivery to the village council, and to affected village commissions, departments, officials and
consultants.
Such notice by mail as herein required shall be required to be mailed no less than seven (7) days in advance of the date of the public hearing or
public meeting by regular United States mail.
2. In addition to notice as required by subsection C1 of this section, notice of every public hearing held pursuant to this title in connection with any
application for landmark designation, historic district designation, withdrawal of landmark designation, or a certificate of appropriateness, shall be
provided:
a. By publication in a newspaper published in the village not less than fifteen (15) days nor more than thirty (30) days in advance of the hearing date.
b. By certified mail, return receipt requested, or by personal delivery to all owners of property located within two hundred fifty feet (250') of the
property which is the subject of the application; provided, further, that in the case of an application for historic district designation, notice shall be
provided to all owners of record of property located within the proposed district and to all owners of record of property located within two hundred
fifty feet (250') of the perimeter of the proposed district. Notice as required by this subsection shall be provided by the applicant not less than
fifteen (15) days nor more than thirty (30) days in advance of the public hearing. (Ord. O-1-06, 1-9-2006)
12-1-5: PROCEDURES FOR CONDUCT OF HEARINGS:
A. Rights Of All Persons: Any person may appear and testify at a public hearing conducted pursuant to this title, either in person or by a duly authorized
agent or attorney, and may submit documentary evidence; provided that the commission may exclude irrelevant, immaterial, or unduly repetitious
evidence.
B. Rights Of Parties And Property Owners: Subject to the determination of the commission, the applicant, any board, commission, department, or official of
the village, and any property owner entitled to written notice pursuant to this section may be afforded the following rights:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 403/416
1. To present witnesses on their behalf;
2. To cross examine all witnesses testifying in opposition to their position;
3. To examine and reproduce any documents produced at the hearing;
4. To request a continuance for the purpose of presenting evidence to rebut evidence introduced by any other person.
C. Adjournment Of Hearing: The commission may at any time, on its own motion or at the request of any person, adjourn the hearing for a reasonable time
and to a fixed date, time, and place, for the purpose of providing notice to additional persons, taking further evidence, gathering further information,
deliberating further, or for such other reason as the commission may find to be sufficient. The staff secretary of the commission shall notify in writing all
commissioners, all parties to the hearing, and any other person designated in the motion for adjournment of the date, time, and place of the next
scheduled hearing.
D. Sworn Testimony: All testimony at any hearing held pursuant to this title shall be given under oath or affirmation.
E. Right To Submit Written Statements: Any person may at any time prior to the commencement of a hearing hereunder, or during such hearing, or within
such time following such hearing, as may be allowed by the commission, submit written statements in support of or in opposition to the application
being heard.
F. Code And Rules To Govern: All other matters pertaining to the conduct of hearings shall be governed by the provisions of this code which may pertain to
such hearings, and any rules promulgated by the commission relating thereto.
G. Landmark Designation: Any building designated as historic in any survey conducted or authorized by the village shall be granted a rebuttable
presumption in favor of landmark designation. (Ord. O-1-06, 1-9-2006)
Chapter 2
HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION
12-2-1: CREATION:
The Forest Park historic preservation commission is hereby created. (Ord. O-1-06, 1-9-2006)
12-2-2: APPOINTMENT OF COMMISSION:
The commission shall consist of five (5) persons to be appointed by the mayor, with the advice and consent of the village council. Terms shall commence
on May 1 and expire on April 30. The first members shall be appointed as follows: one commissioner shall serve an initial term of one year, two (2)
commissioners shall serve an initial term of two (2) years and two (2) commissioners shall serve an initial term of three (3) years. Thereafter, terms shall
be for a length of three (3) years. A commissioner may be reappointed. (Ord. O-1-06, 1-9-2006)
12-2-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
Subject to the laws of the state, this code, and any other ordinances and resolutions of the village, the commission shall have the following powers and
duties:
A. To adopt its own procedural rules. In the absence of such rules, the commission shall conduct its business, as nearly as practicable, in accordance with
"Robert's Rules Of Order".
B. To conduct a survey of structures, buildings, sites, and areas in the village in order to identify those with historical and architectural significance.
C. To keep a register of all buildings, structures, sites, and areas that have been designated as landmarks or historic districts, including all information
required for each designation.
D. To provide information to owners of landmarks and structures, buildings, or sites within historic districts, as well as to residents of the village, regarding:
1) physical and financial aspects of preservation, renovation, rehabilitation, and reuse, including information about incentives that may be available
therefor and possible designation under this title, and 2)procedures for inclusion on the state or National Register of Historic Places.
E. To inform and educate the residents of the village concerning the historic and architectural heritage of the village by: 1) publishing appropriate maps,
newsletters, brochures, and pamphlets, and 2) holding programs and seminars.
F. To hold public hearings, review applications, conduct advisory review conferences, and make recommendations regarding the designation and
withdrawal of designation of landmarks and historic districts and the alteration or demolition of such landmarks, and to issue decisions regarding the
issuance of certificates of appropriateness and certificates of economic hardship for such actions.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 404/416
G. To develop, subject to review and approval by the village council, specific guidelines for the alteration, demolition, construction, or removal of landmarks
or structures, buildings, or sites within historic districts.
H. To recommend, when requested by the village council, whether the village should accept and/or administer any property or full or partial interest in real
property, including conservation rights as that term is used in 765 Illinois Compiled Statutes 120/1, which the village may possess as a gift or otherwise.
I. To request technical advice and assistance from village staff members and to retain specialists or consultants when expressly authorized by the village
council.
J. To review, upon request of the village council, the plan commission or the zoning board of appeals, applications for zoning or subdivision relief affecting
historically and architecturally significant landmarks, historic districts, structures, buildings, and sites.
K. To periodically review, when requested by the village council, the Forest Park zoning code and to recommend to the plan commission or the village
council any amendments appropriate for the protection and continued use of landmarks, historic districts or structures, buildings, or sites within historic
districts.
L. To provide written notification to the owner of record of any structure designated as historic by the commission, upon such designation.
M. To perform such other functions as directed by the village council, including, without limitation, regulatory, acquisitive, informational, and incentive
oriented functions. (Ord. O-1-06, 1-9-2006)
12-2-4: SURVEYS AND RESEARCH:
When authorized by the village council, and within the budgetapproved by the village council, the commission shall undertake an ongoing survey and
research effort in the village to identify neighborhoods, areas, sites, structures, and buildings that have historic, community, architectural, or aesthetic
importance, interest, or value. As part of the survey, the commission shall review and evaluate any prior surveys and studies by any unit of government or
private organization and compile appropriate descriptions, facts, and photographs. The survey results shall be made available to the public at the village
hall for inspection. The survey may be periodically updated at the direction of the village council and at the discretion of the commission. (Ord. O-1-06, 1-9-
2006)
Chapter 3
LANDMARK AND HISTORIC DISTRICT DESIGNATION
12-3-1: CRITERIA:
The commission shall consider the following criteria when recommending a structure, building, or site for designation as a landmark or historic district:
A. General Considerations:
1. The structure, building, site, or area has significant character, interest, or value as part of the historic, aesthetic, or architectural characteristics of the
village, the state, or the United States.
2. The structure, building, site, or area is closely identified with a person or persons who significantly contributed to the development of the village, the
state, or the United States.
3. The structure, building, site, or area involves the notable efforts of, or is the only known example of work by, a master builder, designer, architect,
architectural firm, or artist whose individual accomplishment has influenced the development of the village, the state, or the United States.
4. The unique location or singular physical characteristics of the structure, building, site, or area make it an established or familiar visual feature.
5. The activities associated with a structure, building, site, or area make it a current or former focal point of reference in the village.
6. The structure or building is of a type or is associated with a use once common but now rare, or is a particularly fine or unique example of a utilitarian
structure and possesses a high level of integrity or architectural significance.
7. The structure, building, or site is in an area that has yielded or is likely to yield historically significant information, or even prehistoric data.
B. Architectural Significance:
1. The structure, building, site, or area represents certain distinguishing characteristics of architecture inherently valuable for the study of a time period,
type of property, method of construction, or use of indigenous materials.
2. The structure, building, site, or area embodies elements of design, detail, material, or craftsmanship of exceptional quality.
3. The structure, building, site, or area exemplifies a particular architectural style in terms of detail, material, and workmanship which has resulted in
little or no alteration to its original construction.
4. The structure, building, site, or area is one of the few remaining examples of a particular architectural style and has undergone little or no alteration
since its original construction.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 405/416
5. The structure, building, site, or area is, or is part of, a contiguous grouping that has a sense of cohesiveness expressed through a similarity of style
characteristics, time period, type of property, method of construction, or use of indigenous materials and accents the architectural significance of an
area.
6. The detail, material, and workmanship of the structure, building, or site can be valued in and of themselves as reflective of or similar to those of the
majority of the other visual elements in the area.
C. Historic Significance:
1. The structure, building, site, or area is an exceptional example of a historic or vernacular style, or is one of the few such remaining properties of its
kind in the village.
2. The structure, building, site, or area has a strong association with the life or activities of a person or persons who has significantly contributed to or
participated in the historic events of the United States, the state, or the village.
3. The structure, building, site, or area is associated with an organization or group, whether formal or informal, from which persons have significantly
contributed to or participated in the historic events of the United States, the state, or the village.
4. The structure, building, site, or area is associated with a notable historic event.
5. The structure, building, site, or area is associated with an antiquated use due to technological or social advances.
6. The structure, building, site, or area is a monument to, or a cemetery of, a historic person or persons. (Ord. O-1-06, 1-9-2006)
12-3-2: APPLICATIONS FOR NOMINATIONS OF LANDMARKS AND HISTORIC DISTRICTS:
A. Who May Nominate: Applications for nominations for designation of a landmark may be submitted by: 1) the owner of record of the nominated
landmark; or 2) any resident of the village. Applications for nominations for designation of a historic district may be submitted by the owners of record of
twenty five percent (25%) or more of the sites located within the area to be nominated for historic designation. (Ord. O-21-08, 5-27-2008)
B. Application Requirements: Applications for nomination shall be filed with the village clerk, on forms provided by the village clerk and shall, at a
minimum, include the following information and specifications: (Ord. O-1-06, 1-9-2006)
1. For A Landmark:
a. The name and address of the applicant and owner of record.
b. The legal description and common street address of the property.
c. A written statement describing the structure, building, or site and setting forth reasons in support of the proposed designation, including a list of
significant exterior architectural features that should be protected.
d. Current photographs of the landmark showing each elevation (side) of the property being nominated. Copies of old photographs or drawings may
also be included, but are not required.
e. Such other relevant information as requested by the village administrator or the commission. (Ord. O-21-08, 5-27-2008)
2. For A Historic District:
a. The names and addresses of the applicants.
b. The names and addresses of all of the owners of record of buildings, structures, or sites in the area nominated for designation.
c. A vicinity map delineating the boundaries of the area nominated for designation.
d. A written statement describing the area and structures, buildings, or sites located in the area nominated for designation as a historic district and
setting forth the reasons in support of the proposed designation, including a list and photographs of significant exterior architectural features of all
structures, buildings, or sites in the proposed district that require preservation.
e. Written documentation and evidence establishing that applicants are the current owners of record of property in the area nominated for
designation and that such owners comprise the owners of record of at least twenty five percent (25%) of all sites contained in the area proposed
for designation. Such documentation or evidence of record ownership shall include recent title policies in the names of the applicants or other
evidence of record ownership acceptable to the village administrator.
f. The name, address, and telephone number of one of the applicants who shall be the designated contact person and liaison for the purposes of the
application. The name, address, and telephone number of an additional applicant to serve as an alternative contact person shall also be provided.
g. Such other relevant information as requested by the village administrator or the commission. (Ord. O-1-06, 1-9-2006)
12-3-3: APPLICATION PROCEDURES FOR LANDMARK AND HISTORIC DISTRICT DESIGNATIONS; PUBLIC HEARING
REQUIRED:
A. Upon the village clerk receiving an application and stamping it with the date and time of receipt, the village clerk shall forward the application to the
village administrator or his designee.
B. Within ten (10) business days of his receipt of the application, the village administrator or designee shall:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 406/416
1. Review the application to determine whether the application is complete;
2. Send a letter to the applicant acknowledging receipt of the application and advising whether such application is deemed complete or incomplete;
3. Submit to the historic preservation commission chairperson, for review, copies of the application (whether complete or incomplete) and a copy of the
acknowledgment letter to the applicant.
C. If the application is determined by the village administrator or designee to be complete, the historic preservation commission chairperson shall:
1. Advise the historic preservation commission members of the receipt of an application;
2. If the applicant is not the owner of record, advise the owner of record of the application and seek consent of the owner to continue with the
application process.
D. Only upon receipt of a complete application and the required consent of the owner or owners, as provided herein, the historic preservation commission
chairperson shall schedule a public hearing, in concert with the village clerk. The village clerk will provide notice of the public hearing pursuant to
section 12-1-4 of this title. The public hearing shall be conducted pursuant to the procedures set forth in section 12-1-5 of this title. Such public hearing
shall be commenced not later than ninety (90) days following the filing of a complete application and receipt of consent of the owner or owners as
required herein. Such public hearing may be continued upon request or consent of the applicant. (Ord. O-21-08, 5-27-2008)
12-3-4: RECOMMENDATIONS BY HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION:
A. General: The commission shall review all information presented to it at the public hearing and at the conclusion of the public hearing shall adopt a
recommendation that the nominated landmark or proposed historic district does or does not meet the criteria for designation as herein prescribed. The
recommendation shall contain the following information:
1. The commission's rationale for recommending either approval or rejection of the nomination;
2. In the case of a recommendation for approval of designation of a landmark, the significant feature or features in the exterior architectural appearance
of the landmark that should be protected and preserved;
3. In the case of a recommendation for approval or designation of a historic district, the significant features in the exterior architectural appearance of
any structures, buildings, or sites within the historic district that should be protected and preserved; and
4. Any other information deemed pertinent by the commission related to the nomination of the landmark or historic district.
B. Landmarks: In the case of a nominated landmark, within forty five (45) days following the conclusion of the public hearing, the commission shall transmit
to the village council its recommendation containing the information specified in subsection A of this section. The failure of the commission to act within
forty five (45) days following the conclusion of such hearing, or such further time to which the applicant may agree, shall be deemed a recommendation
for the approval of the application for designation as submitted. The village council shall consider such recommendation within sixty (60) days of the
receipt of such recommendation or within sixty (60) days of the time when such commission was required to recommend to the village council.
C. Historic Districts: In the case of a nominated historic district, such recommendation by the commission shall be deemed preliminary and shall be
accompanied by action of the commission requiring that notice be given to all owners of record of property located within the area of the nominated
district that the nominated district has been preliminarily determined to meet the standards for designation as a historic district, and allowing such
owners of record an opportunity to complete a form indicating whether the owner consents to the designation of the nominated district. The manner of
obtaining such consent shall be pursuant to section 12-3-6 of this chapter. Following receipt of the results of the consent forms submitted by all of the
owners of record or after the passage of sixty (60) days after such notice was provided to the owners, whichever occurs first, the commission shall
reconsider its preliminary recommendation and shall issue a final recommendation to the village council. The commission shall transmit to the village
council its recommendation containing the information specified by section 12-3-2 of this chapter. The failure of the commission to act within forty five
(45) days after it is authorized, as provided hereinabove, or such further time to which the applicant may agree, shall be deemed a recommendation for
the approval of the application for designation as submitted. The village council shall consider such recommendation within sixty (60) days of the
receipt of such recommendation or within sixty (60) days of the time when such commission was required to recommend to the village council.
D. Recommendations On File: All recommendations by the commission shall be filed with the village administrator and made available to persons
requesting the same in writing. (Ord. O-1-06, 1-9-2006)
12-3-5: DESIGNATION BY VILLAGE COUNCIL:
The village council may designate an official landmark or historic district. Upon adoption of an ordinance approving the designation of a landmark or
historic district, the village council shall direct that notice be sent to the building commissioner and to the owners of record advising them of such
designation and informing them that any structure, building, site or area designated as a landmark or located within the boundaries of a historic district
shall thereafter be subject to the requirements of this title. The village council shall also direct that the ordinance approving such designation be recorded
in the offices of the Cook County recorder of deeds. Said designation shall not be approved without the consent of the owner of record for landmark
designation, or without the consent of more than fifty percent (50%) of the owners of the lots in a historic district, as set forth in this title. (Ord. O-1-06, 1-9-
2006)
12-3-6: CONSENT OF OWNERS OF RECORD:
12-3-6-1: PROPOSED LANDMARK:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 407/416
A. Manner Of Consent: In the event that the commission receives a completed application from someone other than the owner of record of the property
being nominated, the owner of record shall immediately be sent written notice of same in accordance with subsection 12-1-4C1a of this title. If a site is
owned by more than one owner of record, each owner will be notified of the application and must submit a signed consent form for the site. The forms
for such consent shall be prepared in a manner that enables the village to verify whether the person submitting the consent is the owner of record,
while keeping the owner's name separate from the owner's indication of whether or not the owner consents to the designation. If a site is owned by only
one owner of record and that owner is the applicant, the owner's consent will be presumed and the commission shall proceed with the public hearing
process. (Ord. O-21-08, 5-27-2008)
B. Effect Of Consent: Once the owner of record consents to a building being designated as a landmark, and said designation is approved by the village
council, said building shall be subject to the rules and regulations set forth in this title. Said designation shall attach to the property and subsequent
owners shall be subject to the rules and regulations of this chapter. The ordinance approving such designation shall be recorded, as provided in section
12-3-5 of this chapter. An owner selling such a property shall also have an affirmative duty to inform a potential purchaser of said designation. Failure
of an owner to so inform a purchaser shall not be considered as a reason to remove said designation from said building. A list of properties so
designated shall be maintained at village hall for public review. (Ord. O-1-06, 1-9-2006)
12-3-6-2: PROPOSED HISTORIC DISTRICT:
A. Manner Of Consent: In the event that the commission receives a completed application for a historic district, each owner of record of each site in the
proposed district shall be sent written notice of same in accordance with subsection 12-1-4C1a of this title. If a site in the proposed district is owned by
more than one owner of record, each owner will be notified of the application and must submit a signed consent form for the site. The forms for such
consent shall be prepared in a manner that enables the village to verify whether the person submitting the consent is the owner of record, while
keeping the owner's name separate from the owner's indication of whether or not the owner consents to the designation. (Ord. O-21-08, 5-27-2008)
B. Effect Of Consent: No historic district shall be designated by the village without affirmative written consent to such designation by the owners of record
of more than fifty percent (50%) of the sites within the proposed district. However, the village shall not be required to designate any proposed district
merely because of the affirmative written consent to such designation by the owners of record of more than fifty percent (50%) of the sites within the
proposed district. (Ord. O-1-06, 1-9-2006)
12-3-7: DENIAL OF DESIGNATION:
An applicant whose nomination for a landmark or historic district designation is denied by the village council may request reconsideration by filing a written
request within thirty (30) days after such action by the village council; provided, however, that the village council shall reconsider a nomination only if
substantial new evidence or information regarding the nominated landmark is provided. Once a nomination has been denied by the village council, no
further nominations involving substantially the same relief under this chapter for any structure, building, site, or area whose designation was denied may
be filed for one year after such denial or reconsideration. (Ord. O-1-06, 1-9-2006)
12-3-8: STAY OF PROCEEDINGS:
No building, demolition, sign, or other permit shall be issued for a proposed landmark or a structure, building, site or area in a proposed historic district,
from the date when the nomination form is filed with the village clerk until the final disposition of the nomination, unless the process for certificate of
appropriateness review required by chapter 5 of this title is completed. (Ord. O-1-06, 1-9-2006)
12-3-9: LANDMARK DESIGNATION CONTROLS:
In the event that a building, structure, or site has been designated as both a landmark and as part of a historic district, the requirements, limitations,
restrictions, and regulations contained in this title pertaining to landmarks shall control over the requirements, limitations, restrictions, and regulations
pertaining to historic districts, including, without limitation, the requirements contained in chapter 5 of this title regarding the issuance of a certificate of
appropriateness. (Ord. O-1-06, 1-9-2006)
12-3-10: SUCCESSIVE APPLICATIONS:
A. Second Applications Without New Grounds Barred: Whenever any application filed pursuant to this chapter has been finally denied on its merits, a
second application, filed after one year of such denial, seeking essentially the same relief as a prior application, whether or not in the same form or on
the same theory, shall not be brought unless in the opinion of the village administrator or the commission there is substantial new evidence available or
a mistake of law or fact significantly affecting the prior denial.
B. New Grounds To Be Stated: Any such second application shall include a detailed statement of the grounds justifying consideration of such application.
C. Summary Denial With Or Without Hearing: Any such second application may be denied by the village administrator summarily, and without hearing, on
a finding that no grounds appear that warrant a new hearing. In any case where such application is set for hearing, the applicant shall be required to
establish grounds warranting reconsideration of the merits of its application prior to being allowed to offer any evidence on the merits. Unless such
grounds are established, the application may be summarily dismissed for such failure.
D. Exception: Whether or not new grounds are stated, any such second application filed more than two (2) years after the final denial of a prior application
shall be heard on the merits as though no prior application had been filed. The applicant shall, however, be required to place in the record all evidence
available concerning changes of conditions or new facts that have developed since the denial of the first application. In the absence of such evidence,
it shall be presumed that no new facts exist to support the new petition. (Ord. O-1-06, 1-9-2006)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 408/416
Chapter 4
WITHDRAWAL OF LANDMARK DESIGNATION
12-4-1: CONDITIONS FOR WITHDRAWAL:
The designation of a structure, building, site, or area as a landmark may be withdrawn under any of the following conditions:
A. The structure, building, site, or area has ceased to meet the criteria for designation because the qualities which caused it to be originally designated
have been lost or destroyed, or such qualities were lost subsequent to nomination, but before designation;
B. Additional information shows conclusively that the structure, building, site, or area does not possess sufficient significance to meet the designation
criteria;
C. The original designation was clearly in error; or
D. There was prejudicial procedural error in the designation process. (Ord. O-1-06, 1-9-2006)
12-4-2: REQUESTS FOR WITHDRAWAL:
The owner of record of any designated landmark structure, building or site may initiate a procedure to withdraw the designation from such structure,
building or site. (Ord. O-1-06, 1-9-2006)
12-4-3: APPLICATION AND HEARING:
A procedure to withdraw a landmark designation shall be initiated by filing an application with the village clerk, in accordance with section 12-3-2 of this
title; provided, however, that the application shall include a written explanation of the reasons for withdrawal as provided by section 12-4-1 of this chapter.
Upon the filing of a completed application, notice shall be given and a public hearing shall be held in accordance with section 12-1-5 of this title. (Ord. O-1-
06, 1-9-2006)
12-4-4: RECOMMENDATION; DETERMINATION:
Promptly after the close of the public hearing, the commission shall recommend approval or denial of the application that a designation should be
withdrawn. Such recommendation shall be in writing and shall set forth the reasons therefor. Any determination or recommendation shall be submitted to
the village council, the applicant, and the village clerk. (Ord. O-1-06, 1-9-2006)
12-4-5: COUNCIL ACTION:
The village council shall consider such a recommendation regarding an application for withdrawal of a designation within sixty (60) days of its receipt of
such recommendation. Approval of such application for withdrawal of landmark designation shall be by ordinance. Upon adoption of such ordinance
approving the withdrawal of such a designation, the village council shall direct that notice be sent to the building commissioner and the owners of record
advising them that such designation has been withdrawn. The village council shall also direct that the ordinance withdrawing a landmark designation be
recorded in the office of the Cook County recorder of deeds. (Ord. O-1-06, 1-9-2006)
Chapter 5
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS
12-5-1: REQUIRED:
A. Landmarks: No alteration shall be allowed to, and no permits shall be issued for, the alteration, demolition, signage, or any other physical modifications
of the exterior architectural appearance of a designated landmark without the prior issuance of a certificate of appropriateness in accordance with the
procedures and criteria specified in this chapter.
B. Historic District: No alteration shall be allowed to, and no permits shall be issued for, the alteration, demolition, signage, or any other physical
modifications of the exterior architectural appearance of any structure, building, site, or area located in a designated historic district prior to the
determination by the commission of an application for a certificate of appropriateness, in accordance with the procedures and criteria specified in this
chapter.
C. Exemption: Certificates of appropriateness shall not be required in connection with permits necessary for compliance with a lawful order of the village,
including, without limitation, any permit necessary to correct what is determined by the village or its agent to be an immediate health or safety problem;
provided that such order expressly exempts the alteration, demolition, signage, or other physical modifications from certificate of appropriateness
procedures; and provided further that such order may be subject to appropriate conditions to advance the purpose and goals of this title. (Ord. O-1-06,
1-9-2006)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 409/416
12-5-2: CRITERIA:
All applications for a certificate of appropriateness shall conform to the applicable standards in this section.
A. General Standards:
1. Alterations that do not affect any essential architectural or historic features of a structure or building as viewed from a public or private street
ordinarily should be permitted.
2. The distinguishing original qualities or character of a structure, building, or site and its environment should not be destroyed. No alteration or
demolition of any historic material or distinctive architectural feature should be permitted except when necessary to assure an economically viable
use of a site.
3. All structures, buildings, sites, and areas should be recognized as products of their own time. Alterations that have no historical basis and that seek
to create an earlier appearance than the true age of the property are discouraged.
4. Changes that may have taken place in the course of time are evidence of the history and development of a structure, building, or site and its
environment. These changes may have acquired significance in their own right, and this significance should be recognized and respected when
dealing with a specific architectural period.
5. Distinctive stylistic features or examples of skilled craftsmanship that characterize a structure, building, site, or area should ordinarily be maintained
and preserved.
6. Deteriorated architectural features should be repaired rather than replaced, whenever possible. In the event replacement is necessary, the new
material should match the material being replaced in composition, design, color, texture, and other visual qualities. Repair or replacement of missing
architectural features should be based on accurate duplications of features, substantiated by historic, physical, or pictorial evidence rather than on
conjectural designs or the availability of different architectural elements from other buildings or structures.
7. The surface cleaning of structures and buildings should be undertaken with the gentlest means possible. Sandblasting and other cleaning methods
that will damage the structures and buildings should be avoided.
8. New structures or buildings, or alterations to sites should not be discouraged when such structures or alterations do not destroy significant historical
or architectural features and are compatible with the size, scale, color, material, and character of the site, neighborhood, or environment.
9. Whenever possible, new structures or buildings, or alterations to the existing conditions of sites should be done in such a manner that, if such new
structures or alterations were to be removed in the future, the essential form and integrity of the original structure, building, site, or area would be
unimpaired.
10. Any permitted alteration or demolition should promote the purposes of this title and general welfare of the village and its residents.
11. Demolition should not be permitted if a structure, building, or site is economically viable in its present condition or could be economically viable after
completion of appropriatealterations, even if demolition would permit a more profitable use of such site.
B. Design Standards:
1. Height: The height of a landmark after alteration should be compatible with the height of the original landmark. The height of a structure or building
and adjacent open spaces after any proposed alteration or construction within a historic district should be compatible with the style and character of
the structure or building and with surrounding structures and buildings.
2. Relationship Between Mass And Open Space: The relationship between a landmark and adjacent open spaces after its alteration should be
compatible with such relationship prior to such alteration. The relationship between a structure or building and adjacent open spaces after alteration
within a historic district should be compatible with the relationship between surrounding structures, buildings and adjacent open spaces.
3. Relationship Among Height, Width And Scale: The relationship among the height, width, and scale of a landmark after alteration should be
compatible with such relationship prior to such alteration. The relationship among height, width, and scale of a structure or building after an alteration
within a historic district should be compatible with the relationship among height, width, and scale of surrounding structures and buildings.
4. Directional Expression: The directional expressions of a landmark after alteration, whether its vertical or horizontal positioning, should be compatible
with the directional expression of the original landmark. The directional expression of a structure or building after alteration within a historic district
should be compatible with the directional expression of surrounding structures and buildings within such historic district.
5. Roof Shape: The roof shape of a landmark after alteration should be compatible with the roof shape of the original landmark. The roof shape of a
structure, building, or object after alteration within a historic district should be compatible with the roof shape of surrounding structures and buildings
within such historic district.
6. Architectural Details, General Designs, Materials, Textures, And Colors: The architectural details, general design, materials, textures, and colors of a
landmark after alteration should be compatible with the architectural details, general design, materials, textures, and colors of the original landmark.
The architectural details, general design, materials, textures, and colors of a structure or building after alteration within a historic district should be
compatible with the architectural details, general design, materials, textures, and colors of surrounding structures and buildings within such historic
district.
7. Landscape And Appurtenances: The landscape and appurtenances, including, without limitation, signs, fences, accessory structures, and pavings,
of a landmark after alteration should be compatible with the landscape and appurtenances of the original landmark. The landscape and
appurtenances of a structure or building after alteration within a historic district should be compatible with the landscape and appurtenances of
surrounding structures and buildings within such historic district.
8. Construction: New construction should be compatible with the architectural styles, design standards and streetscapes within a historic district.
C. Additional Standards: In addition to the foregoing standards, the commission may consider the secretary of the interior's standards for rehabilitation
guidelines for rehabilitating historic buildings, and any amendments thereto, in reviewing any application under this section. (Ord. O-1-06, 1-9-2006)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 410/416
12-5-3: APPLICATION:
A. Formal Application Requirements: Any person proposing an alteration to, or seeking a building, demolition, sign, or other permit for any designated
landmark or for any structure, building, site, or area shall submit a formal application for a certificate of appropriateness as a precondition to
commencing such alteration or obtaining such permit. The formal application for a certificate of appropriateness shall include the following information
and specifications:
1. Applicant's name;
2. Property owner's name, if different from applicant;
3. Street address and legal description of the site;
4. An overall site plan of the site, including front, side, and rear elevation drawings in the case of alteration or partial demolition;
5. A brief description of the structures, buildings, and objects on the site and the structures, buildings, and objects on site adjacent to and across from
such original site;
6. Detailed description of the proposed alteration or demolition, together with any architectural drawings, sketches, and photographs indicating how and
to what extent such alteration or demolition shall affect a landmark or historic district;
7. Names and addresses of the owners of property adjacent to and across from the site;
8. A list and photographs of significant architectural features in relation to the structures, buildings, or objects on the site previously designated by the
commission as being worthy ofprotection and preservation;
9. Identification of any architect or contractor involved in the alteration or demolition; and
10. Such other relevant information as requested by the village administrator or the commission.
B. Preliminary Application Requirements: Preliminary applications for certificates of appropriateness shall be filed with the village clerk, on forms to be
provided by the village clerk and shall include such information required by subsection A of this section as is necessary to allow review by the
commission. No applicant shall be required to file a preliminary application prior to filing a formal application. (Ord. O-1-06, 1-9-2006)
12-5-4: REVIEW OF APPLICATION:
A. Review Of Preliminary Applications: Following the proper filing of a complete preliminary application, the village administrator shall cause such
application to be placed on the agenda of the next regular commission meeting after the date of its having been filed with the village clerk. The
commission shall, not later than the first regular commission meeting after the preliminary application has been referred to it, commence and conclude
its review of the preliminary application.
The purpose of such review shall be to broadly acquaint the commission with the applicant's proposal and to provide the applicant with any preliminary
views or concerns that members of the commission may have at the time in the process when positions are still flexible and adjustment is still possible
and prior to the time when the applicant is required to expend the funds necessary to prepare the complete documentation required for a formal
application.
At the meeting at which the preliminary application is considered, any member of the commission may make any comments, suggestions or
recommendations regarding the preliminary application deemed necessary or appropriate by that member; provided, however, that no recommendation
shall be made, and no final or binding action shall be taken, with respect to any preliminary application by the commission. Any views expressed in the
course of the commission's review of any preliminary application shall be deemed to be only preliminary and advisory and only the individual views of
the member expressing them. Nothing said or done in the course of such review shall be deemed to create, or to prejudice, any rights of the applicant
or to obligate the commission, or any member of it, to approve or deny any formal application following full consideration thereof as required by this
title. Applications by the village shall not be subject to the provisions of this subsection.
B. Review Of Formal Application:
1. Public Meeting If No Demolition: After the filing of a properly completed formal application for a certificate of appropriateness that does not include
any request for demolition, the commission shall conduct a public hearing on the application. Notice of the hearing shall be given in accordance with
section 12-1-4 of this title. The hearing shall be conducted within one hundred twenty (120) days after the filing of a properly completed formal
application, at a regularly scheduled monthly meeting of the commission. The commission shall not be required to hear any application filed within
twenty one (21) days of a scheduled meeting, but may hear the application at any subsequent meeting within one hundred twenty (120) days of
application.
2. Public Hearing If Demolition, Relocation, Or Removal: After the filing of a properly completed formal application for a certificate of appropriateness
that includes a request for demolition, relocation, or removal, the commission shall conduct a public hearing on the application. Notice of the hearing
shall be given in accordance with section 12-1-4 of this title, and the hearing shall be conducted in accordance with section 12-1-5 of this title. The
hearing shall be commenced within one hundred twenty (120) days after the filing of a properly completed formal application. (Ord. O-1-06, 1-9-
2006)
12-5-5: DECISION OF THE COMMISSION:
A. Approval: If the formal application is approved without conditions, the commission shall issue the certificate of appropriateness permitting the building
commissioner to proceed with other required reviews and approvals. The commission shall notify the applicant of its decision within thirty (30) days
after the close of the public hearing.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 411/416
B. Approval With Conditions: If the formal application is approved with conditions, the commission shall notify the applicant in writing and shall specify the
conditions to be imposed and the reasons therefor in light of the criteria applicable to this chapter. If the applicant notifies the commission in writing that
the conditions are acceptable, or if the applicant does not appeal the approval with conditions within the prescribed period of time, the commission shall
issue the certificate of appropriateness, subject to the conditions.
C. Denial: If the formal application is denied, the commission shall notify the applicant in writing and shall specify the particulars in which the application is
inconsistent with the criteria applicable to this chapter. If the commission denies a certificate of appropriateness for a landmark structure, no alteration
shall be permitted to proceed, and no permits shall be issued for the proposed alteration, demolition, signage, or any other physical modifications of the
designated landmark. If the commission issues a denial of a certificate of appropriateness for a structure, building, site, or area within a designated
historic district other than a designated landmark structure, such denial is merely advisory and shall not prohibit anapplicant from proceeding with the
proposed alteration, demolition, signage or any other physical modifications of the structure, building, site, or area within the historic district, upon the
issuance of the denial, and upon receiving all other required approvals and permits therefor.
D. Validity: A certificate of appropriateness shall be invalid if the plans approved by the commission are altered, if any conditions of the certificate are not
satisfied, or if any building permit issued for the approved work becomes invalid. A certificate of appropriateness shall expire one year after the date of
its issuance.
E. Appeal: When a certificate of appropriateness for a designated landmark is denied, the applicant may appeal the commission's decision to the village
council by filing an appeal in writing to the village administrator within fifteen (15) days after the applicant is served with notice by personal delivery or
certified or registered mail of the commission's decision. For the purposes of this section, the date of mailing or delivery shall be the date of service.
The village council may receive comments on the contents of the record but no new matter may be considered by the village council. After due
consideration of the facts contained in the record submitted to the council by the commission, the village council may affirm the decision or recommend
changes or may overturn the commission's decision. (Ord. O-1-06, 1-9-2006)
12-5-6: CERTIFICATE OF ECONOMIC HARDSHIP:
Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this title to the contrary, the commission may issue a certificate of economic hardship to allow the performance of
work for which a certificate of appropriateness has been denied.
A. State Assistance: Applicants claiming economic hardship shall be required to apply to the state historic preservation agency to determine eligibility for
rehabilitation assistance. The eligibility for and availability of financial aid shall be considered by the commission in making its decision.
B. Application Requirements: An applicant for a certificate of economic hardship may submit any or all of the following information in order to assist the
commission in making its determination on the application:
1. The amount paid for the property, the date of purchase, and the party from whom purchased (including a description of the relationship, if any,
between the owner and the person from whom the property was purchased).
2. The assessed value of the land and improvements thereon according to the two (2) most recent assessments.
3. Real estate taxes for the previous two (2) years.
4. Remaining mortgage balance, if any, and annual debt service, if any, for the previous two (2) years.
5. All appraisals obtained within the previous two (2) years by the owner or applicant or their lenders in connection with this purchase, financing, or
ownership of the property.
6. Any listing of the property for sale or rent, price asked, and offers received, if any.
7. Any consideration by the owner as to profitable adaptive uses for the property.
8. If the property is income producing, the annual gross income from the property for the previous two (2) years, itemized operating and maintenance
expenses for the previous two (2) years, and annual cash flow before and after debt service, if any, during the same period.
9. Form of ownership or operation of the property, whether sole proprietorship, for profit or not for profit corporation, limited partnership, joint venture, or
other.
10. Any other information including, but not limited to, income tax bracket of the owner, applicant, or principal investors in the property reasonably
necessary for a determination as to whether the property can be reasonably sold or yield a reasonable return to present or future owners.
C. Study Period: If the commission finds that, without approval of the proposed work, a reasonable economic return cannot be obtained from the property,
then the application shall be delayed for a period not to exceed forty five (45) days. During this period of delay, the commission shall investigate plans
and make recommendations to the village council to allow for a reasonably beneficial use or a reasonable economic return, or to otherwise preserve
the subject property. Such plans and recommendations may include, without limitation, the following: a relaxation of the provisions of this title, an
abatement of real property taxes, financial assistance, building code modifications, and/or changes in zoning regulations.
D. Decision: If, by the end of this forty five (45) day period, the commission has found that without approval of the proposed work, the property cannot be
put to a reasonable beneficial use, or the owner cannot obtain a reasonable economic return therefrom, then the commission shall issue a certificate of
economic hardship approving the proposed work. If the commission finds otherwise, it shall deny the application for a certificate of economic hardship.
E. Appeal: When a certificate of economic hardship is denied, the applicant may appeal the commission's decision in the same manner provided for
certificates of appropriateness, as described in section 12-5-5 of this title. (Ord. O-1-06, 1-9-2006)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 412/416
12-5-7: NATURAL DESTRUCTION OR DEMOLITION:
In the case of partial or complete natural destruction or demolition of a landmark or structure, building, site, or area within a historic district, the owner of
record shall be required to obtain a certificate of appropriateness from the commission prior to reconstruction. Although exact duplication of the previous
structure may not be required, the exterior design of the property shall be in harmony with:
A. The exterior design of the structure prior to damage, and
B. The character of the historic district, where the structure, building, site or area is within a historic district. (Ord. O-1-06, 1-9-2006)
12-5-8: PENALTIES:
Any person who undertakes or causes an alteration, construction, demolition, or removal of any nominated or designated landmark without a certificate of
appropriateness shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more
than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Any person who undertakes or causes an alteration, construction, demolition, or removal of any structure,
building, site, or area within a nominated or designated historic district without having obtained a final decision from the commission on a certificate of
appropriateness application shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00)
nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Every day such violation shall continue to exist shall constitute a separate violation. In addition to
such penalties, the village may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to enjoin, correct or abate any violation of this title. (Ord. O-1-06, 1-9-2006)
Title 13
FAIR HOUSING
Chapter 1
FAIR HOUSING REGULATIONS
13-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE: Any drug or other substance, or immediate precursor included in the definition contained in section 802 of the controlled
substances act (21 USC § 801 et seq.).
DISCRIMINATION: To treat any person in a protected class differently from others.
ELDERLY PERSON: A person fifty five (55) years of age or older.
FAMILIAL STATUS: One or more individuals (who have not attained the age of 18 years) being domiciled with:
A. A parent or other person having legal custody of such individual or individuals;
B. The designee of such parent or other person having such custody, with the written permission of such parent or other person; or
C. A person who is pregnant or is in the process of securing legal custody of any individual who has not attained the age of eighteen (18) years.
HANDICAP: With respect to a person, a physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more major life activities, as defined in section
12102 of the Americans with disabilities act (42 USC § 12101 et seq.), a record of such an impairment, or being regarded as having such an impairment.
HOUSING ACCOMMODATIONS: Includes any improved or unimproved real property, or part thereof, which is used or occupied, or is intended, arranged
or designed to be used or occupied, as the home or residence of one or more individuals.
LEASE: Includes sublease, assignment, or rental, and includes any contract to do any of the foregoing.
LENDING INSTITUTION: Any bank, insurance company, savings and loan association, other person in the business of lending money or guaranteeing
loans, any person in the business of obtaining, arranging or negotiating loans or guarantees as agent or broker, and any person in the business of buying
loans or instruments for the payment of money which are secured by title to or a security interest in real property, but shall not include any religious
institution or organization nor any charitable or educational organization operated, supervised or controlled by a religious institution or organization.
MARITAL STATUS: The legal status of being married, single, separated, divorced, or widowed.
NATIONAL ORIGIN: The place in which a person or one of his or her ancestors was born.
OWNER: Any person who holds legal or equitable title to, or owns any beneficial interest in, any real property or who holds legal or equitable title to shares
of, or holds any beneficial interest in, any real estate cooperative which owns any real property.
PURCHASE: Includes any contract to purchase.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 413/416
REAL ESTATE BROKER OR SALESPERSON: A person, whether licensed or not, who, for or with the expectation of receiving a consideration, lists, sells,
purchases, exchanges, rents, or leases real property on behalf of another person, or who negotiates or attempts to negotiate any of these activities, or
who holds himself or herself out as engaged in these activities.
REAL ESTATE TRANSACTION: Includes the sale, exchange, rental or lease of real property and also includes the brokering or appraising of residential
real property and the making or purchasing of loans or providing other financial assistance:
A. For purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining a dwelling; or
B. Secured by residential real estate.
REAL PROPERTY: Includes buildings, structures, real estate, lands, tenements, leaseholds, interests in real estate cooperatives, condominiums, and
hereditaments, corporeal and incorporeal, or any interest therein.
RELIGION: Includes all aspects of religious observance and practice, as well as belief, and all aspects of religious nonobservance, nonpractice, and
nonbelief.
SALE: Includes any contract to sell, exchange or convey, transfer or assign legal or equitable title to or beneficial interest in real property.
SOLICITATION: Any conduct designed or intended to induce the owner of any real property to sell, rent, exchange, convey, transfer or list for sale or rental
such real property. (Ord. O-28-09, 4-13-2009)
13-1-2: DISCRIMINATION IN REAL ESTATE TRANSACTIONS PROHIBITED:
A. No owner, lessee, or sublessee of real property, real estate broker or salesperson, lender, financial institution, advertiser, or agent of any of the
foregoing, shall discriminate against any person because of that person's race, color, religion, national origin, sex, familial status or handicap.
B. It shall be a violation for any person listed in subsection A of this section, on the grounds of unlawful discrimination to engage in any of the following
acts:
1. Refusal to engage in a real estate transaction with a person or discriminate in making available such a transaction.
2. Altering the terms, conditions or privileges of a real estate transaction or in the furnishing of facilities or services in connection therewith.
3. Refusal to receive or failure to transmit a bona fide offer to engage in a real estate transaction from a person.
4. Refusal to negotiate for a real estate transaction with a person.
5. Representing to a person that real property is not available for inspection, sale, rental, or lease when in fact it is so available, or failure to bring a
property listing to his or her attention, or refusal to permit him or her to inspect real property.
6. Printing, circulating, posting, mailing, publishing or causing to be published a written or oral statement, advertisement or sign, or using a form of
application for a real estate transaction, or making a record in inquiry in connection with a prospective real estate transaction, which expresses any
limitation founded upon, or indicating, directly or indirectly an intent to engage in unlawful discrimination.
7. Offering, soliciting, accepting, using or retaining a listing of real property with knowledge that unlawful discrimination or discrimination on the basis of
race, color, religion, national origin, sex, familial status, or handicap in a real estate transaction is intended.
8. Soliciting for sale, leasing, listing or purchasing any residential real estate within the village on the grounds of loss of value due to the present or
prospective entry into the vicinity of the property involved of any person or persons of any particular race, color, religion, national origin, sex, familial
status, or handicap.
9. Distributing or causing to be distributed, written material or statements designed to induce any owner of residential real estate in this village to sell or
lease his or her property because of any present or prospective changes in the race, color, religion, national origin, sex, familial status, or handicap.
10. Intentionally creating alarm, among residents of any community, by transmitting communications in any manner, including a telephone call, whether
or not conversation thereby ensues, with a design to induce any owner of residential real estate in this village to sell or lease his or her property
because of any present or prospective entry into the vicinity of the property involved of any person or persons of any particular race, color, religion,
national origin, sex, familial status, or handicap. (Ord. O-28-09, 4-13-2009)
13-1-3: HANDICAPPED HOUSING:
In addition to those prohibited acts identified in section 13-1-2 of this chapter, the following shall also be unlawful:
A. Discrimination: To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling or in the provision of services or
facilities in connection with such dwelling because of a handicap of:
1. The buyer or renter;
2. A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after it is so sold, rented, or made available; or
3. Any person associated with that person.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 414/416
B. Inquiry: To make an inquiry to determine whether an applicant for a dwelling, a person intending to reside in that dwelling after it is sold, rented, or made
available, or any person associated with that person has a handicap; or to make inquiry as to the nature or severity of a handicap of such a person.
However, this subsection does not prohibit the following inquiries, provided these inquiries are made of all applicants, whether or not they have
handicaps:
1. Inquiry into the applicant's ability to meet the requirements of ownership or tenancy.
2. Inquiry to determine whether an applicant is qualified for a dwelling available only to persons with handicaps or to persons with a particular type of
handicap.
3. Inquiry to determine whether an applicant for a dwelling is qualified for a priority available to persons with handicaps or to persons with a particular
type of handicap.
4. Inquiry to determine whether an applicant for a dwelling is a current illegal abuser or addict of a controlled substance.
5. Inquiry to determine whether an applicant has been convicted of the illegal manufacture or distribution of a controlled substance.
Nothing in this subsection requires that a dwelling be made available to an individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to the health or
safety of other individuals or whose tenancy would result in substantial physical damage to the property of others.
C. Unit Modification: To refuse to permit, at the expense of the handicapped person, reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or to be
occupied by such person if such modifications may be necessary to afford such person full enjoyment of the premises, except that, in the case of a
rental, the landlord may, where it is reasonable to do so, condition permission for a modification on the renter agreeing to restore the interior of the
premises to the condition that existed before the modifications, reasonable wear and tear excepted.
D. Rules And Policies: To refuse to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies, practices, or services, when such accommodations may be
necessary to afford such person equal opportunity to use and enjoy the dwelling, including public and common use areas.
E. New Construction: To fail to design and construct dwellings after March 13, 1991, in such a manner that:
1. The public use and common use portions of such dwellings are readily accessible to and usable by a handicapped person;
2. All the doors designed to allow passage into and within the premises within such dwellings are sufficiently wide to allow passage by handicapped
persons in wheelchairs; and
3. All premises within such dwellings contain the following features of adaptive design:
a. An accessible route into and through the dwelling;
b. Light switches, electrical outlets, thermostats, and other environmental controls in accessible locations;
c. Reinforcements in bathroom walls to allow later installation of grab bars; and
d. Usable kitchen and bathrooms such that an individual in a wheelchair can maneuver about the space.
F. Guide/Support Dogs: To refuse to sell or rent because a person has a guide, hearing, or support dog. It shall be a violation for the owner or agent of any
housing accommodation to:
1. Refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of or otherwise make unavailable or deny
property to any blind, hearing impaired or physically handicapped person because he has a guide, hearing, or support dog;
2. Discriminate against any blind, hearing impaired, or physically handicapped person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental property, or
in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith, because he has a guide, hearing or support dog; or
3. Require, because a blind, hearing impaired, or physically handicapped person has a guide, hearing or support dog, an extra charge in a lease, rental
agreement, or contract of purchase or sale, other than for actual damage done to the premises by the dog. (Ord. O-28-09, 4-13-2009)
13-1-4: FINANCING:
In addition to those prohibited acts identified in sections 13-1-2 and 13-1-3 of this chapter, it shall be a violation for any financial institution, on the grounds
of unlawful discrimination, to:
A. Deny any person any of the services normally offered by such an institution;
B. Provide any person with any service which is different from or provided in a different manner than that which is provided to other persons similarly
situated;
C. Deny or vary the terms of a loan because of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, familial status or handicap;
D. Deny or vary the terms of a loan on the basis that a specific parcel of real estate offered as security is located in a specific geographical area;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 415/416
E. Deny or vary the terms of a loan without having considered all of the regular and dependable income of each person who would be liable for repayment
of the loan;
F. Utilize lending standards that have no economic basis; or
G. Refuse to purchase or impose different terms or conditions on loans or other debts or securities which support the purchase, construction,
improvement, repair, or maintenance of a dwelling or which are secured by residential real estate because of race, color, religion, sex, physical or
mental handicap, familial status, or national origin. (Ord. O-28-09, 4-13-2009)
13-1-5: EXEMPTIONS:
A. Nothing in this chapter, other than the prohibition against discriminatory advertising, shall apply to the following:
1. The rental, lease, or occupancy of a room in an owner occupied single-family dwelling, provided the following conditions are met:
a. The owner does not own or have any interest in more than three (3) single-family houses at any one time;
b. The house is sold or rented without the use of a real estate broker, agent or salesperson, or the facilities of any person in the business of selling or
renting dwellings.
2. Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four (4) families living independently of
each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such living quarters as his residence.
B. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a religious organization, association, or society or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised, or
controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization or society from limiting the sale, rental, or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates
for other than commercial purposes to persons of the same religion or from giving preference to such persons, unless membership in such religion is
restricted on account of race, color, national origin.
C. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a private club not, in fact, open to the public, which, as an incident to its primary purposes, provides lodgings which
it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose from listing the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members and their guests or from
giving preference to its members.
D. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the rental or sale of a dwelling on the basis of age or handicap when such dwelling is authorized, approved,
financed, or subsidized, in whole or in part, by a unit of state, local, or federal government.
E. Nothing in this chapter shall limit the applicability of any reasonable local, state, or federal restrictions regarding the maximum number of occupants
permitted to occupy a dwelling.
F. Nothing in this chapter shall require the rental or sale of a unit to any person convicted of the illegal manufacture or distribution of a controlled
substance.
G. Nothing in this chapter shall apply to persons engaged in the business of furnishing appraisals of real property from taking into consideration factors
other than those based on unlawful discrimination or familial status in furnishing appraisals.
H. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit financial institutions from considering sound underwriting practices in contemplation of any loan to any person.
Such practices shall include the following:
1. The willingness and the financial ability of the borrower to repay the loan;
2. The market value of any real estate or other time or property proposed as security for any loan; and
3. Diversification of the financial institution's investment portfolio.
I. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a person engaged in the business of furnishing appraisals of real property from taking into consideration factors
other than race, creed, age, ancestry, unfavorable military discharge, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin. (Ord. O-28-09, 4-
13-2009)
13-1-6: COMPLAINT PROCEDURES:
A. The village shall act as a local source for assistance and information for persons who have complaints related to unfair housing practices.
B. The village shall provide assistance and information to any such person, which shall include, but is not limited to:
1. The rights and remedies available to a person who has been discriminated against by virtue of an unfair housing practice;
2. The types of discrimination which are considered to be unfair housing practices;
3. The names, addresses and phone numbers of county, state and federal agencies where such person may file formal complaints; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=422 416/416
4. Such other relevant information or assistance as the village may have available to assist such person.
C. The village administrator shall be responsible for coordinating and directing the village's fair housing procedures. (Ord. O-28-09, 4-13-2009)