
Geneseo, IL Code of Ordinances


CITY OF GENESEO, ILLINOIS
CODE OF ORDINANCES



2019 S-44 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. O-19-03, passed 4-9-2019; and
State legislation current through 2018 Illinois Legislative Service Pamphlet
#7



 



Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com



ADOPTING ORDINANCE



City of Geneseo
1953-2009



AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF GENESEO, ILLINOIS:
REVISING, AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING CERTAIN EXISTING
GENERAL ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF GENESEO DEALING WITH SUBJECTS EMBRACED IN
SUCH CODE OF ORDINANCES



   WHEREAS, the Acts of the Legislature of the State of Illinois empower
and authorize the municipality to revise, amend, restate, codify and compile
any existing ordinances and all new ordinances not heretofore adopted or
published and to incorporate such ordinances into one ordinance in book form;
and,



   WHEREAS, the City Council did approve to solicit RFPs for such service
and approved to engage American Legal Publishing Company at their regular
meeting on October 14, 2008; and,



   WHEREAS, the City Council of the City of Geneseo, Illinois has
authorized a general compilation, revision and codification of the ordinances
of a general and permanent nature and publication of such ordinance in book
form; and,



   WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of
the municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace,
health, safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance
take effect at an early date.



BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF GENESEO, ILLINOIS:



Section I.   The general ordinances of the City of Geneseo as revised,
amended, restated, codified, and compiled in book form are hereby adopted as
and shall constitute the "CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF GENESEO,
ILLINOIS."



Section II.   Such Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 1 shall
consist of the following Titles:



City Charter



Title I: General Provisions



Title III: Administration



Title V: Public Works



Title VII: Traffic Code



Title IX: General Regulations



Title XI: Business Regulations



Title XIII: General Offenses



Title XV: Land Usage



Table of Special Ordinances



Parallel References



Index



Section III.   All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in
such Code of Ordinances shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective
date of this ordinance except as they are included and re-ordained in whole
or in part in such Code; provided, such repeal shall not affect any offense
committed or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective
date of this ordinance, nor shall such repeal affect the provisions of
ordinances levying taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching
territory, establishing franchises, or granting special rights to certain
persons, authorizing public improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds
or borrowing of money, authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal
property, granting or accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to
public use, vacating or setting the boundaries of streets or other public
places; nor shall such repeal affect any other ordinance of a temporary or
special nature or pertaining to subjects not contained in or covered by the
Code.



Section IV.   Such Code shall be deemed published as of the day of its
adoption and approval by the City Council and the City Clerk of the City of
Geneseo, Illinois is hereby authorized and ordered to file a copy of such
Code of Ordinances in the Office of the Clerk.



Section V.   Such Code shall be in full force and effect as provided in
Section VI, and such Code shall be presumptive evidence in all courts and
places of the ordinance and all provisions, sections, penalties and
regulations therein contained and of the date of passage, and that the same
is properly signed, attested, recorded, and approved and that any public
hearings and notices thereof as required by law have been given.



Section VI.   This ordinance is declared to be an urgent measure necessary
for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety and general
welfare of the people of this municipality, and shall take effect at the
earliest date provided by law.



PASSED AND ADOPTED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF GENESEO, HENRY COUNTY,
ILLINOIS ON THIS 13TH DAY OF OCTOBER, 2009 AND APPROVED BY THE MAYOR THIS  
      DAY OF OCTOBER, 2009.



               Patrick Eberhardt /s/             



               Mayor for the City of Geneseo



      (Seal)



Tracy A Kotecki /s/



City Clerk



AYES:      7   Deener, Ewert, Kennett, Peterson, Spensley, Van Der
Leest & West



Nays:      0



Abstain:   0



Absent:   1    Schmid



CITY OF GENESEO
ORDINANCE NO: O-11-020



AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR
THE CITY OF GENESEO, ILLINOIS AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY



   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the 3rd  supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the Political
Subdivision, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general and
permanent nature enacted since the prior shipment to the Code of Ordinances
of the City of Geneseo; and



   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the
revision or addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are
based on or make reference to sections of the Illinois code; and



   WHEREAS, it is the intent of the Legislative Authority to accept these
updated sections in accordance with the changes of the law of the State of
Illinois; and



   WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of
the municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace,
health, safety, and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance
take effect at an early date;



NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY OF THE  CITY OF
GENESEO, ILLINOIS:



Section I:   That the 3rd  supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the
City of Geneseo as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of
Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted
by reference as if set out in its entirety.



Section II:   Such supplement shall be deemed published as of the day of
its adoption and approval by the Legislative Authority and the Clerk of the
City of Geneseo is hereby authorized and ordered to insert such supplement
into the copy of the Code of Ordinances kept on file in the Office of the
Clerk.



Section III:   This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure
necessary for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety and
general welfare of the people of this municipality, and shall take effect at
the earliest date provided by law.



PASSED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF GENESEO AND APPROVED BY THE MAYOR
THIS _____ DAY OF AUGUST, 2011



                                 _____________
________________



                                    Linda
Van Der Leest, Mayor



                                                   
   



Loree K. Phlypo, City Clerk



This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage,
approval, and due publication in pamphlet form as required by law.



Passed by the City Council of the City of Geneseo, Illinois on August 9th,
2011



Approved by the Mayor of the City of Geneseo, Illinois on August 10th, 2011.



                                        
                                                   



                                 Linda Van
Der Leest



(Seal)



                                 Mayor, City
of Geneseo



Attest:



                                             



Loree K. Phlypo



City Clerk



CITY CHARTER




AN ACT to incorporate the City of Geneseo.




ARTICLE I.



   SEC. 1.   Be it enacted by the People of the State of Illinois,
represented in the General Assembly, That the inhabitants of the town of
Geneseo, in the county of Henry, and state of Illinois, be and are hereby
constituted a body politic and corporate, by the name and style of “The
City of Geneseo,” and by that name shall have perpetual succession, and
have and use a common seal, which they may change and alter at pleasure.



   SEC. 2.   The corporate limits and jurisdiction of the city of
Geneseo shall extend over and include within the same, all that district of
country situated in the county of Henry, and state of Illinois, embraced
within the present limits of the town of Geneseo, to-wit:  All those tracts
of land embraced within sections twenty-one (21) in township seventeen (17)
north, in range three (3) east of the fourth principal meridian, and so much
of section sixteen, in said township, as is included in lots number fourteen,
fifteen, sixteen, seventeen and eighteen, and the south halves of lots number
eleven, twelve and thirteen, and, also, so much of lot number six in said
section sixteen, and so much of the east half of the south-east quarter of
section seventeen, in said township, as shall lie south of a direct line,
extending from east to west across the center of said lots number eleven,
twelve and thirteen, also the east half of the east half of section twenty in
said township.



   SEC. 3.   The inhabitants of said city, by the name and style
aforesaid, shall have power to sue and be sued, to plead and be impleaded,
defend and be defended, in all courts of law and equity, and in all actions
whatsoever; to purchase, receive and hold property, real and personal, in
said city; to purchase, receive and hold property, both real and personal,
beyond the city, for burial grounds, or for other public purposes, for the
use of the inhabitants of said city; to sell, lease, convey or dispose of
property, real and personal, for the benefit of the city, and to improve and
protect such property, and to do all other things in relation thereto, as may
be necessary.



   SEC. 4.   The president of the present board of trustees of the town
of Geneseo, Isaac N. Wilson, together with Andrew Crawford and Joseph A.
Sawyer, shall on the first Monday of March, A.D. 1865, or within ten days
thereafter, divide the city of Geneseo into two wards, as nearly equal in
population as they may deem practicable, particularly describing the
boundaries of each ward, and cause two written notices of such division and
description to be posted up in public places in each ward ten days before the
first day of April, 1865, and also cause such division and description to be
recorded in the present town book of ordinances and by-laws of the said town
of Geneseo.



   SEC. 5.   Whenever any tract of land adjoining the city of Geneseo
shall be laid off into town lots, the same shall be recorded, as now required
by law, and shall be annexed to and form a part of said City of Geneseo.



ARTICLE II.
OF THE CITY COUNCIL.



   SEC. 1.   There shall be a city council, to consist of a mayor and
board of aldermen.



   SEC. 2.   The board of aldermen shall consist of two members from
each ward, to be chosen by the qualified voters thereof for two years.



   SEC. 3.   No person shall be an alderman, unless at the time of his
election, he shall have resided at least six months within the limits of the
city, and shall be, at the time of his election, twenty-one years of age, and
a citizen of the United States.



   SEC. 4.   If any alderman shall, after his election, remove from the
ward from which he is elected, his office shall thereby become vacated.



   SEC. 5.   At the first meeting of the city council, the aldermen
shall be divided, by lot, into two classes, the seats of those of the first
class shall be vacated at the expiration of one year from their election, and
of the second class at the expiration of the second year after their
election, so that half of the board shall be elected annually.



   SEC. 6.   The city council shall judge of the qualifications,
elections and returns of their members, and shall determine all contested
elections.



   SEC. 7.   A majority of the city council shall constitute a quorum
to do business, but a smaller number may adjourn from day to day, and compel
the attendance of absent members under such penalties as may be prescribed by
ordinance.



   SEC. 8.   The city council shall have power to determine the rule of
its proceedings, punish its members for disorderly conduct, and, with the
concurrence of two-thirds of the members elected, expel a member.



   SEC. 9.   The city council shall keep a full journal of their
proceedings in a book or books provided for that purpose, which said book or
books shall at all times be open to the public inspection.



   SEC. 10.   No alderman shall be appointed to any office under the
authority of the city, which shall have been created, or the emoluments of
which shall have been increased during the time for which he shall have been
elected.



   SEC. 11.   All vacancies that shall occur in the board of aldermen,
shall be filled by the remaining members of the said board of aldermen, by
their appointment from the ward wherein the vacancy occurred and a record of
the same made in their journal of proceedings.



   SEC. 12.   Whenever there shall be a tie in the election of mayor or
aldermen, the judges of election shall certify the same to the city council,
who shall determine the same by lot.



   SEC. 13.   The city council shall meet for business on the second
Tuesday in each month, and at such other times as may be necessary, upon the
call of the mayor, or any two members of the city council.



ARTICLE III.
OF THE MAYORALTY.



   SEC. 1.   The chief executive officer of the city shall be a mayor,
who shall be elected by the qualified voters of the city, and hold his office
for one year1, and until his successor shall be elected and qualified.



   SEC. 2.   No person shall be eligible to the office of mayor who
shall not have been a resident of the city one year next preceding his
election, or who shall be under twenty-one years of age, or who shall not, at
the time of his election, be a citizen of the United States, and a freeholder
within the city limits.



   SEC. 3.   If any mayor shall, during the time for which he shall
have been elected, remove from the city, his office shall be vacated.



   SEC. 4.   Whenever an election of mayor shall be contested, the city
council shall determine the same in such manner as may be prescribed by
ordinance.



   SEC. 5.   Whenever any vacancy shall happen in the office of mayor,
it shall be filled by election.



   SEC. 6.   The mayor shall preside at all meetings of the council,
and shall have a casting vote, and no other, and, in case of his
non-attendance upon any meeting of the council, the board of aldermen shall
appoint one of their number chairman, pro tem.



   SEC. 7.   The mayor shall, at all times, be active and vigilant in
enforcing the laws and ordinances for the government of the city; and it is
hereby expressly made his duty to inspect the conduct of all subordinate
officers of said city, and to give notice of their negligence, or violation
of duty, to the council, and at the regular meeting, to communicate in
writing to the aldermen, such information, and recommend all such measures
as, in his opinion, may tend to the improvement of the finances, the police,
the health, security, comfort and ornament of the city; and the city council
shall have full power to enact all ordinances necessary to carry out such
recommendation.



   SEC. 8.   The mayor shall receive for his services, such salary as
shall be fixed by the said city council, in no case, however, to exceed the
sum of three hundred dollars per year2 and shall be so fixed and paid during
the last month of the year that said mayor shall so hold his office, and in
case of his neglect or omission of duty, he shall be removed by the board of
aldermen, who may hold a special meeting, appointing one of their number
chairman, having notified said mayor of such meeting, and try and remove him
for such neglect or omission. And in case of his said removal, no salary
shall be granted or paid him by said city council; but it shall, in all
cases, require a full vote of the aldermen to remove said mayor.



Editor’s note:



   1 one year changed to two years; by referendum on 4-7-1987



   2 in no case, however, to exceed the sum of three hundred dollars per
year [deleted by referendum on 11-8-1988];



   the sum of four thousand eight hundred dollars ($4,800.00) per
municipal year, effective April 1, 1990



   [by Ordinance No. 1464, adopted 1-9-90]



ARTICLE IV.
OF ELECTIONS.



   SEC. 1.   On the first Monday in April next, an election shall be
held in each ward of said city, for one mayor for said city, and two aldermen
for each ward; and forever there-after, on the first Monday in April of each
year, there shall be an election held in each ward of said city, for one
mayor of the city, and one alderman of each ward. The present board of
trustees of the town of Geneseo shall make the necessary arrangements for
said first election, and fix the place in each ward as before determined by
them, for said election; and one or more of their present number, together
with one of the magistrates or justices of the peace of said present town of
Geneseo, shall preside at and hold such election in each of said wards, the
said trustee or trustees acting as clerk or clerks of said election, and said
magistrate or justice, as judge thereof; and the election returns from each
ward shall be returned to said board of trustees, or a majority of them, who
shall determine the same, and make record thereof in the present book of
records of said town of Geneseo, and for all elections to be held after said
first election, the city council shall, on their regular meeting in February
of each year, or as soon thereafter as convenient, appoint one judge and one
clerk of election for each ward for the then coming election, and make record
of the same in their journal of proceedings, and in case any, or either of
said judges or clerks of election shall fail to attend, the mayor, on the
mornings of said elections, may supply their places by appointment. The pay
of said judges and clerks of election to be paid out of the city treasury,
the sum fixed and ordered by the city council.



   SEC. 2.   The judges of any city election, within five days after
such election, shall deliver the poll books to the mayor, who shall
immediately call a meeting of the council, who shall examine the poll books,
and enter the result of the election on their journal; and if the persons
elected do not take the oath of office within ten days after said election,
required by this act their office shall be declared vacant, and a new
election ordered.



   SEC. 3.   All male inhabitants over the age of twenty-one years, who
are entitled to vote for state officers, and who shall have been actual
residents of said city sixty days next preceding any city or ward election,
shall be entitled to vote for city officers: Provided, that said voters shall
give their votes in all city or ward elections in the wards in which they
respectively reside, and in no other, and that no vote shall be received at
any of said elections unless the person offering such vote shall have been an
actual resident of the ward when the same is offered, at least ten days next
preceding such election.



ARTICLE V.
OF APPOINTMENTS.



   SEC. 1.   The city council of the city of Geneseo shall have the
power to appoint a city marshal, who shall be ex officio collector, a city
clerk, a city attorney, a city assessor, a city treasurer, and a city street
commissioner, and such other city officers as they may deem expedient, and
they may give one or more of said offices to any one person as they may see
proper, and regulate their salaries and fix the same, as they may think best,
and in accordance with the services performed by said officers; and the city
council may remove any of said officers at their pleasure, either for
misconduct or for any other cause.



ARTICLE VI.
OF POWERS AND DUTIES OF CITY OFFICERS, ETC.



   SEC. 1.   The mayor and each alderman, before entering upon the
duties of their office, shall take and subscribe an oath, that they will
support the constitution of the United States, and of this state, and that
they will well and truly perform the duties of their office to the best of
their skill and abilities.



   SEC. 2.   All ordinances and resolutions shall, before they take
effect, be placed in the office of the city clerk, and if the mayor approves
thereof, he shall sign the same, and such as he shall not approve, he shall
return to the city council, with his objections thereto. Upon the return of
any ordinance or resolution by the mayor, the vote by which the same was
passed shall be reconsidered, and, if after such reconsideration, a majority
of all the members of the city council shall agree by the “ayes and
noes,” which shall be entered upon the journals, to pass the same, it shall
go into effect; and if the mayor shall neglect to approve, or object to any
such proceedings for a longer period than three days after the same shall be
placed in the clerk’s office as aforesaid, the same shall go into effect.
He shall, ex-officio, have power to administer any oath required to be taken
by this act, or any law of the state, to take depositions, acknowledgments of
deeds, mortgages, and all other instruments of writing, and certify the same
under the seal of the city, which shall be good and valid in law.



   SEC. 3.   In case of vacancy in the office of mayor, or of his being
unable to perform the duties of his office by reason of temporary or
continued absence, or sickness, the city council shall appoint one of its
members, by ballot, to preside over their meetings, whose official
designation shall be “acting mayor,” and the alderman so appointed shall
be vested with all the powers, and perform all the duties of mayor, until the
mayor shall assume his office, or the vacancy shall be filled by a new
election.



   SEC. 4.   The clerk shall hold his office for one year. He shall
keep the corporate seal, and all papers and books belonging to the city. He
shall attend all meetings of the city council, and keep a full record of
their proceedings on the journals, and copies of all papers duly filed in his
office, and transcripts from the journals of the proceedings of the city
council, certified by him under the corporate seal of the city, shall be
evidence in all courts in like manner as if the originals were produced; he
shall likewise draw all warrants on the treasury, and countersign the same,
and keep an accurate account thereof in a book provided for that purpose, and
he shall have power to administer any oath required to be taken by this act.



   SEC. 5.   It shall be the duty of the city attorney to perform all
professional duties incident to his office, and, when required, to furnish
written opinions upon questions and subjects submitted to him by the mayor or
the city council, or its committees.



   SEC. 6.   The city treasurer shall receive all moneys belonging to
the city, and shall keep an accurate account of all receipts and
expenditures, in such manner as the city council shall direct. All moneys
shall be drawn from the treasury, in pursuance of an order of the city
council, by treasury warrant signed by the mayor or the presiding officer of
the city council, countersigned by the clerk; such warrant shall specify for
what purpose the amount therein named is to be paid. The treasurer shall
exhibit to the city council, at least twenty days before the annual election
of each year, and oftener if required, a full and detailed account of all
receipts and expenditures since the date of the last annual report, and also
the state of the treasury, which account shall be filed in the office of the
clerk.



   SEC. 7.   The city marshal shall perform such duties as shall be
prescribed by the city council for the preservation of the public peace, the
collection of license moneys, fines or otherwise; he shall possess the powers
and authority of a constable at common law, and under the statutes of this
state, and receive like fees; but shall not serve civil process without first
entering into bond as such constable, to be approved by the supervisor of the
town, as in other cases. He shall execute and return all process issued by
any proper officer under this act, or any ordinance in pursuance thereof. He
shall, also, as city collector, collect all taxes and assessments which may
be levied by the city council, and moneys belonging to the city, and keep an
accurate account of the same, and receive such percentage for so collecting
as the said council may direct, and shall, at any time, pay over into the
city treasury, all said moneys upon order so to do by said council.



   SEC. 8.   The street commissioner shall superintend all local
improvements in the city and carry into effect all orders of the city council
in relation thereto; it shall be his duty to superintend and supervise the
opening of streets and alleys, and the grading, improving and opening
thereof, and the construction and repairing of bridges, culverts and sewers;
to order the laying, re-laying and repairing of sidewalks; to give notice to
the owners of property adjoining such sidewalks, when required, and upon the
failure of any person to comply with such notice to cause the same to be
laid, re-laid or repaired and apportion the cost thereof among the persons or
lots, properly chargeable therewith, and deliver the account thereof to the
city clerk, to be laid before the city council; to make plans and estimates
of any work ordered in relation to streets and alleys, culverts or sewers; to
keep full and accurate accounts in appropriate books of all appropriations
made for work pertaining to his office, and all disbursements thereof,
specifying to whom made, and on what account, and he shall render monthly
accounts thereof to the city council.



   SEC. 9.   The city council shall have power, from time to time, to
require further and other duties of all officers whose duties are herein
prescribed, and prescribe the powers and duties of all officers elected or
appointed to any office under this act, whose duties are not herein
specified; they may also require all officers severally, before they enter
upon the duties of their respective offices, to execute a bond to the city of
Geneseo in such sum and with such securities as they may approve, conditioned
that they shall faithfully execute the duties of their respective offices,
and account for and pay over and deliver all moneys and other property
received by them, which bond, with the approval of the city council certified
thereon by the clerk, shall be filed in his office for the benefit of any
person aggrieved by the official act of the officer.



   SEC. 10.   If any person having been an officer of said city shall
not, within ten days after notification and request, deliver to his successor
in office all property, books, papers, and effects of every description in
his possession, belonging to said city, or appertaining to his said office,
he shall forfeit and pay for the use of the city, a sum not exceeding fifty
dollars, besides all damages and costs caused by his refusal or neglect so to
deliver; and such successor may recover possession of the books and papers
and effects belonging to his office, in the same manner as prescribed by the
laws of this state.



   SEC. 11.   All officers elected or appointed under this act, shall
be commissioned by warrant, under the corporate seal, signed by the mayor or
presiding city council and clerk.



ARTICLE VII.
OF THE LEGISLATIVE POWER OF THE CITY COUNCIL.



   SEC. 1.   The city council shall have control of the finances and of
all property, real, personal and mixed, belonging to the corporation, and
shall likewise have power within the jurisdiction of the city by ordinance.



   SEC. 2.   To borrow money on the credit of the city, and issue the
bonds of the city therefore; but no sum of money shall be borrowed at a
higher rate of interest than the rate allowed by law, nor shall a greater sum
or sums be borrowed or at any time outstanding, that the aggregate of which
shall exceed the sum of twenty-five hundred dollars, and no bonds of the city
shall be issued or negotiated at less than par value; but the city council
may apply any surplus money in the treasury to the extinguishment of the city
debt, or to the contingent fund, for the contingent expenses of the city.



   SEC. 3.   To appropriate money for improvements or appropriate the
same to provide for the payment of the debts and expenses of the city.



   SEC. 4.   To make regulations to prevent the introduction of
contagious diseases into the city; to make quarantine laws for that purpose,
and enforce the same within five miles of the city.



   SEC. 5.   To establish hospitals and make regulations for the
government of the same.



   SEC. 6.   To make regulations to secure the general health of the
inhabitants; to declare what shall be a nuisance and to prevent and remove
the same.



   SEC. 7.   To provide the city with water, to erect hydrants and
pumps, build cisterns and dig wells in the streets for the supply of engines
and buckets.



   SEC. 8.   To open, alter, abolish, widen, extend, establish, grade,
pave, or otherwise improve and keep in repair streets, avenues, lanes and
alleys, sidewalks, drains and sewers.



   SEC. 9.   To establish, erect and keep in repair bridges.



   SEC. 10.   To divide the city into wards, alter the boundaries
thereof, and erect additional wards as the occasion may require.



   SEC. 11.   To provide for lighting the streets and erecting lamp
posts.



   SEC. 12.   To establish, support and regulate night watches.



   SEC. 13.   To erect market houses, to establish markets and market
places, and to provide for the government thereof.



   SEC. 14.   To provide for all needful buildings for the use of the
city.



   SEC. 15.   To provide for inclosing, improving and regulating all
public grounds belonging to the city.



   SEC. 16.   To license, tax and regulate auctioneers, merchants,
peddlers, retailers, grocers, taverns, ordinaries, hawkers, brokers,
pawn-brokers and money changers.



   SEC. 17.   To license, tax and regulate hacks, carriages, wagons,
carts and drays, and fix the rates to be charged for the carriage of persons,
and for the wagonage, cartage and drayage of property.



   SEC. 18.   To license and regulate porters and the rates of
porterage.



   SEC. 19.   To license, tax and regulate all theatrical and other
exhibitions, shows and amusements.



   SEC. 20.   To restrain, prohibit and suppress tippling houses, dram
shops, gambling houses and bawdy houses, and other disorderly houses.



   SEC. 21.   To provide for the prevention and extinguishment of
fires; to organize and establish fire companies.



   SEC. 22.   To regulate the fixing of chimneys, and to fix the flues
thereof.



   SEC. 23.   To regulate the storage of gunpowder, tar, pitch, rosin,
and other combustible materials.



   SEC. 24.   To regulate and order parapet walls and partition fences,
and to restrain cattle, hogs, sheep and dogs from running at large.



   SEC. 25.   To establish standard weights and measures to be used in
the city in all cases not otherwise provided for by law, and to order all
laws upon the subject to be enforced, and to fix and enforce payments of
fines for non-compliance with any such order.



   SEC. 26.   To provide for the inspection and measuring of lumber and
other building materials, and for the measuring of all kinds of mechanical
works.



   SEC. 27.   To provide for the inspection and weighing of hay and
stone coal, the measurement of charcoal, fire wood and other fuel to be used
within said city.



   SEC. 28.   To provide for and regulate the inspection of tobacco and
of beef, pork, flour, meal, and whisky in barrels.



   SEC. 29.   To provide for and regulate the inspection of butter,
lard and other provisions.



   SEC. 30.   To regulate the weight and quality of bread to be sold
and used in the city.



   SEC. 31.   To regulate the size of bricks to be sold and used in the
city.



   SEC. 32.   To provide for taking enumeration of the inhabitants of
the city.



   SEC. 33.   To regulate the police of the city, to impose fines,
forfeitures and penalties for the breach of any ordinance, and provide for
the recovery and appropriation of such fines and forfeitures and the
enforcement of such penalties.



   SEC. 34.   The city council shall have exclusive power, within the
city by ordinance, to license, regulate and restrain the keeping of billiards
and billiard tables.



   SEC. 35.   The city council, by ordinance, shall have exclusive
power to license, prohibit, or regulate in any manner they see fit, the
selling, bartering or trafficking of any wine, rum, gin, brandy, whisky, malt
liquor, strong beer, ale, porter, mixed liquor, or any intoxicating liquors
whatsoever.



   SEC. 36   To regulate the running at large of dogs, and authorize
the destruction of the same if at large contrary to ordinance.



   SEC. 37.   To prevent horse racing, or immoderate riding or driving
of horses or other animals, and to prohibit the abuse of animals, and to
compel persons to fasten their horses or other animals attached to vehicles,
whenever standing in the streets of said city.



   SEC. 38.   To regulate, restrain or prohibit the running at large of
horses, cattle, asses, mules, swine, sheep, goats and geese, and to authorize
the distraining, impounding and sale of the same, for the costs of the
proceedings and the penalty incurred, and to impose penalties on the owners
thereof for a violation of any ordinance in relation thereto.



   SEC. 39.   To authorize and direct the taking up and providing for
the safe keeping and education, for such periods of time as may be deemed
expedient, of all children who are destitute of proper parental care.



   SEC. 40.   To direct the location and regulate the management and
construction of breweries, tanneries, blacksmith shops, founderies, livery
stables, and packing houses; to direct the location and regulate the
management and construction of, and restrain, abate, and prohibit, within the
city, and to the distance of one mile from the limits thereof, distilleries,
slaughtering establishments, establishments for steaming or rendering lard,
tallow, offal, and such other substances as may be rendered, and all other
establishments or places where any nauseous, offensive, or unwholesome
business may be carried on.



   SEC. 41.   To require railroad companies to keep in repair the
streets through which their track may run, and to construct and keep in
repair suitable crossings at the intersections of streets and alleys, and
sewers, and ditches, and culverts, when the city council shall deem
necessary; to direct and prohibit the use and regulate the speed of
locomotive engines within the inhabited portions of the city.



ARTICLE VIII.
OF ASSESSMENTS, TAXATION, ETC.



   SEC. 1.   All real estate and personal property within the limits of
the city of Geneseo, Henry County, Illinois, shall be subject to taxation;
and taxes may be levied and collected upon the same, for the use and benefit
of said city. The city council shall have power to levy and collect taxes,
annually, for the general purposes of the city, upon all taxable real and
personal property, within the city limits, in any sum they may deem
expedient, but never to exceed one per cent, upon the assessed value thereof,
without first having been submitted to a vote of the taxable citizens of the
city, and approved by three-fifths of the voters therein, and in such case,
never to exceed two per cent in any one year.



   SEC. 2.   The assessor shall assess all the real estate and personal
property in said city, so far as practicable; he shall ascertain the names of
all owners of taxable property, and the amount of all taxable real estate and
personal property, and for this purpose he shall call upon each taxable
inhabitant of said city.



   SEC. 3.   The assessor shall prepare an assessment roll, with a
caption in substance as follows:  “An assessment roll of all the real
estate and personal property within the limits of the city of Geneseo, Henry
County, Illinois, made by the assessor of said city, for the year 18__;”
and shall set down, in separate columns, according to the best information in
his possession:



      First.   The names of all owners, if known, of all taxable
real estate within the limits of said city. If the owner is unknown, it shall
be so stated.



      Second.   The description of all real estate opposite the name
of the owner, or word “unknown,” when the name of the owner cannot be
ascertained.



      Third.   The value of the real estate opposite the description.



      Fourth.   The amount of tax assessed opposite to the value.
The said assessment roll shall, also, contain, in parallel columns:



         First.   The names of the owners of personal property
subject to taxation, in alphabetical order.



         Second.   The assessed value of the personal property
taxed to each individual.



         Third.   The amount of tax on each individual’s
personal property.



   SEC. 4.   After the provisions of sections two and three of this
article shall have been complied with, the same proceeding shall be had and
observed in relation to such assessment and the collecting thereof, as are
prescribed and set forth in the fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth and
ninth sections of article nine, (9,) of “An act to charter the city of
Ottawa,” approved February 10th, 1853; which sections, of said article, are
hereby incorporated February 10th, 1853; which sections, of said article, are
hereby incorporated into and made a part of this charter, as fully as if
herein set forth at length.




SECTIONS OF OTTAWA CHARTER ABOVE REFERRED TO.





      [SEC. 4.   After the said assessment roll shall have been thus
completed, the said assessor shall attach thereto a certificate, signed by
him, in substance, as follows: “I do hereby certify that the above
assessment roll contains, according to my best information, a true and
correct list of the names of all the owners of taxable property, real and
personal, within the limits of said city, a description of each parcel of
real estate, set opposite the names of the owners, or set opposite the word
‘unknown.’  In cases where, after diligent search and inquiry, I have
been unable to ascertain the name of the owner, the value of said parcels of
real estate, set opposite each one, the amount of tax on each of said parcels
of real estate set opposite the same, the aggregate value of personal estate
of each owner set opposite his name, and the amount of tax on said real
estate set opposite his name.” Said assessment roll so certified shall, on
or before the second Monday in July then next, be returned to the clerk of
the city council.





      SEC. 5.   Previous to the third Monday in July the assessment
may be inspected by any person interested in the same. On the third Monday in
July of each year there shall be a meeting of the city council for the
purpose of reviewing the assessment. On the application of any person
conceiving himself aggrieved by the assessment, the city council, upon being
satisfied that the same is erroneous, may review, alter and correct such
assessment.





      SEC. 6.   Immediately after the return of the assessment roll,
it shall be the duty of the city clerk to cause to be inserted in a newspaper
published in said city, or posted up in three public places in said city, a
notice that the assessment roll has been returned, and may be inspected by
any person interested therein, and of the time when the city council will
meet to hear applications for reviewing said assessment.





      SEC. 7.   Immediately after the said assessment roll shall
have been corrected by the city council, the clerk shall make out a true copy
thereof as corrected, to which, after being satisfied that the same is a
correct copy as above, the city council shall annex a warrant, signed by the
mayor of said city, requiring the collector to collect from the several
persons the several amounts of taxes set opposite their respective names, and
pay the same to the treasurer of the city, and if any resident of said city
shall neglect or refuse to pay his tax within ten days after demand made of
said resident, or at his last and usual place of residence, the collector
shall proceed to levy the same of the goods and chattels of said resident,
and after giving six days’ notice of the time and place of sale, by posting
up a notice thereof in three public places in said city, shall sell as many
of said goods and chattels as may be necessary to make the amount of tax. In
cases where the owner is not a resident of the city the collector shall
proceed to levy and sell without previous demand. The said warrant shall be
returnable on the first Monday in October, after the date thereof, at which
time the collector shall return said warrant and tax list to the clerk of the
city council and pay over all money by him collected to the treasurer, and
take his receipt for the same.





      SEC. 8.   In the return to said warrant the collector shall
give a list of the names of the persons whose tax and personal property he
has been unable to collect on account of not finding goods and chattels
whereon to levy, the value of the property assessed, and the amount of the
tax thereon, and state in said return that he has been so unable to collect
the tax, and the city council may give him credit for the amount of taxes he
has thus been unable to collect.





      SEC. 9.   The collector shall also make a list of the real
estate upon which the taxes have not been paid or collected, and state to
whom each parcel of said real estate was assessed, or that the same was
assessed to a person “unknown,” and describe said real estate, and give
the amount of tax on each parcel. The collector shall return said list at the
time last aforesaid, with a certificate signed by him that said taxes remain
unpaid, and that he could [find] no goods or chattels whereon to levy and
collect the same, and the city council may credit him with the amount.)




   SEC. 5.   Within twenty days after the return of said list, provided
for in said section, the clerk shall cause the same to be published in a
newspaper printed in said city, together with a notice in substance as
follows: “It appearing from the return of the collector, that the taxes on
the above described parcels of real estate remain unpaid, notice is hereby
given that the said real estate will be exposed, in separate parcels, at
public auction, on the __________ day of _________________________, 18____,
at ten o’clock in the forenoon, at the __________, in Geneseo, and sold for
the purpose of making said taxes, and fifty cents for cost of selling each
lot or parcel, in case of sale.” Said day of sale shall be at least thirty
days after the publication of said notice.



   SEC. 6.   The provisions of sections eleven, twelve, thirteen,
fourteen, fifteen and sixteen, of said article nine, (9,) of said act,
entitled “An act to charter the city of Ottawa,” approved February 10,
1853, and all the proceedings therein set forth shall be pursued and observed
in the sale of lands for taxes in said city of Geneseo; and the said
sections, excepting that in section fourteen the word “Ottawa” shall be
changed to the word “Geneseo”, of said article nine, (9,) are hereby
incorporated into and made a part of this charter, as fully as if herein set
forth at length.




SECTIONS OF OTTAWA CHARTER ABOVE REFERRED TO.





      [SEC. 11. The collector shall attend said sale and act as
auctioneer, and sell all the lots or parcels of real estate so advertised,
upon which the taxes and cost remain unpaid at the time of selling; the clerk
shall also attend said sale, and enter in a book provided for that purpose, a
description of the real estate sold, the name of the purchaser and the amount
of his bid, and shall make out and deliver to said purchaser a certificate
giving description of the real estate by him purchased, the amount of the
taxes and cost due separately, and the amount of his bid, stating that said
purchaser will be entitled to a deed for the real estate described in such
certificate, at the expiration of one year, unless the same shall be
redeemed. The clerk shall receive the taxes and cost due at any time before
sale, and pay the same over to the treasurer, taking his receipt for the same.





      SEC. 12. In case no person shall bid the amount of taxes and cost
charged upon any of said real estate at such sale, the same may be advertised
and sold at any time within six months thereafter. The manner of proceeding
in such second sale shall be the same as hereinafter mentioned, as near as
may be.





      SEC. 13. All lands sold for taxes and assessments assessed under
this charter shall be sold off of the eastt side, as in cases of sales for
county and state taxes, and may be redeemed within one year from the sale, in
the same manner upon the same terms, as lands are now redeemed in cases of
sale for state and county taxes, by payment of the necessary amount to the
said city clerk, and the said clerk shall keep and preserve said books of
sale in his office, and enter said redemption therein. Said book shall be
prima facie evidence of the matters contained therein.





      SEC. 14. In case said lands shall not have been redeemed as
aforesaid, it shall be the duty of the mayor of said city to execute and
deliver to the purchaser a deed of the premises, which deed shall be in
substance, as follows:





      “Whereas, on the _____ day of _________, A.D., _____, at a
public sale made by the collector of the city of Ottawa, for taxes duly
assessed by said city for the year ____ A. B. became the purchaser of the
following described real estate, viz: _____for the sum of _____, that being
the amount of the assessment and cost on the _____. Now, therefore, know all
men by these presents, that I C. D., mayor of said city, in consideration of
the premises, hereby grant, bargain, sell and convey unto the said A. B., his
heirs and assigns, the real estate above described as so purchased by him,
subject to the right of infants, femmis covert, and others, to redeem, to
have and hold the same to the said A. B., his heirs and assigns, forever.
Witness my hand and seal of said city, this _____ day o f________, in the
year of our Lord, &c,”





      SEC. 15. Deeds on all sales for taxes and assessments assessed
upon real estate under this charter shall be acknowledged as other
conveyances, and when executed and acknowledged as aforesaid, they shall be
deemed and taken to be prima facie evidence of the existence and regularity
of all such prior proceedings as might otherwise be required to be proved in
order to establish the title in the purchaser.





      SEC. 16. The clerk and collector shall each be entitled to twenty
cents for each parcel of land sold, in full satisfaction for their services
in making such sale, and the balance of said cost shall be paid into the city
treasury. All other expenses attending such sale shall be allowed and paid by
city council.]




   SEC. 7.   Power is hereby also given the city council of said city
to provide, by ordinance, that all taxes levied, assessed and collected,
under and by virtue of the provisions of this act, shall be assessed and
collected by the same assessor and collector whose duty it shall be, by
general law, to assess and collect the state and county tax for township
seventeen north, of range three east of the fourth principal meridian, in
said Henry county. If said city council shall wish to have said city taxes so
assessed and collected, it shall be their duty to inform the clerk of the
county court, on or before the first day of September, of each year, of the
rate per cent, of the taxation levied by them for city purposes, for said
year, and also for all special assessments, for any purpose in said city, and
assessments for the purpose of laying out any public grounds, streets,
alleys, lanes, or highways, and altering, widening, contracting, repairing,
or the discontinuing the same, either or all, as the said city council may
direct; and it shall thereupon be the duty of said county clerk to carry out
each and extend said tax upon the books of the collector, in the same manner
that he is now required by law to carry out and extend the district school
tax against the name of each tax payer, whether resident or non-resident,
owning property in said city; and said city tax shall be collected, in every
respect, and the collection thereof enforced in like manner and with like
remedies as the state and county tax, and shall be paid over by the collector
to the treasurer of said city, at the same time that the county revenue is
required to be paid over to the county. Any court which shall render judgment
in said Henry county against lands and lots in said city, for non-payment of
taxes due the state and county, shall, at the same time, include in the same
judgment any and all taxes which may be due said city, in any such property.
For his services, in carrying out, adding and extending said tax in the books
of the collector, said county clerk shall receive one-half cent for each lot
or tract, and one-half cent on each person’s name assessed for personal
property, to be paid out of said city tax, when collected. The collector
shall receive the same compensation which may be allowed by law for the
collection of school taxes, and shall be liable, on his official bond, for
the payment of all such city taxes by him collected. The fees of the
collector to be paid out of the taxes, when collected.



ARTICLE IX.
OF ASSESSMENTS FOR OPENING STREETS AND ALLEYS.



   SEC. 1.   The city council shall have power, upon the petition of
one-half of the owners of the property fronting thereon and lying within
forty rods thereof, and without such petition, by the unanimous vote of the
city council, to open and lay out public grounds or squares, streets, alleys
and highways, or sections thereof, and to alter, widen, construct, straighten
and discontinue the same; but no street, alley or highway, or any part
thereof, shall be discontinued or contracted, without the consent, in
writing, of all persons owning land or lots adjoining such street, alley or
highway, unless by a unanimous vote of the city council. The city council
shall cause all streets, alleys and highways, or public squares or grounds,
laid out by them, to be surveyed, described and recorded in a book, to be
kept by the clerk, showing accurately and particularly the proposed
improvements, and the real estate required to be taken; and the same, when
opened and made, shall be highways and public highways and public squares.



   SEC. 2.   Whenever any street, alley or highway, public ground or
square is proposed to be laid out, opened, altered, widened or straightened,
by virtue thereof, and the amount of compensation cannot be agreed upon, the
city council shall give notice of their intention to appropriate and take the
land necessary for the same, to the owner thereof, by publishing said notice,
by two insertions in a weekly paper, or six insertions in a daily paper, in
the newspaper publishing the ordinances of the city; at the expiration of
which time they shall appoint three disinterested freeholders, residing in
the city as commissioners, to ascertain and assess the damages and recompense
due the owners of said real estate, respectively, and, at the same time,
determine what persons will be benefitted by such improvements, and assess
the damages and expenses thereof on the real estate in the neighborhood of
the improvement benefitted thereby, in proportion, as nearly as may be, to
the benefits resulting to each. A majority of the councilmen authorized by
law to be elected, shall be necessary to a choice of commissioners. The
commissioners shall be sworn faithfully and impartially to execute their
duties, to the best of their abilities, before entering upon their duties.
They shall give at least five days’ personal notice of the time and place
of their meeting, for the purposes of viewing the premises and making their
assessments; which notice shall be given to the owners who are residents
thereof, and known. They shall view the premises, and, in their discretion,
receive any legal evidence, and may, if necessary adjourn from day to day.



   SEC. 3.   If there should be any buildings standing, in whole or in
part, upon the land to be taken, the commissioners, before proceeding to make
their assessments, shall first estimate and determine the whole value of such
building to the owner, aside from the value of the land, and the actual
injury to him in having such building taken from him, and, secondly, the
value of such building to him to remove.



   SEC. 4.   At least five days’ notice shall be given to the owner
of such determination, when known, and a resident of the city, which may be
given personally, or in writing, left at his usual place of abode. If a
non-resident, or unknown, like notice to all persons interested shall be
given, by one publication in the newspaper publishing the ordinances of the
city. Such notice shall specify the buildings and the award of the
commissioners. It shall, also, require the persons interested to appear, by a
day to be named therein, not exceeding thirty days, or give notice of their
election to the city council, either to accept the award of the
commissioners, and allow such building to be taken, with the land condemned
or appropriated, or of their intention to receive such building, he shall
have such reasonable time for that purpose as the city council may direct.



   SEC. 5.   If the owner refuses to take the building at its appraised
value, to remove or fail to give notice of his intention, as aforesaid,
within the time prescribed, the city council shall have power to direct the
sale of such building, at public auction, for cash or on a credit, giving
five days’ public notice of the sale. The proceeds of the sale shall be
paid to the owner or deposited to his use.



   SEC. 6.   In making their assessment the said commissioners shall
ascertain the value of the land taken, and all expenses of the improvement
and damage occasioned thereby, and then assess upon the property in the
neighborhood benefitted, in fair proportions, a sum sufficient to cover the
whole amount thereof, which shall be paid by the owners respectively, and be
a lieu upon the property on which it may be assessed, and collected as other
taxes are collected, by sale of the land, or otherwise. The value of the land
taken from any owner shall be a credit to him on the assessment against him
for his share of the improvements, and, if more, the difference shall be paid
him in money before the land is taken. Said commissioners shall particularly
describe the lands and parcels on which either assessment may be made, and
make a return of their proceedings and assessments to the city council within
ten days after its completion.



   SEC. 7.   The clerk shall give ten days’ notice, by one
publication in the newspaper publishing the ordinances of the city, that such
assessment has been returned, and, on the day to be specified therein, will
be acted upon by the city council, unless objections are made to the same by
some person interested. Objections may be heard before the city council, and
the hearing may be adjourned from day to day. The council shall have power,
in their discretion, to alter, confirm or annul the assessment. If annulled,
all the proceedings shall be void. If altered or confirmed, an order shall be
entered directing a warrant to issue for the collection thereof.



   SEC. 8.   The city council shall have power to remove the
commissions, and, from time to time, appoint others in place of such as may
be removed, refuse, neglect or are unable, from any cause, to serve.



   SEC. 9.   The land required to be taken for the making, opening,
widening, straightening or altering any street, alley or highway, or public
ground or square, shall not be appropriated until the damages awarded
therefor, to any owner thereof, under this act, shall be paid or tendered to
such owner, or his agent; or, in case such owner or agent cannot be found in
the city, deposited to his or their credit in some safe place of deposit
other than the hands of the treasurer, and then, and not before, such lands
may be taken and appropriated for the purpose required in making such
improvements; and such streets, alleys, or other highways, or public grounds
may be made and opened.



   SEC. 10.   Any person interested may appeal from any order of the
city council for opening, widening, altering or straightening any street,
alley, or other highway or public ground, to the police magistrate or circuit
court, after the passage of said final order; said court to determine such
appeal, and confirm or annul the proceedings, from which appeal no judgment
or writ of error shall lie. Upon trial of the appeal, all questions involved
in said proceedings, including the amount of damages, shall be open to
investigation, by affidavit or oral testimony, adduced to the court; or, upon
application of the city, or any party, the amount of damages may be assessed
by a jury, in said court, without formal pleadings, and judgment rendered
accordingly. The court shall not set aside the proceedings or final order of
the council for any omission or informality, without injury has resulted
therefrom.



   SEC. 11.   When any owner, known, or other person having an interest
in any real estate, residing in the city or elsewhere, shall be an infant,
and any proceedings shall be had under this act, the judge of the circuit
court, or any judge of a court of record, may, upon the application of the
city council, or such infant, or his next friend, appoint a guardian for such
infant, taking security from such guardian for the faithful execution of such
trust; and all notices and summons required by this act shall be served on
such guardian; and the final determination of either the common council or
court, in the premises, shall be conclusive on such infant, and the
proceedings shall not be opened at any time thereafter.



   SEC. 12.   It is, however, here provided that none of the
petitioners petitioning the said city council, under the first section of
this article, shall be entitled to any damages under this article, unless by
the unanimous vote of the city council, and then only such sum or sums as the
said council shall so vote.



ARTICLE X.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS AND ASSESSMENTS THEREFOR.



   SEC. 1.   The city council shall have power, from time to time, upon
the petition of one-half of the owners of the property fronting thereon and
lying within forty rods thereof, or, without such petition, by the unanimous
vote of the council, to cause any street, alley, or other highway, or section
thereof, to be graded, regraded, levelled, paved or planked, and keep the
same in repair, and alter and change the same; to cause side and crosswalks,
maindrains and sewers, and private drains or section thereof, to be
constructed and laid, relaid, cleansed and repaired, and regulate the same;
to grade, improve, protect and ornament any public square, or other public
ground, now or hereafter laid out.



   SEC. 2.   The city council shall have power to assess and collect of
the owners of lots or real estate, on any street or other highway, or any
part thereof, in the same manner as other city taxes, or in such a manner as
may be prescribed by ordinance, all expenses and damages for the purpose of
grading, paving or planking such street, sidewalk, pavement or other highway.
All owners or occupants of lots or lands in front of or adjoining, or upon
whose premises the city council shall order and direct sidewalks, or private
drains or gutters communicating with any maindrain, to be constructed,
graded, paved, planked, repaired, relaid or cleansed, or shall declare any
such lands or lots to be nuisances, and order the same to be graded, filled
up and drained, or otherwise improved, shall make, grade, pave, plank,
repair, or relay such sidewalk, or make or cleanse such private drain, or
grade, fill up, drain, or otherwise improve such lot or land, at their own
cost and charges, within the time and in manner prescribed by ordinance or
otherwise; and if not done within the time and in the manner prescribed, the
city council may cause the same to be constructed, paved, planked, repaired,
relaid, cleansed, filled up, graded, drained or otherwise improved, and
assess the expense and damage thereof, by an order to be entered in their
proceedings, upon the lots and land respectively, and collect the same, by
warrant and sale of the premises, as in other cases. A suit may also be
maintained against the owner of such premises, for the recovery of such
expenses, as for money paid and laid out to his use at his request.



   SEC. 3.   In all cases where expenses may be incurred in the removal
of any nuisance, the city council may cause the same to be assessed against
the real estate chargeable therewith, in the same manner prescribed in the
foregoing section. Such expenses may be likewise collected by the owner or
occupant of such premises, in a suit for money expended to his or their use;
and in case the same should not be chargeable to any real estate, suit may,
in like manner, be brought for such expenses against the author of such
nuisances, if known, or any person whose duty [it] may be to remove or abate
the same.



   SEC. 4.   The city council shall have power to compel the owners of
lots or ground fronting or adjoining any public or private alley, to keep the
same clean, and, if necessary, to direct the same to be paved, planked, or
otherwise, and the costs thereof to be assessed and collected in the same
manner as sidewalk assessments.



ARTICLE XI.
OF TAXATION.



   SEC. 1.   The city council shall have power, for the purpose of
keeping the streets, lanes, avenues and alleys in repair, to require every
able-bodied male inhabitant in said city, over twenty-one years of age and
not exceeding fifty, to labor on said streets, lanes, avenues and allies, not
exceeding four days in each year; and any person failing to perform such
labor, when duly notified by the street commissioner, shall forfeit and pay a
sum not to exceed one dollar and fifty cents for each day so neglected and
refused, as said city council may provide.



   SEC. 2.   The Inhabitants of the city of Geneseo are hereby exempted
from working on any road beyond the limits of the city, and from paying any
tax to procure laborers to work upon the same:  Provided, that the city
council may, at their discretion, cause one-fourth of the labor tax to be
laid out on roads leading into said city, and may expend a portion of the
city tax upon the same, not to exceed one-eighth of the amount annually
assessed.



   SEC. 3.   All lands lying and being within the corporate limits of
said city, the same being in fields containing five or more acres, and the
same never having been laid off in lots or blocks, and upon which no
buildings are situated, and unoccupied, shall, until the same either become
occupied, or buildings be erected thereon, or laid off into lots or blocks,
be exempt from all corporation taxes.



ARTICLE XII.
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.



   SEC. 1.   The city council shall have power to pass, publish, amend
and repeal all ordinances, rules and police regulations, not contrary to the
constitution of the United States or of this state, for the good government,
peace and order of the city, and the trade and commerce thereof, that may be
necessary or proper to carry into effect the powers vested by this act in the
corporation, the city government, or any department or officer thereof; to
enforce the observance of all such rules, ordinances and police regulations,
and to punish violations thereof by fines, penalties, and imprisonment in the
county jail, city prison, or both, in the discretion of the court or
magistrate before whom conviction may be had; but no fine or penalty shall
exceed one hundred dollars, nor the imprisonment of four months, for any
offense; and such fine or penalty may be recovered, with costs, in an action
of debt, by a common summons, as issued by justices and magistrates in other
cases, and to give the special matter in evidence under it, in the name of
the city, before any court having jurisdiction, and punishment inflicted; and
any person upon whom any fine or penalty is imposed shall stand committed
until the payment of the same, and costs, and, in default thereof, may be
imprisoned in the county jail, city prison, or work house, or required to
labor on the streets, or other public works of the city, for such time, and
in such manner, as may be provided by ordinance.



   SEC. 2.   They shall also have power to recall and withdraw from
circulation any of the matured city bonds, for city indebtedness, for the
purpose of paying the same, or to have new bonds issued to those who are
legally entitled to them; but in no case shall such bonds be disposed of
under par.



   SEC. 3.   In all prosecutions for any violation of any ordinance,
by-law, or other regulation, the first process shall be a summons, unless
oath or affirmation be made for a warrant, as in other cases; and warrants
may issue in all cases, upon such oath or affirmation, whenever the same can
issue for a similar offense under our statutes, or whenever the ordinance
under or upon which the same be made provides for the issuing of a warrant.



   SEC. 4.   Execution may be issued immediately on rendition of
judgment. If the defendant has no goods or chattels or real estate within the
county of Henry, whereof the judgment can be collected, the execution shall
require the defendant to be confined in the county jail or city prison, for a
term of not exceeding four months, in the discretion of the court rendering
judgment; and all persons who may be committed under this section shall be
confined one day for each one dollar of such judgment and costs. All expenses
incurred in any prosecution for the recovery of any fine, penalty or
forfeiture, when collected, shall be paid into the city treasury.



   SEC. 5.   All fines, forfeitures and penalties collected for
offenses committed within the city shall be paid into the treasury of said
city by the officers collecting the same; and all fines and forfeitures
collected of any citizen of said city, for any conviction in the circuit
court, shall be paid over in like manner.



   SEC. 6.   No person shall be an incompetent judge, justice, witness
or juror, by reason of his being an inhabitant or freeholder in the city of
Geneseo, in any action or proceeding in which said city may be a party in
interest, unless the said judge, justice, witness or juror shall be a party
to the suit; then the same rules shall govern as in the practice in other
cases in this state.



   SEC. 7.   The city council shall have power to require the police
magistrate to report and settle quarterly, or oftener, and to conform to the
ordinances and resolutions passed from time to time.



   SEC. 8.   The police magistrate, and all other officers of the city,
shall not be entitled to receive any fees from the city, when, from any
cause, the city shall be unsuccessful in the prosecution of any action, or
should be unable to collect any fine and costs, or until the money has been
collected by the officer authorized to collect the same.



   SEC. 9.   All officers of the city created conservators of the peace
by this act, or authorized by any ordinance, shall have power to arrest, or
cause to be arrested, with or without process, all persons who shall break
the peace, or threaten to break the peace, or be found violating any
ordinance of this city, commit for examination, and, if necessary, detain
such person in custody over night, or the Sabbath, in the watch house, or
other safe place, or until they can be brought before a magistrate; and shall
have and exercise such other powers, as conservators of the peace, as the
city council may prescribe.



   SEC. 10.   At the first election held under this charter for city
officers, there shall be elected one police magistrate for said city, who
shall have the like jurisdiction and powers in all respects, and be governed
by the same laws, as provided by the general statutes of this state in
relation to police magistrates. Said police magistrate, so elected, shall
hold his office for four years, and until his successor shall be elected and
qualified. He shall be commissioned in the same manner as other police
magistrates and justices of the peace are by law.



   SEC. 11.   All ordinances of the city may be proved by the seal of
the corporation; and when printed and published in book or pamphlet form, and
purporting to be printed and published by authority of the corporation, the
same shall be received in evidence in all courts and places, without further
proof; and the book or books of city records, and journal of proceedings kept
by the city clerk, shall be received in evidence in the trial of any case or
cases wherein the city may be a party, without further proof; and all
ordinances may be proved by the introduction of the same, properly signed and
sealed, or by the introduction in evidence of the book of records or the
journal of proceedings of the city council containing the same.



   SEC. 12.   Every ordinance, regulation and by-law imposing any
penalty, fine, imprisonment or forfeiture for a violation of its provisions,
shall, after the passage thereof, be published once in the newspaper
publishing the ordinances of the city; and proof of such publication, by the
affidavit of the printer or publisher of such newspaper, taken before any
officer authorized to administer oaths, and filed with the city clerk, or any
other competent proof of such publication, shall be conclusive evidence of
the legal publication and promulgation of such ordinance, regulation or
by-law, in all courts and places.



   SEC. 13.   Appeals shall be allowed from the decisions, in all cases
arising under the provisions of this act, or under any ordinance passed in
pursuance thereof, that may be brought before any justice or other
magistrate, to the circuit court of Henry county; and every such appeal shall
be taken and granted in the same manner, and with like effect, as appeals are
taken from justices of the peace to the circuit court under the laws of the
state.



   SEC. 14.   This act is hereby declared to be a public act, and may
be read in evidence in all cases of law and equity in this state, without
proof.



   SEC. 15.   Any person who shall injure or destroy any bridge or any
public building or other property belonging to the city, or shall cause or
procure the same to be injured or destroyed, shall be subject to a penalty
not exceeding one hundred dollars for such offense, to be recovered by the
city in any action of debt, and may be imprisoned not exceeding four months,
in the discretion of the court before whom such conviction may be had; and
such person shall also be liable in a civil action, at the suit of the city,
for the damages occasioned by such injury or destruction: Provided, however,
that the prosecution of any person or persons for the violation of any
section of this act, or ordinance passed by virtue of this act, imposing any
fine, penalty or imprisonment for a violation thereof, whenever the violation
of the same may be declared to be a crime or misdemeanor under the general
criminal code or law of the state, shall not take away the rights of
punishment under said general criminal code or law; but said person or
persons, so offending, may be fined, imprisoned or punished under either or
both of said laws.



   SEC. 16.   The style of all ordinances shall be: “Be it ordained
by the city council of the city of Geneseo.”



   SEC. 17.   Any tract of land adjoining said city, which may be laid
off into blocks or lots, and duly platted, according to law, and any tract of
land adjoining the city, with the consent of the owner thereof, shall and may
be annexed to said city and form a part thereof.



   SEC. 18.   The city council shall, at least ten days before the
annual election, in each year, cause to be published in the newspaper
publishing the ordinances of the city, a correct and full statement of the
receipts and expenditures, from the date of the last annual report, together
with the sources from which the former are derived and the mode of
disbursement, and also a distinct statement of the whole amount assessed,
received and expended in the respective wards and divisions, for making and
repairing streets, highways and bridges, for the same period, together with
such information as may be necessary to a full understanding of the financial
concerns of the city.



   SEC. 19.   Neither the city council or mayor shall remit any fine or
penalty imposed for any violation of any of the laws or ordinances of said
city, or release from confinement, unless two-thirds of all the aldermen
elected shall vote for such release or remission; nor shall anything in this
act be so construed as to oust any court of jurisdiction to abate and remove
any nuisance within its jurisdiction, by indictment or otherwise.



   SEC. 20.   The city council shall have power to provide for the
prevention and extinguishment of fires, and to organize and establish fire
companies; to regulate or prevent the erection of manufactories dangerous in
causing fires, appoint fire wardens and property guards, with power to remove
and keep away from the vicinity of any fire all idle or suspicious persons,
and to compel any person or persons present to aid in extinguishing fires, or
in the preservation of property exposed to the danger of the same, and to
prevent goods from being purloined thereat, and with such other powers and
duties as may be prescribed by ordinance.



   SEC. 21.   The police magistrate and justices of the peace, who now
have and hereafter may have, their offices within the corporation limits of
the city, shall have jurisdiction to hear and determine all cases in which
the said city may be a party, under or by virtue of this act or any ordinance
or by-law of said city.



   SEC. 22.   All property, real and personal, heretofore vested in the
president and trustees of the town of Geneseo, for the use of the inhabitants
of said town, or belonging to said town in any manner, shall be and the same
is hereby declared to be vested in the corporation hereby created.



   SEC. 23.   The present board of trustees and other officers of the
town of Geneseo, now in the office, shall, respectively, continue in the same
until superseded in conformity to the provisions thereof, but shall be
governed by this act, which shall take effect from and after its passage.



   SEC. 24.   The council of said city shall have the power to
appropriate, at any time or times, a sum not exceeding five hundred dollars,
in any manner they may deem expedient, for the purpose of prospecting and
boring for coal, anywhere within three miles of the limits of the said city.



   SEC. 25.   The mayor of said city is hereby empowered to call on any
male inhabitant of said city, over eighteen years of age, to aid in enforcing
the laws and ordinances; and, in case of riot, to call out the militia, to
aid in suppressing the same or carry into effect any law or ordinance; and
any person who shall not obey such call shall forfeit to said city, a fine,
not exceeding ten dollars.



   APPROVED February 16, 1865.



TITLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



   Chapter



      10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY



      11.   GOVERNMENT ETHICS



      12.   PUBLIC COMMENT



CHAPTER 10:  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY



Section



   10.01   Title of code



   10.02   Definitions



   10.03   Section headings



   10.04   Rules of construction



   10.05   Official time



   10.06   Revivor; effect of amendment or repeal



   10.07   Reference to other sections



   10.08   Conflicting provisions



   10.09   Amendments to code



   10.10   Severability



   10.11   Reference to public office or officer



   10.12   Errors and omissions



   10.13   Ordinances repealed



   10.14   Ordinances unaffected



   10.15   Ordinances saved



   10.16   Technical codes



   10.17   Historical and statutory references



 



   10.99   General penalty



§ 10.01  TITLE OF CODE.



   This codification by and for the City of Geneseo, Illinois, shall be
designated as the Code of Geneseo, and may be so cited.



§ 10.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AGENT.  A person acting on behalf of another.



(Prior Code, § 1-4-1)



   ANOTHER.  When used to designate the owner of property which is the
subject of an offense, includes not only natural persons but also every other
owner of property.



   CITY, MUNICIPALITY, or MUNICIPAL CORPORATION.  The City of Geneseo,
irrespective of its population or legal classification.



   COUNCIL or CITY COUNCIL.  The Council of the City of Geneseo.



   COUNTY.  Henry County, Illinois.



   COUNTY BOARD.  The County Board of Henry County, Illinois.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.07)



   COURT.  Construed to mean any court of competent jurisdiction.



   DECREE.  Synonymous with JUDGMENT.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.24)



   ELECTORS.  Persons qualified to vote for elective officers at
municipal elections.



(ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-1-2)



   EXECUTIVE OFFICER.  Words used for an executive or ministerial officer
may include any deputy or other person performing the duties of the officer,
either generally or in special cases.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.08)



   FEE.  Sum of money charged by the city for the carrying on of a
business, profession, or occupation.



(Prior Code, § 1-4-1)



   FISCAL YEAR.  The period of time beginning on July 1 of each and every
year, and ending on the following June 30.



(Prior Code, § 1-4-1)



   HERETOFORE or HEREAFTER.  HERETOFORE means any time previous to the
day on which the ordinance, resolution, or statute takes effect; HEREAFTER
means at any time after that date.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.17)



   HIGHWAY,ROAD, or STREET.  May include any road laid out by authority
of the United States, or of this state, or of any town or county of this
state, and all bridges thereupon.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.16)



   ILCS.  Illinois Compiled Statutes, 1992, as heretofore and hereafter
amended.



   KEEPER or PROPRIETOR.  Includes all persons, whether acting by
themselves, or as a servant, agent, or employee.



   LAND or REAL ESTATE.  Includes rights and easements of an incorporeal
nature.



   MAY.  The act referred to is permissive.



   MAYOR.  The Mayor of the City of Geneseo.



   MISDEMEANOR.  Any offense for which a sentence to a term of
imprisonment in other than a penitentiary for less than one year may be
imposed.



(Prior Code, § 1-4-1)



   MONTH.  A calendar month. 



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.10)



   MUNICIPAL CODE.  The Illinois Municipal Code, ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5.



   MUNICIPAL YEAR.  That period of time beginning at the Second Session
on the second Tuesday of April or the appointment by City Council at the
first Council meeting following the certification of ballots from the Henry
County Clerk, whichever is later, and expiring the day preceding the
appointment by City Council of the following year.



(Prior Code, § 1-4-1)



   OATH.  Includes affirmation, and SWEAR includes affirm.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.12)



   OFFENSE.  Any act forbidden by this code, or the omission of any act
required by the provisions of this code.



(Prior Code, § 1-4-1)



   OWNER.  When applied to property, includes any part owner, joint
owner, purchaser and seller under a contract and/or deed, or tenant in common
of the whole or part of the property, and includes any beneficiary of a land
trust which owns property.



   PERSON.  Any legal person; includes associations, partnerships,
corporations, joint ventures, and bodies politic and corporate as well as
individuals.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.05)



   PERSONAL PROPERTY.  Includes all property except real.



   POLICE OFFICERS.  Police officers employed and in the service of the
City of Geneseo. POLICE FORCE shall be construed to include such persons in
the employ of a city as members of the Department of Police, who are or shall
hereafter be appointed and sworn as POLICE OFFICERS.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.20)



   PREMISES.  As applied to property, includes land and buildings.



   PROPERTY.  Includes real, personal, mixed estates, and other interests.



   PUBLIC AUTHORITY.  Includes school districts; units of legal
government; the village, city, county, state, or federal governments,
officers and agencies thereof, or any commissions or committees thereof; or
any duly authorized public official.



   PUBLIC PLACE.  Includes any street, sidewalk, park, cemetery, school
yard, body of water or watercourse, public conveyance, or any other place for
the sale of merchandise, public accommodation, or amusement.



   REAL PROPERTY.  Includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments.



   REGISTERED MAIL.  Includes certified mail and CERTIFIED MAIL includes
registered mail.



   RETAILER.  The seller of goods, merchandise, articles, or things in
small quantities direct to the consumer.



(Prior Code, § 1-4-1)



   RIGHT-OF-WAY.  The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or
other property.



(Prior Code, § 1-4-1)



   SHALL.  The act referred to is mandatory.



   SIDEWALK.  The portion of the street between the curb lines, or the
lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for use
of pedestrians.



(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-188)



   SPECIAL DISTRICTS.  The meaning ascribed in Article VII of the
Constitution of the State of Illinois of 1970.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.29)



   STATE.  The State of Illinois.



   STREET.  Where the context admits, includes alleys, lanes, courts,
boulevards, squares, and other public thoroughfares.



   TENANT or OCCUPANT.  As applied to premises, includes any person
holding a written or oral lease, or who actually occupies the whole or any
part of the premises, alone or with others.



   THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES.  The city code hereby adopted,
and as hereinafter modified by amendment, revision, and by the adoption of
new titles, chapters, or sections.



   UNITS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT.  The meaning established in § 1 of Article
VII of the Constitution of the State of Illinois of 1970.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.28)



   WEEK.  Seven consecutive days.



   WHOEVER.  Includes all persons, natural and artificial; partners;
principals, agents, and employees; and all officials, public or private.



   WHOLESALER or WHOLESALE DEALER.  The seller of goods, merchandise,
articles, or things in quantity to persons who purchase for the purpose of
resale.



(Prior Code, § 1-4-2)



   WRITTEN or IN WRITING.  Includes printing, electronic,  and any other
mode of representing words and letters; but when the written signature of any
person is required by law on any official or public writing or bond, required
by law, it shall be (1) in the proper handwriting of that person, or in case
he or she is unable to write, his or her proper mark, or (2) an electronic
signature as defined in the Electronic Commerce Security Act, ILCS Ch. 5, Act
175, §§ 1-101 et seq., except as otherwise provided by law.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.15)



   YEAR.  A calendar year unless otherwise expressed; and the word YEAR
alone is equivalent to the expression “Year of Our Lord”.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.10)



§ 10.03  SECTION HEADINGS.



   Headings and captions used in this code are employed for reference
purposes only, and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.



§ 10.04  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   Words and phrases shall be read in context and construed
according to the rules of grammar and common usage. Words and phrases that
have acquired a technical or particular meaning, whether by legislative or
judicial definition or otherwise, shall be construed accordingly.



   (B)   As used in this code, unless the context otherwise requires,
the following rules will be followed.



      (1)   The singular shall include the plural, and the plural
shall include the singular.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.03)



      (2)   Words of one gender shall include the other genders.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.04)



      (3)   Words in the present tense shall include the future.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.02)



      (4)   AND may be read OR, and OR may be read AND, if the
context admits.



   (C)   The time within which any act provided by law is to be done
shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last, unless
the last day is Saturday or Sunday or is a holiday as defined or fixed in any
statute now or hereafter in force in this state, and then it shall also be
excluded. If the day succeeding Saturday, Sunday, or a holiday is also a
holiday or a Saturday or Sunday, then the succeeding day shall also be
excluded.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.11)



   (D)   When the law requires an act to be done which may by law as
well be done by an agent as by the principal, the requirement shall be
construed to include all such acts when done by an authorized agent.



   (E)   Words purporting to give joint authority to three or more
municipal officers or other persons shall be construed as giving authority to
a majority of the officers or persons.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.09)



   (F)   These rules of construction shall not apply to any provision
of this code which shall contain any express provision excluding that
construction, or when the subject matter or context of this code may be
repugnant thereto.



   (G)   All general provisions, terms, phrases, and expressions shall
be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the Mayor
and City Council may be fully carried out.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.01)



   (H)   The provisions of any ordinance, in so far as they are the
same as those of any prior ordinance, shall be construed as a continuation of
the prior provisions, and not as a new enactment.



(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 2)



§ 10.05  OFFICIAL TIME.



   The official time for the city shall be as set by federal law.



§ 10.06  REVIVOR; EFFECT OF AMENDMENT OR REPEAL.



   (A)   The repeal of a repealing ordinance does not revive the
ordinance originally repealed, nor impair the effect of any saving clause
therein.



   (B)   The reenactment, amendment, or repeal of an ordinance does not
do any of the following, except as provided in division (C) of this section:



      (1)   Affect the prior operation of the ordinance or any prior
action taken thereunder;



      (2)   Affect any validation, cure, right, privilege,
obligation, or liability previously acquired, accrued, accorded, or incurred
thereunder;



      (3)   Affect any violation thereof or penalty, forfeiture, or
punishment incurred in respect thereto, prior to the amendment or repeal; or



      (4)   Affect any investigation, proceeding, or remedy in
respect of any privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture, or
punishment. The investigation, proceeding, or remedy may be instituted,
continued, or enforced, and the penalty, forfeiture, or punishment imposed,
as if the ordinance had not been repealed or amended.



   (C)   If the penalty, forfeiture, or punishment for any offense is
reduced by a reenactment or amendment of an ordinance, the penalty,
forfeiture, or punishment, if not already imposed, shall be imposed according
to the ordinance as amended.



§ 10.07  REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.



   (A)   Wherever in a penalty section reference is made to a violation
of a section or an inclusive group of sections, the reference shall be
construed to mean a violation of any provision of the section or sections
included in the reference.



   (B)   References in this code to action taken or authorized under
designated sections of this code include, in every case, action taken or
authorized under the applicable legislative provision which is superseded by
this code.



   (C)   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section
hereof, the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as
subsequently amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject
matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision and the
context clearly indicates that the reference to the section as amended or
revised was not intended.



§ 10.08  CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.



   If the provisions of different codes, chapters, or sections of these
codified ordinances conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions
bearing the latest passage date shall prevail. If the conflicting provisions
bear the same passage date, the conflict shall be construed so as to be
consistent with the meaning or legal effect of the questions of the subject
matter taken as a whole.



§ 10.09  AMENDMENTS TO CODE.



   All ordinances passed subsequent to this code which amend, repeal, or
in any way affect this code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering
system of this code and printed for inclusion herein, or in the case of
repealed chapters, sections, and divisions, or any part thereof, by
subsequent ordinances, the repealed portions may be excluded from the code by
the omission from reprinted pages affected thereby, and the subsequent
ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall
be prima facie evidence of subsequent ordinances until this code of
ordinances and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are re-adopted as a
new code of ordinances by the City Council.



§ 10.10  SEVERABILITY.



   If any provisions of a section of these codified ordinances or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the
invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the section
or related sections which can be given effect without the invalid provision
or application, and to this end the provisions are severable.



§ 10.11  REFERENCE TO PUBLIC OFFICE OR OFFICER.



   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of the city exercising the powers, duties, or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary. The references
shall also include the designee or agent of any such officer or office,
unless the law or the context clearly requires otherwise.



§ 10.12  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.



   If a manifest error is discovered consisting of the misspelling of any
word or words, the omission of any word or words necessary to express the
intention of the provisions affected, the use of a word or words to which no
meaning can be attached, or the use of a word or words when another word or
words was clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be
corrected, and the word or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will
conform with the manifest intention, and the provision shall have the same
effect as though the correct words were contained in the text as originally
published. No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists
regarding the nature or extent of the error.



§ 10.13  ORDINANCES REPEALED.



   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated
and embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this
code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code
of ordinances.



§ 10.14  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.



   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature (including, but not
limited to tax levy ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating
to boundaries and annexations; franchise ordinances and other ordinances
granting special rights to persons or corporations; contract ordinances and
ordinances authorizing the execution of a contract or the issuance of
warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming, or vacating
streets, alleys, or other public places; improvement ordinances; bond
ordinances; ordinances relating to elections; ordinances relating to the
transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the city; and all special
ordinances) as well as any other ordinances pertaining to subjects not
enumerated and embraced in this code of ordinances, shall remain in full
force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.



§ 10.15  ORDINANCES SAVED.



   Whenever an ordinance by its nature either authorizes or enables the
City Council or a certain city officer or employee to make additional
regulations for the purpose of carrying out the intent of the ordinance, all
regulations of a similar nature serving that purpose effected prior to the
codification and not inconsistent thereto, shall remain in effect and are
saved.



§ 10.16  TECHNICAL CODES.



   (A)   Whenever any technical codes are incorporated herein by
reference, any subsequent amendments or revisions to the technical codes
shall automatically become a part of this code and shall be made available
for public inspection by the city.



   (B)   To the extent of any conflict between the technical provisions
of this code and any technical codes adopted by reference, the most
restrictive provision shall prevail.



§ 10.17  HISTORICAL AND STATUTORY REFERENCES.



   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and
passage date of the original ordinance, and the amending ordinances, if any,
are listed following the text of the code section. Example: 



(Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960; Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed
1-1-1980; Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)



   (B)   (1)   An “ILCS” cite included in the history indicates
that the text of the section reads either verbatim or substantially the same
as the statute. Example: 



(ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-2-1)



      (2)   An “ILCS” cite set forth as a “statutory
reference” following the text of the section indicates that the reader
should refer to that statute for further information. Example:



   § 38.04  PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.



      The city shall make available to any person for inspection or
copying    all public records, as provided in the Illinois Freedom of
Information Act.



   Statutory reference:



      Freedom of Information Act, see ILCS Ch. 5, Act 140, §§ 1 et
seq.



§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY.



   (A)    Violations of the code shall be triable as civil cases
whenever in this code or in any city ordinance any act is prohibited or is
made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in the code or
ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is
declared to be unlawful or an offense, where no specific penalty is provided
therefore, the violation of any such provision of this code or any ordinance
shall be punished by a fine of not more than $750.  Each day any willful
violation of any provision of this code or of any ordinance continues shall
constitute a separate offense.



   (B)   In the event a person is charged with a violation of an
ordinance contained in the code of ordinances, and does not wish to contest
that charge, then the person so charged may pay to the City Clerk or Police
Department at the Municipal Building located at 115 S. Oakwood Avenue, the
fine for each violation listed in Exhibit A attached hereto to Ordinance
1950, a copy of which is available in the office of the City Clerk, within
seven calendar days of the date of receipt of the citation (date of issuance
included), and prior to a conviction for the ordinance violation in the
Circuit Court, for and in full satisfaction of the violation.



   (C)   In the event the City Clerk does not receive payment as
prescribed in division (B) above within seven calendar days of the date of
receipt of citation (date of issuance included), the city may then file the
ordinance violation with the Circuit Court in the Fourteenth Judicial Circuit
for prosecution with the ordinance violation subject to the fines set out in
division (A) above.



   (D)   In addition to the penalties hereinabove provided, and in
addition to all other specific penalties provided for particular ordinance
violations throughout this Code, the city may seek to impose the following
penalties:



      (1)   Restitution in an amount sufficient to restore any
losses to the victim or victims of the violation.



      (2)   An order requiring the violator to take such specific
action as may be necessary to reasonably remedy or abate the circumstances or
conditions constituting the violation.



      (3)   An order authorizing the city to take such specific
action as may be necessary to reasonably remedy or abate the circumstances or
conditions constituting the violation, and to charge all costs thereof to the
violator.



(Ord. 1950, passed 8-11-2009; Ord. O-12-057, passed 8-14-2012; Ord. O-13-084,
passed 5-14-2013)



CHAPTER 11:  GOVERNMENT ETHICS



Section



Ethics



   11.01   Public officials and employee ethics



City Council Procedure



   11.10   Procedures and conduct of the Mayor and all City Council
members



ETHICS



§ 11.01  PUBLIC OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEE ETHICS.



   (A)   The regulations of §§ 5 through 15 and Article 10 of the
State Officials and Employees Ethics Act, ILCS Ch. 5, Act 430, §§ 1-1 et
seq., hereinafter referred to as the Act in this section, are hereby adopted
by reference and made applicable to the officers and employees of the city to
the extent required by ILCS Ch. 5, Act 430, § 70-5.



   (B)   The solicitation or acceptance of gifts prohibited to be
solicited or accepted under the Act, by any officer or employee of the city,
is hereby prohibited.



   (C)   The offering or making of gifts prohibited to be offered or
made to an officer or employee of the city under the Act, is hereby
prohibited.



   (D)   The participation in political activities prohibited under the
Act, by any officer or employee of the city, is hereby prohibited.



   (E)   For purposes of this section, the terms OFFICER and EMPLOYEE
shall be defined as set forth in ILCS Ch. 5, Act 430, § 70-5(c).



   (F)   The penalties for violations of this section shall be the same
as those penalties set forth in ILCS Ch. 5, Act 430, § 50-5 for similar
violations of the Act.



   (G)   This section does not repeal or otherwise amend or modify any
existing ordinances or policies which regulate the conduct of city officers
and employees. To the extent that any existing ordinances or policies are
less restrictive than this section, the provisions of this section shall
prevail in accordance with the provisions of ILCS Ch. 5, Act 430, § 70-5(a).



   (H)   Any amendment to the Act that becomes effective after the
effective date of this section shall be incorporated into this section by
reference and shall be applicable to the solicitation, acceptance, offering,
and making of gifts and to prohibited political activities. However, any
amendment that makes its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities
shall not be incorporated into this section by reference without formal
action by the city.



   (I)   If the State Supreme Court declares the Act unconstitutional
in its entirety, then this section shall be repealed as of the date that the
State Supreme Court’s decision becomes final and not subject to any further
appeals or rehearings. This section shall be deemed repealed without further
action by the city if the Act is found unconstitutional by the State Supreme
Court.



   (J)   If the State Supreme Court declares part of the Act
unconstitutional but upholds the constitutionality of the remainder of the
Act, or does not address the remainder of the Act, then the remainder of the
Act as adopted by this section shall remain in full force and effect;
however, that part of this section relating to the part of the Act found
unconstitutional shall be deemed repealed without further action by the city.



(Prior Code, § 1-9-1)



CITY COUNCIL PROCEDURE



§ 11.10  PROCEDURES AND CONDUCT OF THE MAYOR AND ALL CITY COUNCIL MEMBERS.



   (A)   All members of the City Council, including the duly elected or
appointed Aldermen and Mayor, shall be subject to the provisions of this
section.  All duly appointed citizen board members are also subject to the
provisions of this section.



   (B)   It is the policy of the city to uphold, promote, and demand
the highest standards of behavior from the Mayor and the City Council
members. Accordingly, the Mayor and all members of the City Council shall
maintain the utmost standards of personal integrity, truthfulness, honesty
and fairness in carrying out their public duties. All shall comply with all
applicable laws, ordinances and policies, and never use their city position
or powers improperly, or for personal or private gain.



   (C)   No Alderman or the Mayor shall disclose or improperly utilize
any confidential information without prior authorization of the City Council.
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION shall mean any non-public information, written or
otherwise, including information exempt from disclosure pursuant to the Open
Meetings Act, the Freedom of Information Act, or information exempt from
disclosure pursuant to written agreement.



   (D)   No Alderman or the Mayor shall directly or indirectly
communicate with staff seeking to influence the hiring or termination of an
employee or contractor. Such discussions shall be conducted with by the City
Administrator or acting Administrator, or in accordance with the requirements
of the Open Meetings Act, with members of the City Council.



   (E)   The Mayor, nor any member of the City Council, shall not
directly or indirectly obtain, or seek to obtain, preferential treatment for
himself or herself or any other individual or entity.



   (F)   No Alderman or the Mayor shall act in a manner that exceeds
his or her authority given either by the Illinois Municipal Code, the Geneseo
City Charter, or expressly by the City Council.



   (G)   The Mayor, nor any member of the City Council, shall not
utilize his or her role to intentionally misrepresent the policy or position
of the city.



   (H)   The employees of the city, under the supervision of department
heads, or other structure approved by the City Council, are responsible for
the day-to-day operations of the city. All operational matters shall be
directed and carried out accordingly.



   (I)   The Mayor, nor no member of the City Council, shall engage in
discriminatory behavior based upon race, age, sex, sexual orientation, gender
identity, religious affiliation, marital status or any other protected status
under applicable law.



   (J)   A complaint may be filed with the City Clerk by any person
alleging that the Mayor/Member of the City Council, or citizen board member,
violated any provision of this section. The complaint must be deemed valid
and legitimate by two-thirds of the Council Members/Mayor not accused. Upon
the filing of a complaint, the City Council will hold a hearing on the
complaint within 30 days and decide upon the merits of same. The person
against whom the complaint was filed may act as a witness in said
proceedings, but shall not act in any other capacity at the hearing. If the
City Council finds that the member violated any portion of this section, it
may censure the member via a written and public reprimand. Any violation of a
provision in this section may also be considered as a city ordinance
violation of disorderly conduct.



   (K)   All members of the City Council and each Mayor of the city
shall, at the first regular meeting of the City Council after election, shall
sign a written certification that he or she has received a copy of Ordinance
No. O-11-013, and agrees to comply with its terms.



(Ord. O-11-013, passed 6-23-2011; Ord. O-12-039, passed 5-8-2012)



CHAPTER 12:  PUBLIC COMMENT



Section



   12.01   Listing on Council meeting agenda



   12.02   Policy for addressing Council



   12.03   Limitation on number of speakers



   12.04   Disorderly behavior prohibited



   12.05   Public comment at other city meetings



§ 12.01  LISTING ON COUNCIL MEETING AGENDA.



   Public comment shall be listed on each regularly scheduled City Council
meeting near the beginning of the meeting, and near the end, as deemed by the
Mayor or Chairman who presides over the meeting in question. Persons shall be
allowed to address the City Council as set forth in this chapter.



(Ord. O-11-23, passed 8-24-2011)



§ 12.02  POLICY FOR ADDRESSING COUNCIL.



   It shall be the policy of the City Council that any person may address
the City Council at its regular meetings under the public comment agenda
item. Public comment shall be limited to three minutes per speaker to speak
on any matter pertinent to issues or matters relating to the city. The
three-minute time limit shall apply unless the City Council, by a majority
vote, sets a lower or higher time limit for comment on a particular subject
which shall apply to all speakers during that public comment section. After a
reasonable period of time has been devoted to public comment, the public
comment section may be closed upon a motion and second of the City Council
and a majority vote in favor thereof.



(Ord. O-11-23, passed 8-24-2011)



§ 12.03  LIMITATION ON NUMBER OF SPEAKERS.



   If numerous persons wish to speak on a single topic, the City Council
may recognize a number of individuals who wish to speak in favor of, against
or wish to make general comments regarding the issue. The city shall not be
required to allow every person who wishes to address the issue to do so, but
as many views as possible should be heard. Any person who is not able to
speak during a public comment period shall be allowed and encouraged to
present their views to the city in writing.



(Ord. O-11-23, passed 8-24-2011)



§ 12.04  DISORDERLY BEHAVIOR PROHIBITED.



   All comments must be civil in nature. Any person who engages in
threatening or disorderly behavior when addressing the City Council shall be
deemed out of order by the presiding officer and their time ceased to address
the City Council at said meeting.



(Ord. O-11-23, passed 8-24-2011)



§ 12.05  PUBLIC COMMENT AT OTHER CITY MEETINGS.



   Public comments shall be allowed in a similar manner at all committee
meetings or meetings of subsidiary bodies of the city.



(Ord. O-11-23, passed 8-24-2011)



TITLE III:  ADMINISTRATION



   Chapter



      30.   GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS



      31.   CITY ORGANIZATIONS AND OFFICES



      32.   PURCHASING



      33.   TAXATION



      34.   CIVIL EMERGENCIES AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT



      35.   RESERVED



      36.   ADMINISTRATIVE CODE HEARING DEPARTMENT



      37.   BUDGET SYSTEM



      38.   ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE TO DETERMINE ELIGIBILITY FOR
BENEFITS UNDER THE PUBLIC SAFETY EMPLOYEE BENEFITS ACT



CHAPTER 30:  GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS



Section



   30.01   Term of office



   30.02   City Administrator



   30.03   Date for inauguration of newly elected municipal officials



   30.04   Definition of meeting



   30.05   Remote attendance policy



   30.06   Bond requirements



§ 30.01  TERM OF OFFICE.



   All officers appointed by the Mayor and approved by the City Council
shall hold their respective offices from the time of their appointment and
qualification until the end of the municipal year for which they are
respectively appointed or their term of office, and until the appointment and
qualification of their respective successors, unless otherwise provided by
the state statutes.



(Prior Code, § 1-5-2)



§ 30.02  CITY ADMINISTRATOR.



   (A)   Authorization to employ Administrator; appointment.  The
Mayor and City Council are hereby authorized to employ a City
Administrator.  Such Administrator shall be appointed by the Mayor, by and
with the advice and consent of the City Council.



   (B)   Bond. The City Administrator shall furnish a bond in such
amount and with such surety as may be approved by the corporate authorities,
such bond to be conditioned upon the faithful performance of his or her
duties.  The cost of the bond shall be paid by the city.  The bond of the
City Administrator may be part of a blanket bond.



   (C)   Compensation.  The City Administrator shall receive such
compensation as the corporate authorities shall, from time to time,
establish.  The City Council may enter into an employment agreement which
specifies in writing provisions, including but not limited to, establishing
the level of compensation of the City Administrator, specifying benefits
including levels of support for the City Administrator's continuing
professional education and association activities, determining separation pay
upon termination of the City Administrator's employment and defining other
conditions of employment.



   (D)   Chief administrator.  The City Administrator, under and
subject to the direction of the corporate authorities, shall be the chief
administrator of the city, and shall be responsible to the corporate
authorities for the proper administration of the affairs of the city and
policies adopted by the City Council.



   (E)   Acting Administrator.



      (1)   Whenever the City Administrator is absent from the city
for personal reasons, or on account of city business, or is otherwise unable
to perform the duties and responsibilities of the City Administrator due to
short term illness or disability, the City Administrator may designate in
writing a member of the city's senior administrative staff to serve as acting
administrator and to carry out the duties of the Administrator during the
Administrator's absence.



      (2)   In the event of a prolonged absence, as determined by
either the City Administrator himself or the Mayor and City Council, then the
Mayor by and with the advice and consent of the City Council shall appoint an
Acting Administrator, whose office shall be temporary and who shall serve
only until such time as the City Administrator is able to resume the duties
of his office.



   (F)   Powers and duties of Administrator. 



      (1)   The City Administrator shall have the following powers
and duties:



         (a)   Provide for the enforcement of all laws and
ordinances within the city.



         (b)   Attend all meetings of the City Council and other
official city boards and commissions as directed by the City Council, except
those which the City Council determine that attendance is not required
because of a conflict or other reason.  The City Administrator shall have
the right to take part in the discussion of all matters coming before the
City Council or other city boards and commissions, but shall have no right to
vote.  The City Administrator shall be entitled to notice of all special and
regular meetings of the City Council.



         (c)   Prepare and submit agenda for City Council
meetings and Committee of the Whole to the Mayor for approval.



         (d)   Recommend to the City Council such measures as, in
his or her judgment he or she deems to be in the best interest of the city.



         (e)   Employ, discipline, suspend and terminate any city
employees except Mayoral officers or appointees, corporate authorities, and
excepting as when otherwise provided by law, City Code, ordinance, or
contract and to the extent permitted by law, and subject to the policies and
procedures of the city's Personnel Policy.



         (f)   Propose to the Mayor and City Council such
personnel rules and regulations as the Administrator deems necessary to
manage the personnel of the city.  These rules may cover procedures and
policies to govern the following:



            1.   The administration of the position
description, classification and pay plans;



            2.   Recruitment, selection promotion, evaluation,
transfer, discipline and separation of city personnel;



            3.   Establishment of hours of work, attendance,
leave regulations and working conditions;



            4.   Rules covering the outside employment,
nepotism and political activity of city personnel;



            5.   Maintenance and use of necessary records and
forms;



            6.   System of handling grievances.



         (g)   Supervise and administer the conduct of all
collective bargaining processes of the city and recommend to the city
collective bargaining agreements for consideration and approval by the city,
and administer all employee organization contracts reached through the
collective bargaining process.



         (h)   Direct, supervise and coordinate the activities of
all departments, offices, and agencies of the city, except as otherwise
provided by law, and to administer the affairs of the city to ensure that all
city business is accomplished efficiently and economically.



         (i)   Recommend to the city the creating, consolidating,
and combining of offices, positions, departments or units of the
administrative and executive departments of the city.



      (j)   Investigate all complaints in relation to matters
concerning the administration of the government of the city and services
maintained by the public utilities of the city and see that all franchises,
permits and privileges granted by the city are faithfully observed.



      (k)   It shall be the duty of the City Administrator to ensure
that all franchises granted by, and all contracts with, the city are
faithfully kept and performed by all parties hereto.



      (l)   Keep a current inventory of all real and personal
property of the city and location of such property.  The City Administrator
shall be responsible for the care and custody of all city property which is
not assigned to some other officer or body for care and control.



      (m)   Prepare and submit to the Mayor and City Council by the
date set by the Council a recommended annual budget for city operations and
recommended capital programs; and administer the approved budget after
adoption.



      (n)   Supervise and administer the procurement of commodities
and services for all city departments, offices and agencies, and promulgate
purchasing rules implementing city ordinances which are consistent with state
law, which shall be followed by the employees in the procurement of goods and
services.



      (o)   Report to the City Council periodically the financial
condition of the city.



      (p)   Submit to the Mayor and City Council and make available
to the public a complete report on the finances and administrative activities
of the city as of the end of each fiscal year.



      (q)   Represent the city in its dealings with other
governmental agencies and officials, businesses, not-for-profit
organizations, residents, and the general public as necessary.



      (r)   Cause to be prepared grant and/or loan applications on
behalf of the city; administer grant and/or loan funds and shall have caused
the preparation of relevant reports to the corporate authorities and all
appropriate agencies.



      (s)   Evaluate city projects, programs, agreements and
services and make recommendation on modifications and improvement thereto.



      (t)   Devote his or her entire time to the discharge of his or
her official duties.



      (u)   The City Administrator shall perform such other duties
as may be required by the City Council consistent with state statutes and
ordinances of the city.



      (v)   Hold such other appointive offices as may be consistent
with law, as the Mayor and City Council may determine, and to faithfully and
honestly discharge the duties and powers associated with such office.



      (2)   The powers assigned to the City Administrator are not
intended to diminish those powers otherwise assigned to other officers by
statute or ordinance, including, but not limited to the Mayor.



   (G)   Matters directed to Administrator's attention.  All offices
and departments shall submit all matters requiring City Council action or
attention to the City Administrator, who shall submit them to the City
Council with recommendations as may be deemed necessary.  All departmental
or employee requests shall be submitted to the City Administrator who shall
provide instruction as to policy and action. Except as otherwise provided by
state law or city ordinance, elected and appointed city officers shall deal
with administrative services of the city through the City Administrator and
shall not give orders to subordinates of the City Administrator either
publicly or privately.



   (H)   Removal.  The City Administrator may be removed in accordance
with law, including but not limited to any agreement between the
Administrator and city, the city personnel ordinance and state statutes.



(Ord. 1518, passed - -; Ord. 1656, passed 1-14-1999; Ord. O-11-009, passed
6-22-2011; Ord. O-14-103, passed 6-10-2014)



§ 30.03  DATE FOR INAUGURATION OF NEWLY ELECTED MUNICIPAL OFFICIALS.



   (A)   The City Council hereby establishes that the date for
inauguration of newly elected municipal officials and appointed citizens
shall begin with the appointment of Council at Council's first meeting
following receipt of the certification of ballots from Henry County Clerk or
during the second session the second Tuesday in April, whichever is later;
provided, however, that said municipal election has been held in accordance
with law and the proclamation of results by the local canvassing board shall
have been conducted in accordance with law.



   (B)   In no case shall inauguration of newly elected municipal
officials occur later than the first regular meeting of the City Council in
the month of June following the election.



(Ord. 1951, passed 9-8-2009)



§ 30.04  DEFINITION OF MEETING.



   The term MEETING as used in any existing city resolutions, ordinance or
rules shall be defined to mean any gathering, whether in person or by
telephone calls, of a majority of a quorum of the members of a public body
held for the purpose of discussing public business or such other definition
as shall be contained within the state statutes.



(Ord. O-12-051, passed 7-10-2012)



§ 30.05  REMOTE ATTENDANCE POLICY.



   (A)   Policy statement.  It is the policy of the City Council that
a member of any group associated with this unit of government which is
subject to the provisions of the open meetings act of the City Council may
attend and participate in any open or closed meeting of that City Council
from a remote location via telephone, video or internet connection, provided
that such attendance and participation sis in compliance with this policy and
any other applicable laws.



   (B)   Prerequisites. A member of the City Council shall be provided
the opportunity to attend an open and closed meeting or only one of such
meetings from a remote location if the member meets the following conditions
and a majority of a quorum of the City Council votes to approve the remote
attendance:



      (1)   The member must notify the City Clerk of the City
Council at least 24 hours before the meeting unless advance notice is
impractical;



      (2)   The member must meet one of three reasons described
herein why he or she is unable to physically attend the meeting, including
either:



         (a)   The member cannot attend because of personal
illness or disability;



         (b)   The member cannot attend because of employment
purposes or the business of the City Council; or



         (c)   The member cannot attend because of a family or
other emergency; and



      (3)   A quorum of the City Council must be physically present.



   (C)   Voting procedures. After roll call, a vote of the City Council
shall be taken, considering the prerequisites set forth in division (B) of
this section, on whether to allow an offsite Council member to participate
remotely. All of the members physically present are permitted to vote on
whether remote participation will be allowed. A vote may be taken to permit
remote participation for a stated series of meetings if the same reason
applies in each case. Otherwise, a vote must be taken to allow each remote
participation.



   (D)   Quorum and vote required.  A quorum must be established by
members physically present at any meeting before it can be considered whether
to allow a member to participate in the meeting remotely. A vote of a
majority of a quorum shall be necessary to decide the issue. For the meeting
to continue there shall always need to be a quorum physically present.



   (E)   Minutes. The member participating remotely shall be considered
an offsite participant and counted present by means of video or audio
conference for the meeting if the member is allowed to participate. The
meeting minutes of the City Council shall also reflect and state specifically
whether each member is physically present, present by video, or present by
audio means.



   (F)   Rights of remote member. The member permitted to participate
in the same capacity as those members physically present, is subject to all
general meeting guidelines and procedures previously adopted and adhered to.
The remote member shall be heard, considered, and counted as to any vote
taken. Accordingly, the name of any remote member shall be called during any
vote taken, and his or her vote counted and recounted by the City Clerk and
placed in the minutes for the corresponding meeting. A member participating
remotely may leave a meeting and return as in the case of any member.



   (G)   Meetings. The term MEETING as used herein refers to any
gathering, whether in person or by video or audio conference, telephone call,
electronic means (such as, without limitation, electronic mail, electronic
chat, and instant messaging), or other means of contemporaneous interactive
communication, or a majority of a quorum of the members of a public body held
for the purposes of discussing public business.



   (H)   Closed meetings. A quorum of the City Council's members must
be physically present at any closed meeting. Members participating remotely
shall otherwise be entitled to participate in closed meeting by video or
audio conference.



   (I)   Costs. A member participating remotely via telephone shall be
reimbursed for the cost of the telephone call upon a valid receipt shown. Any
other costs associated with remote participation, including video
conferencing and other audio and video equipment, must be approved by the
City Council.



(Ord. O-12-051, passed 7-10-2012)



§ 30.06  BOND REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Each of the following officers of the city shall, upon
appointment and entering upon his or her duties, execute a bond with surety
to be approved by the corporate authorities:



      (1)   Mayor;



      (2)   Administrator;



      (3)   City Clerk;



      (4)   Treasurer.



   (B)   The amount of the bond for each officer shall be $50,000.



   (C)   The form of the bond shall be as shown on Exhibit A attached
to Ordinance O-15-131 and incorporated herein by reference.



(Ord. O-15-131, passed 3-10-2015)



CHAPTER 31:  CITY ORGANIZATIONS AND OFFICES



Section



Committee of the Whole



   31.001   Creation of Committee



   31.002   Meetings; business



   31.003   Membership; Chairperson



   31.004   Meetings; procedures



   31.005   Powers



Board of Police Commissioners



   31.020   Board creation



   31.021   Members; term of office; vacancy



   31.022   Compensation; expense reimbursement



   31.023   Qualifications; oath; removal



   31.024   Duties of Board



   31.025   Governing body



   31.026   Legal counsel



Police Pension Fund Board of Trustees



   31.030   Board creation; jurisdiction



   31.031   Members; term of office; vacancy



   31.032   Compensation; expense reimbursement



   31.033   Conflict of interest



   31.034   Oath



   31.035   Organization; minutes and records



   31.036   Duties of Board



   31.037   Removal of member



Zoning Board of Appeals



   31.050   Board creation; jurisdiction



   31.051   Members; term of office; vacancy



   31.052   Oath



   31.053   Compensation



   31.054   Conflict of interest



   31.055   Organization; minutes and records



   31.056   Duties of Board



   31.057   Duties of City Clerk



   31.058   Removal of members



Plan Commission



   31.060   Creation of Commission



   31.061   Intent and purpose



   31.062   Powers



   31.063   Commission membership



   31.064   Meetings



   31.065   Duties



   31.066   Reports and records



Plumbing Inspector



   31.080   Office created; appointment



   31.081   Qualifications



   31.082   Compensation



   31.083   Administrative duties



   31.084   Enforcement duties



   31.085   Inspection of premises



   31.086   Inspection duties



   31.087   Appeal of Plumbing Inspector orders



   31.088   Removal from office; vacancy



   31.089   Limitation of liability



Electrical Inspector



   31.100   Office created; appointment



   31.101   Qualifications



   31.102   Compensation



   31.103   Administrative duties



   31.104   Enforcement duties



   31.105   Inspection of premises



   31.106   Appeal of Electrical Inspector orders



   31.107   Removal from office; vacancy



   31.108   Limitation of liability



Police Department



   31.140   Creation and supervision of Department



   31.141   Offices



   31.142   Civilian personnel



   31.143   Chief of Police



   31.144   Appointments; discharges



   31.145   Salaries



   31.146   Power to arrest



   31.147   Rules and regulations effective upon approval



COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE



§ 31.001  CREATION OF COMMITTEE.



   The Committee of the Whole of the City Council is hereby created as a
standing committee of the City Council.



(Ord. O-11-009, passed 6-22-2011)



§ 31.002  MEETINGS; BUSINESS.



   The Committee of the Whole shall meet on the  fourth Tuesday of the
month beginning at 6:00 p.m. local time. Otherwise, the Mayor or any three of
the Alderman may call a meeting of the Committee of the Whole at any time.
Notice of each committee of the whole meeting shall be given by the city in
accordance with the Illinois Open Meetings Act. The Clerk shall promptly
notify all members of the City Council of a meeting of the Committee of the
Whole, except those scheduled for the fourth Tuesday of the month, by
delivering a written notice stating the time and place of such  Committee
meeting to each member personally or by leaving the notice at the member's
residence. At said Committee of the Whole meetings, the department
supervisors shall present their agenda items. Discussion may be had on same
and other city issues and the Committee may by motion to send items to the
Council for approval.



(Ord. O-11-009, passed 6-22-2011; Am. Ord. O-11-030, passed 12-14-2011)



§ 31.003  MEMBERSHIP; CHAIRPERSON.



   The Committee of the Whole is composed of the Mayor and the City
Council. The Mayor shall be the Chairperson of the Committee of the Whole. In
the absence of the Mayor from a meeting of the Committee of the Whole, the
members of the Committee of the Whole present at that meeting shall elect
from among themselves a person to serve as Chairperson for that meeting.



(Ord. O-11-009, passed 6-22-2011)



§ 31.004  MEETINGS; PROCEDURES.



   All meetings of the Committee of the Whole must be conducted in
compliance with the requirements of the Illinois Open Meetings Act. The
procedures governing meetings of the Committee of the Whole generally shall
be the same as the procedures applicable to meetings of the City Council.



(Ord. O-11-009, passed 6-22-2011)



§ 31.005  POWERS.



   The Committee of the Whole is generally advisory to the City Council
and generally shall not have the power to take final action on matters coming
before it.  Notwithstanding this limitation, the Committee of the Whole
shall have the power to approve any bills and financial obligations of the
city which come before it and are on its agenda.



(Ord. O-11-009, passed 6-22-2011; Ord. O-15-134, passed 3-10-2015)



BOARD OF POLICE COMMISSIONERS



§ 31.020  BOARD CREATION.



   There is hereby created a Board of Police Commissioners consisting of
three members, as provided by state statute.



(Prior Code, § 2-8-1)  (Ord. O-11-009, passed 6-22-2011)



§ 31.021  MEMBERS; TERM OF OFFICE; VACANCY.



   (A)   The Board of Police Commissioners shall be appointed by the
Mayor, by and with the consent of the City Council. The term of office of the
members of the Board of Police Commissioners shall be three years, and until
their respective successor shall be appointed and qualified; provided, that
no appointments shall be made by any Mayor within 30 days before the
expiration of his or her term of office; provided further, that the Mayor
shall appoint the first member of the Board, one of which is appointed to
serve until the end of the current municipal year in which the appointment is
made, another of which shall serve until the end of the municipal year next
ensuing, and the third of which shall serve until the end of the municipal
year second next ensuing; and provided, that each of the first members of the
Board shall serve until his or her successor is appointed and qualified.



   (B)   Vacancies on the Board shall be filled in the same manner as
the original appointment, and it is hereby declared proper and desirable that
members of the Board be reappointed where the reappointment is practicable,
all in furtherance of continuity of membership on the Board.



(Prior Code, § 2-8-2)  (Ord. O-11-009, passed 6-22-2011)



§ 31.022  COMPENSATION; EXPENSE REIMBURSEMENT.



   The Secretary of the Board of Police Commissioners shall serve without
compensation for his or her  services, and the members of the Board shall
serve without compensation.



(Prior Code, § 2-8-5)  (Ord. O-11-009, passed 6-22-2011)



§ 31.023  QUALIFICATIONS; OATH; REMOVAL.



   The members of the Board of Police Commissioners shall have the
qualifications as are now, or as may hereafter be, required of them by law.
Each member of the Board of Police Commissioners shall take oath or
affirmation of office. The members of the Board of Police Commissioners shall
be subject to removal from office as provided by state statute.



(Prior Code, § 2-8-3)  (Ord. O-11-009, passed 6-22-2011)



§ 31.024  DUTIES OF BOARD.



   The Board of Police Commissioners shall have the powers and duties as
are now, or as may hereafter be, given to it by state statute and by the City
Council.



(Prior Code, § 2-8-4)  (Ord. O-11-009, passed 6-22-2011)



§ 31.025  GOVERNING BODY.



   The Board of Police Commissioners shall be governed in its operation by
the provisions of the Illinois Compiled Statutes and additions or amendments
hereto as shall from time to time become applicable. The provisions of this
subchapter are intended to embody and conform with the statutes in all
respects.



(Prior Code, § 2-8-6)  (Ord. O-11-009, passed 6-22-2011)



§ 31.026  LEGAL COUNSEL.



   The Board of Police Commissioners shall be entitled to legal counsel
and representation, to be provided by or at the expense of the city, in any
case pertaining to or arising from the performance of the statutory duties of
the Commission.



(Prior Code, § 2-8-7)  (Ord. O-11-009, passed 6-22-2011)



POLICE PENSION FUND BOARD OF TRUSTEES



§ 31.030  BOARD CREATION; JURISDICTION.



   There is hereby created and established, and shall hereafter be
maintained and shall function in and for the city, a Board of Trustees of the
Police Pension Fund. The Board shall be under the jurisdiction of the City
Council.



(Prior Code, § 2-9-1)  (Ord. O-11-009, passed 6-22-2011)



§ 31.031  MEMBERS; TERM OF OFFICE; VACANCY.



   (A)   The Board shall be known as the Board of Trustees of the
Police Pension Fund of the city. The Board shall consist of five members, a
majority of whom shall be residents of the city and who shall administer the
Pension Fund and designate the beneficiaries thereof. Two members of the
Board shall be appointed by the Mayor. The third and fourth members of the
Board shall be elected from the regular police force by the active members
thereof. The fifth member shall be elected by and from among the
beneficiaries of the Fund.



   (B)   The members of the Board holding office at the time this
subchapter becomes effective shall continue in office until the expiration of
their respective terms and until their respective successors are appointed or
elected and qualified, as the case may be. In a municipality which comes
within the provisions of this subchapter after the effective date of this
code, one of the Board members appointed by the Mayor shall serve for one
year beginning on the second Tuesday in May after the municipality comes
within the provisions thereof. The other appointed member shall serve for two
years beginning on the same date. The successors to any of the appointed
members of the Board shall serve for two years each or until their successors
are appointed and qualified.



   (C)   The election provided for in this subchapter for elected Board
members shall be held biennially  on the third Monday in April at the place
or places in the municipality and under the Australian ballot system, and
other regulations as shall be prescribed by the appointed members of the
Board. All members of the regular police force shall be entitled to vote only
for the police force members of the Board. All beneficiaries of legal age
shall be entitled to vote only for the member chosen from among the
beneficiaries. No person shall be entitled to cast more than one ballot at
the election. The members shall be elected for a term of two years beginning
on the second Tuesday of the first May after the election.



   (D)   Upon the death, resignation, or inability to act of any member
of the Board elected under this subchapter, his or her successor shall be
elected for the unexpired term at a special election, to be called by the
Board and conducted in the same manner as the regular biennial election.



(Prior Code, § 2-9-2)  (Ord. O-11-009, passed 6-22-2011)



§ 31.032  COMPENSATION; EXPENSE REIMBURSEMENT.



   Neither Alderpersons nor citizen members of the Board shall be
compensated. No member of the Board shall receive any benefits, emoluments,
or fees whatever for his or her services; provided, however, the actual
amounts paid out by any members for personal and traveling expenses while
engaged in business pertaining to duties of the Board shall be reimbursed by
the city.



(Prior Code, § 2-9-7)  (Ord. O-11-009, passed 6-22-2011)



§ 31.033  CONFLICT OF INTEREST.



   No member of the Board shall be interested, directly or indirectly, in
any contract or job for work, or material for any work, for themselves or
family, or the profits therefrom, or services to be furnished or performed in
the operation, maintenance, extension, or improvement of the Board functions.
No member of the Board shall accept any compensation, gratuity, bribe, or
other form of payment for his or her actions as a Board member except as
provided by this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 2-9-8)  (Ord. O-11-009, passed 6-22-2011)



§ 31.034  OATH.



   Every member of the Board shall, before entering upon the duties of his
or her office, take the oath of affirmation prescribed by law for city
officers. The Mayor and the Alderpersons who are selected as Board members
need not take any other oaths than those taken by them as Mayor and
Alderperson, respectively.



(Prior Code, § 2-9-3)  (Ord. O-11-009, passed 6-22-2011)



§ 31.035  ORGANIZATION; MINUTES AND RECORDS.



   (A)   (1)   The Board shall hold regular quarterly meetings in
July, October, January, and April annually, and special meetings as called by
the president.



      (2)   At the regular July meeting, the Board shall select from
its members a President, Vice- President, Secretary, and Assistant Secretary
to serve for the period of one year, and until his or her respective
successor is elected and qualified. The Vice-President of the Board shall
perform the duties of President during any vacancy in that office, or during
time the President is absent from the municipality, or for any other reason
is disqualified, or by reason of illness or other cause is unable to perform
his or her duties. The Assistant Secretary shall act for the Secretary
whenever necessary to discharge the functions of the office.



(Prior Code, § 2-9-4)



   (B)   The Board shall keep full and accurate minutes of its
proceedings and regular systematic accounts of transactions. This
information, to be kept as aforesaid, shall be reported to the City Council,
in writing, as soon as possible following the Board meeting.



(Prior Code, § 2-9-6)  (Ord. O-11-009, passed 6-22-2011)



§ 31.036  DUTIES OF BOARD.



   (A)   The Board shall be responsible for the following:



      (1)   To control and manage exclusively the Pension Fund and
all moneys donated, paid, or assessed for the relief or pensioning of
disabled, superannuated, and retired members of the Police Department, their
widows, minor children, and dependent parents. All such moneys shall be
placed by the Treasurer of the municipality to the credit of the Fund,
subject to the order of the Board;



      (2)   To order and direct the payment of pensions and other
benefits provided by this subchapter and to issue certificates signed by its
President and Secretary to the person entitled thereto of the amount ordered
paid to the persons from the Fund, which certificates shall state the purpose
of the payment;



      (3)   To submit annually to the City Council, at the close of
the municipality’s fiscal year, a list of persons entitled to payments from
the Fund, stating the amount of the payments and their purpose, as ordered by
the Board. It shall also include items of income accrued to the Fund during
the fiscal year. The list shall be signed by the Secretary and President of
the Board and attested under oath. No resolution or order for the payment of
money shall be valid unless approved by a majority of the members of the
Board, and any order for payment shall be signed by the President and
Secretary of the Board;



      (4)   To draw pension funds from the Treasurer or other
officials of the municipality and invest any part thereof in the name of the
Board of the Police Pension Fund in:



         (a)   Interest bearing bonds or tax anticipation
warrants of the United States, of the state, or of any county, township, or
municipal corporation of the state;



         (b)   Insured withdrawable capital accounts of state
chartered savings and loan associations;



         (c)   Insured withdrawable capital accounts of federal
chartered savings and loan associations if the withdrawable capital accounts
are insured by the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation;



         (d)   Insured investments in credit unions if the
investments are insured by the National Credit Union Administration; and



         (e)   Savings accounts or certificates of deposit of a
national or state bank.



      (5)   To compel witnesses to attend and testify before it upon
matters connected with the administration of this subchapter in the manner
provided by law for the taking of testimony before the Circuit Court. The
President or any member of the Board may administer oaths to the witnesses;



      (6)   To appoint a clerk and define his or her duties. No
person drawing a pension under this subchapter shall be employed by the Board;



      (7)   To provide for the payment from the Fund of all
necessary expenses, including clerk hiring, printing, and witness fees;



      (8)   To keep a public record of all its proceedings;



      (9)   To make necessary rules and regulations in conformity
with the provisions of this subchapter, which shall be published by the Board
and copies transmitted from time to time to all pensioners and contributors;
and



      (10)   Any and all other duties as set forth in the state
statutes.



   (B)   The Board shall report to the City Council of the municipality
on the condition of the Police Pension Fund. The report shall be made prior
to the meeting of the Council or Board held for the levying of taxes for the
year for which the report is made.



   (C)   The Board shall certify to the City Council of the
municipality:



      (1)   The assets in its custody at the time;



      (2)   The estimated receipts during the next succeeding
calendar year from deductions from the salaries of police officers and from
all other sources; and



      (3)   The estimated amount required during the calendar year
to:



         (a)   Pay all pensions and other obligations provided in
this subchapter; and



         (b)   Maintain the Reserve Fund provided in ILCS Ch. 40,
Act 5, § 3-127.



   (D)   All securities shall be deposited with the Treasurer of the
municipality and be subject to the order of the Board. Interest on the
investments shall be credited to the account of the Pension Fund.



   (E)   No bank or savings and loan association shall receive
investment funds as permitted by this subchapter unless it has complied with
the requirements established pursuant to ILCS Ch. 30, Act 235,§ 0.01-8. The
limitations set forth therein shall be applicable only at the time of
investment and shall not require the liquidation of any investment at any
time.



(Prior Code, § 2-9-5)  (Ord. O-11-009, passed 6-22-2011)



§ 31.037  REMOVAL OF MEMBER.



   Any member of the Board may be removed at any time by the City Council
by a majority vote of the Council members present whenever, in the opinion of
the Council, the interest of the city requires the removal. The Board may
recommend to the City Council the removal of any member of the Board for
excessive absenteeism. Excessive absenteeism shall be the missing of three of
the last four regularly scheduled Board meetings.



(Prior Code, § 2-9-9)  (Ord. O-11-009, passed 6-22-2011)



ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS



§ 31.050  BOARD CREATION; JURISDICTION.



   There is hereby created and established and shall hereafter be
maintained and recognized in and for the city a Zoning Board of Appeals. The
Board shall be under the jurisdiction of the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 2-10-1)  (Ord. O-11-009, passed 6-22-2011)



§ 31.051  MEMBERS; TERM OF OFFICE; VACANCY.



   The Board shall consist of seven members as follows:



   (A)   The seven members of the Board shall be citizens of the city
who are not members of the City Council. The seven citizen members shall be
appointed by the Mayor and approved by the City Council. The members shall
serve for a term of five years each from the first City Council meeting after
election certification of the year they are appointed, or until their
successors take office. The term for which each member is appointed shall be
designated in his or her appointment. At the April Council meeting of each
year, the member shall be appointed for a five-year term to succeed the
member whose term has expired.



   (B)   Members shall be eligible for reappointment, and it is
desirable that members rendering good service be reappointed in order that
the Zoning Board of Appeals may have the benefit of their experience, and
that there may be a continuity policy. If any member should, during the term
of his or her office die move from the city, or for any reason be unable to
act, the vacancy created shall be filled in the same manner as an original
appointment, and shall be for the remainder of the unexpired term.



(Prior Code, § 2-10-2)  (Ord. O-11-009, passed 6-22-2011)



§ 31.052  OATH.



   All citizen members of the Board do not have to take any oaths.



(Prior Code, § 2-10-3)  (Ord. O-11-009, passed 6-22-2011)



§ 31.053  COMPENSATION.



   The member of the Board shall be compensated $20 per regular meeting
attended to be paid quarterly and shall be entitled to receive reimbursement
for any reasonable actual expenses incurred. Payments shall be from revenue
of the General Fund.



(Prior Code, § 2-10-8)  (Ord. O-11-009, passed 6-22-2011)



§ 31.054  CONFLICT OF INTEREST.



   No member of the Board shall be interested, directly or indirectly, in
any contract of job for work, or material for any work, for themselves or
family, or the profits therefrom, or services to be furnished or performed in
the carrying out of the City Zoning Ordinance.



(Prior Code, § 2-10-9)  (Ord. O-11-009, passed 6-22-2011)



§ 31.055  ORGANIZATION; MINUTES AND RECORDS.



   (A)   (1)   The Board shall organize as soon as practicable after
the appointment and qualification of its members by the election of one of
its members as Chairperson and a Vice-Chairperson, to be elected yearly by a
majority of Board members.



      (2)   All hearings conducted by the Board shall be open to the
public. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of
each member upon every question or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating
the fact, and shall also keep records of its hearings and other official
actions. Findings of fact shall be included in the minutes of each case and
the reasons for recommending approval or denial of the request shall be
specified. Every rule or regulation, every amendment or repeal thereof, and
every order, requirement, decision, or determination of the Board shall be
filed within ten days in the office of the City Clerk and shall be a public
record. The Board shall adopt its own rules and procedures not in conflict
with this subchapter or with the state statutes in such case made and
provided.



(Prior Code, § 2-10-4)



   (B)   The Board shall keep full and accurate minutes of its
proceedings. The City Clerk shall designate a member of his or her staff to
be present to take full and accurate minutes. All records of the Board shall
be kept at City Hall and shall be open to the public.



(Prior Code, § 2-10-7)  (Ord. O-11-009, passed 6-22-2011)



§ 31.056  DUTIES OF BOARD.



   (A)   The powers and duties of the Board are:



      (1)   To hold public hearings and recommend to the City
Council approval or denial of conditional use permits;



      (2)   To hold public hearings and grant variances and
expansions of nonconforming uses;



      (3)   To hold public hearings and decide upon request for
determination of the existence of a nonconforming use and request for the
extension of a nonconforming use;



      (4)   To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is
an error in an order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the
Building Inspector in the enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance or the Building
Code and fee schedule;



      (5)   To permit the extension of a district where the boundary
line of a district divides a lot held in a single ownership at the time of
passage of the Zoning Ordinance; and



      (6)   To interpret the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance in
such a way as to carry out the intent and purpose of the plan as shown upon
the map fixing the several districts, which is adopted by reference as if set
out in full in this subchapter, where the street layout on the ground varies
from the layout as shown on the map.



   (B)   The Board may grant the following variances:



      (1)   Vary the yard regulations where there is an exception of
unusual physical condition of a lot, which condition, if not generally
prevalent in the neighborhood, and, when related to the yard regulations of
this code, would prevent a reasonable or sensible arrangement of buildings on
the lot. Applicants for a side or rear yard variance must be able to show the
distance of the proposed improvement from the lot line by way of lot corner
stakes in the neighborhood. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a variance may be
granted for the parking or storage of recreational vehicles in side yards.
Before granting a variance, the Board shall consider such factors as the
closeness of neighboring buildings, adequate light, sunshine, airspace, and
fire hazard potential;



      (2)   Vary the parking regulations where an applicant
demonstrates conclusively that the specific use of a building would make
unnecessary the parking spaces required by this code, providing that a
reduction not be more than 50% of the usual requirement;



      (3)   Use of the premises for public utilities and railroad
purposes (other than track right-of-way) or for radio and television tower or
broadcasting station; and



      (4)   Vary the parking regulations for parking in R districts
for churches, temples, public schools, public libraries, community centers,
public parks, and public playgrounds. In the R districts, 20% of the required
front yard shall be reserved and devoted to permanent landscaping, and no
off-street parking spaces or off-street loading spaces shall be permitted
within this landscaping area.



   (C)   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall conduct public hearings and
make recommendation to the City Council upon applications for conditional use
permits specifically listed in the district regulations of this code.
Conditional uses of areas to be annexed shall be detailed in an annexation
agreement. A public hearing on the conditional use and annexation agreement
shall be conducted by the Community Development Board. In such cases, it
shall be the Community Development Board rather than the Zoning Board of
Appeals which shall make recommendation to the City Council. No
recommendation for a conditional use permit shall be forwarded to the City
Council within the same week as the public hearing is completed. Before
recommending approval of a conditional use permit, the Board shall satisfy
itself that the conditional use requested will meet conditions that will,
with the Board’s judgment, ensure that:



      (1)   The establishment, maintenance, or operation of a
conditional use will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health,
safety, morals, comfort, or general welfare;



      (2)   The conditional use will not be injurious to the use and
enjoyment of other property in the immediate vicinity for the purposes
already permitted, nor substantially diminish and impair property values
within the neighborhood;



      (3)   The establishment of the conditional use will not impede
the normal and orderly development and improvement of surrounding property
uses permitted in the district;



      (4)   Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage, and other
necessary facilities will be provided;



      (5)   Adequate measures will be taken to provide ingress and
egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestions in the public streets;
and



      (6)   Duration of conditional uses shall be for that period of
time as set forth.



   (D)   An appeal may be taken to the Zoning Board of Appeals by a
person or by an officer, department, board, or bureau of the city affected by
a decision of the Building Inspector. An appeal shall state all proceedings
in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the Building Inspector
certifies to the Zoning Board of Appeals, after the notice of appeal has been
filed with him or her, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a
stay would, in his or her opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property,
in which case the proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a
restraining order, which may be granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals or by
a court of record on application, on notice to the Building Inspector, and on
due cause shown.



   (E)   The Board shall select a reasonable time and place for the
hearing of the appeal, give 15 days notice thereof to the parties, and shall
render a decision on the appeal without unreasonable delay. Any person may
appeal and testify at the hearing either in person or by duly authorized
agent or attorney.



   (F)   Any review of the decisions of the Zoning Board of Appeals as
set forth in division (B) above shall be subject to the Illinois
Administrative Review Act.



(Prior Code, § 2-10-5)  (Ord. O-11-009, passed 6-22-2011)



§ 31.057  DUTIES OF CITY CLERK.



   (A)   For conditional uses, variances, extension, expansion of
nonconforming uses, or for the determination of the existence of a
nonconforming use, the City Clerk’s office shall:



      (1)   Obtain the name of property owners within a radius of
250 feet of the property of the stated case and notify each property owner of
the public hearing by a letter;



      (2)   Have the legal notice published in the official
newspaper 15 days prior to the public hearing.



   (B)   The City Clerk’s office shall receive a fee of $150 with the
application for conditional use, variance, and expansion of nonconforming
use. No fee shall be received with applications for other meetings or
hearings of the Zoning Board of Appeals.



(Prior Code, § 2-10-6)  (Ord. O-11-009, passed 6-22-2011)



§ 31.058  REMOVAL OF MEMBERS.



   Any member of the Board may be removed at any time by the Council by a
two-thirds vote of Council members present whenever, in the opinion of the
Council, the interest of the city requires removal. The Board may recommend
to the City Council the removal of any member for excessive absenteeism at
any regularly scheduled Board meeting. Excessive absenteeism shall be the
missing of any three of the last four regularly scheduled Board meetings.



(Prior Code, § 2-10-10)  (Ord. O-11-009, passed 6-22-2011)



PLAN COMMISSION



§ 31.060  CREATION OF COMMISSION.



   There is hereby created a Plan Commission which shall be advisory to
the City Council.



(Ord. O-11-009, passed 6-22-2011)



§ 31.061  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   It shall be the intent and purpose of the Plan Commission to provide
for the continued comprehensive development of the city according to the most
recent copy of the comprehensive plan of the city and to review and recommend
changes in the comprehensive plan.



(Ord. O-11-009, passed 6-22-2011)



§ 31.062  POWERS.



   The members of the Plan Commission shall have such powers as are now or
may hereafter be given to it by law.



(Ord. O-11-009, passed 6-22-2011)



§ 31.063  COMMISSION MEMBERSHIP.



   (A)   Members.  The Plan Commission shall consist of five members,
each appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council.



   (B)   Terms.  Three Plan Commission members shall serve a two-year
term and two Plan Commission members shall serve a one-year term. Upon the
initial appointments, the Mayor shall designate which Plan Commission members
are serving which terms and said seat shall thereafter continue with that
same term.



   (C)   Removal.  A Commission member may be removed in accordance
with the law.



   (D)   Chairman.  The Plan Commission shall designate one of its own
to be Chairman.



(Ord. O-11-009, passed 6-22-2011)



§ 31.064  MEETINGS.



   The Plan Commission shall determine and set the time of its meeting and
shall otherwise meet upon the call of its Chairman or any three members.



(Ord. O-11-009, passed 6-22-2011)



§ 31.065  DUTIES.



   (A)   To review the comprehensive plan of the city, and to prepare
and recommend changes to the comprehensive plan to the City Council.



   (B)   To hold public hearings, make written findings of fact and
submit the same with recommendations to the City Council on those matters
identified by law or ordinance.



   (C)   To study the provisions of the text of the zoning code and
review the zoning map pursuant to the zoning code, from time to time but not
less frequently than annually, so that this chapter and the map pursuant
thereto may be duly filed and updated annually.



   (D)   To act on all matters referred to it by the City Council or
upon which it is required to act under the zoning code and subdivision
regulations code as may be amended from time to time.



(Ord. O-11-009, passed 6-22-2011)



§ 31.066  REPORTS AND RECORDS.



   (A)   The Commission shall keep permanent records and minutes of its
meetings, showing the vote of each member upon each topic submitted to it.



   (B)   The Commission shall prepare and submit minutes of each
meeting to the City Clerk in a timely manner.



   (C)   The Commission shall submit all recommendations to the City
Council in writing.



   (D)   A minority report may be attached to the majority
recommendation.



(Ord. O-11-009, passed 6-22-2011)



PLUMBING INSPECTOR



§ 31.080  OFFICE CREATED; APPOINTMENT.



   (A)   The office of Plumbing Inspector is hereby created in
accordance with the City Charter, § 1, Article V, OF APPOINTMENTS.



(Prior Code, § 3-1-1)



   (B)   The Plumbing Inspector shall be appointed by the Mayor with
the advice and consent of the City Council. The confirmed appointee shall be
an officer of the city, and as such shall have the powers of a law
enforcement officer for the enforcement of duties and responsibilities
delegated by the City Charter, ordinances, resolutions, and motions of the
Council, and of statutes of the state. The officer shall be commissioned by
warrant under the corporate seal and signed by the Mayor and attested by the
City Clerk.



(Prior Code, § 3-1-2)  (Ord. O-11-009, passed 6-22-2011)



§ 31.081  QUALIFICATIONS.



   The Plumbing Inspector shall have a valid plumbing license from the
state, shall not be engaged in the occupation of plumbing or be interested
directly or indirectly in any firm or corporation engaged in the business of
plumbing during the term of office, and shall be licensed in cross-connection
control devices.



(Prior Code, § 3-1-3)  (Ord. O-11-009, passed 6-22-2011)



§ 31.082  COMPENSATION.



   (A)   The Plumbing Inspector shall be compensated for the purpose of
carrying out the assigned duties of the office and for expenses incurred for
attendance of Council meetings and City Board meetings.



   (B)   The Plumbing Inspector shall be compensated for actual
expenses incurred for attendance at workshops, seminars and the like, which
have been approved by the Mayor.



(Prior Code, § 3-1-5)  (Ord. O-11-009, passed 6-22-2011)



§ 31.083  ADMINISTRATIVE DUTIES.



   The Office of Plumbing Inspector shall function under the provisions of
the City Charter, ordinances, and the following provisions.



   (A)   The Plumbing Inspector shall attend City Council meetings and
Board meetings upon request, shall provide a monthly report of plumbing
permits issued and fees established to the City Council, and shall keep in
close contact with the work of the city, officers, and various city boards
and departments.



   (B)   The Plumbing Inspector shall make any recommendations to City
Council concerning ordinances, resolutions, policies, fees, rules, and
regulations relating to the duties of the office.



(Prior Code, § 3-1-6)  (Ord. O-11-009, passed 6-22-2011)



§ 31.084  ENFORCEMENT DUTIES.



   (A)   The Plumbing Inspector is hereby authorized and directed to
enforce all the provisions of the city’s adopted Code and other ordinances
which assign specific enforcement duties.



   (B)   The authorization shall include, but not be limited to:



      (1)   The right to retain technical assistance;



      (2)   The right of entry to make an inspection to enforce any
provisions of the city’s adopted Code;



      (3)   The right to issue stop orders;



      (4)   The right to request and receive, so far as is required
in the discharge of the duties, the assistance and cooperation of other
officials of the city;



      (5)   The right to issue a permit, deny a permit, revoke a
permit, or require modifications to correct plans before the issuance of a
permit;



      (6)   The right to order modification of all work, whether
installed or not;



      (7)   The right to issue discontinued use of building or
structure or equipment regulated by the city’s adopted Code;



      (8)   Review applications for permit and establish fees;



      (9)   Present to the designated city board any plans or
alternative materials and method of construction for interpretation prior to
the issuance of a permit; and



      (10)   Present to the designated city board any citizen
complaint or request for interpretation.



(Prior Code, § 3-1-7)  (Ord. O-11-009, passed 6-22-2011)



§ 31.085  INSPECTION OF PREMISES.



   The Plumbing Inspector shall, in the course of his or her duties and
inspections, make all reasonable efforts to obtain the consent of the owner
or occupant of the premises for inspection. If consent cannot be obtained and
the Plumbing Inspector has probable cause for the necessity of the
inspection, he or she shall contact the City Attorney for the purpose of
obtaining a search warrant to conduct the inspection.



(Prior Code, § 3-1-11)  (Ord. O-11-009, passed 6-22-2011)



§ 31.086  INSPECTION DUTIES.



   (A)   The Plumbing Inspector shall be responsible for verifying the
presence or absence of cross-connections. The Plumbing Inspector shall make a
report of cross-connections discovered and forward the report to the Water
and Sewer Superintendent.



(Prior Code, § 3-1-9)



   (B)   The Plumbing Inspector shall inspect:



      (1)   All plumbing work in the process of construction;



      (2)   All waste pipes in repair or replacement work;



      (3)   Construction of public sewers;



      (4)   Installation of water service taps and service piping;



      (5)   Connections to main sewers; and



      (6)   Water, sewer, and drainage piping work which comes
within the meaning of the term PLUMBING, as defined in the adopted Plumbing
Code.



(Prior Code, § 3-1-10)  (Ord. O-11-009, passed 6-22-2011)



§ 31.087  APPEAL OF PLUMBING INSPECTOR ORDERS.



   (A)   Orders by the Plumbing Inspector may be appealed to the Water
and Sewer Board within ten days from service of the order. Unless appealed,
orders shall become final in ten days.



   (B)   If the order is sustained by the Water and Sewer Board, the
order will become final within ten days from the date the Water and Sewer
Board sustains the order, unless an appeal is taken to the Circuit Court.



   (C)   If no administrative appeal is taken from the order issued by
the Plumbing Inspector pursuant to this subchapter, or if no appeal is taken
from an order of the Water and Sewer Board sustaining an order of the
Plumbing Inspector within the period fixed by this section, the party upon
whom the order was entered shall be deemed to have waived the right to have
the reasonableness or the lawfulness of the order reviewed by a court, and
there shall be no trial of those issues in any court in which suit may be
instituted for the penalty for failure to comply with the order.



   (D)   The Water and Sewer Board shall have jurisdiction to review
all appeals from the orders of the Plumbing Inspector. The Water and Sewer
Board may reverse or sustain, in whole or in part, any order of the Plumbing
Inspector, or may modify any order.



(Prior Code, § 3-1-8)  (Ord. O-11-009, passed 6-22-2011)



§ 31.088  REMOVAL FROM OFFICE; VACANCY.



   (A)   The City Council, at its pleasure, may remove the Plumbing
Inspector for misconduct or any other cause by two-thirds vote of Council.
The Mayor may remove the Plumbing Inspector and must report the reason for
removal within ten days to Council. The Council, by two-thirds vote, may
disapprove of the removal.



   (B)   Vacancies created by death, resignation, removal from office,
or any other reason shall be filled by the appointment process of § 31.080.



(Prior Code, § 3-1-4)  (Ord. O-11-009, passed 6-22-2011)



§ 31.089  LIMITATION OF LIABILITY.



   The city is not liable for, nor in any respect, bound or obligated by,
any actions including, but not limited to, the issuance of permits or
licenses of the Plumbing Inspector which are done or performed outside the
scope of the authority set forth in this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 3-1-12)  (Ord. O-11-009, passed 6-22-2011)



ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR



§ 31.100  OFFICE CREATED; APPOINTMENT.



   (A)   The office of Electrical Inspector is hereby created in
accordance with the City Charter, § 1, Article V, OF APPOINTMENTS.



(Prior Code, § 3-2-1)



   (B)   The Electrical Inspector shall be appointed by the Mayor with
the advice and consent of the City Council. The confirmed appointee shall be
an officer of the city and as such shall have the powers of a law enforcement
officer for the enforcement of duties and responsibilities delegated by the
City Charter, ordinances, resolutions, and motions of the Council, and of
statutes of the state. The officer shall be commissioned by warrant under the
corporate seal and signed by the Mayor and attested by the City Clerk.



(Prior Code, § 3-2-2)  (Ord. O-11-009, passed 6-22-2011)



§ 31.101  QUALIFICATIONS.



   The Electrical Inspector shall be knowledgeable with the methods of
electrical construction for safety to life and property as approved by this
subchapter, state law, and by rules and regulations made by the Electrical
Utility Board, pursuant to the city electrical ordinance and the National
Electric Code.



(Prior Code, § 3-2-3)  (Ord. O-11-009, passed 6-22-2011)



§ 31.102  COMPENSATION.



   (A)   The Electrical Inspector shall be compensated for the purpose
of carrying out the assigned duties of the office and for expenses incurred
for attendance of Council meetings and City Board meetings.



   (B)   The Electrical Inspector shall be compensated for actual
expenses incurred for attendance at workshops, seminars and the like, which
have been approved by the Mayor.



(Prior Code, § 3-2-5)  (Ord. O-11-009, passed 6-22-2011)



§ 31.103  ADMINISTRATIVE DUTIES.



   The Office of Electrical Inspector shall function under the provisions
of the City Charter, ordinances, and the following provisions.



   (A)   The Electrical Inspector shall attend City Council meetings
and Board meetings upon request, shall provide a monthly report of electric
permits issued and fees established to the City Council, and shall keep in
close contact with the work of the city, officers, and various city boards
and departments.



   (B)   The Electrical Inspector shall make any recommendations to
City Council concerning ordinances, resolutions, policies, fees, rules, and
regulations relating to the duties of the office.



   (C)   The Electrical Inspector shall administer the written
examination developed by the Electrical Utility Board to test the experience,
knowledge, and qualifications of applicants for electrical contractor’s or
electrical journeyman’s licenses.



(Prior Code, § 3-2-6)  (Ord. O-11-009, passed 6-22-2011)



§ 31.104  ENFORCEMENT DUTIES.



   (A)   The Electrical Inspector shall arrange for the issuance of
permits upon payment of permit fees required by this subchapter, inspect all
electrical wires, conduits, and apparatus, and administer enforcement of
laws, rules, and regulations relating to the installation of electrical wires
and apparatus in public and private buildings and on public and private
property.



   (B)   The Electrical Inspector shall make a periodic inspection of
all electrical equipment used within the city and shall inspect at reasonable
hours any premises, buildings, or other structures where electrical equipment
is used.



   (C)   The Electrical Inspector shall have the power to order
modifications of all electrical work, whether installed or not, so that the
work will be in conformance to this subchapter and to good electrical
practice, and shall have the power to enter into premises, buildings, or
other structures in the course of the exercise of that power only after
obtaining the necessary warrant or otherwise complying with all legal and
constitutional requirements. The Electrical Inspector shall further have the
power to cause the turning off of all electrical current and to cut or
disconnect wire in cases of emergency, where the electrical current is
dangerous to life or property.



   (D)   The Electrical Inspector shall interview applicants for
electrical licenses, receive their affidavits of experience, administer
electrical examinations to qualified applicants, and issue electrical
licenses to qualified applicants.



   (E)   The Electrical Inspector shall renew electrical licenses for
existing holders upon payment of license fees and proof that bonding and
insurance requirements have been complied with.



(Prior Code, § 3-2-7)  (Ord. O-11-009, passed 6-22-2011)



§ 31.105  INSPECTION OF PREMISES.



   The Electrical Inspector shall, in the course of his or her duties and
inspections, make all reasonable efforts to obtain the consent of the owner
or occupant of the premises for the inspection. If consent cannot be obtained
and the Electrical Inspector has probable cause for the necessity of
inspection, he or she shall contact the City Attorney for the purpose of
obtaining a search warrant to conduct the inspection.



(Prior Code, § 3-2-9)  (Ord. O-11-009, passed 6-22-2011)



§ 31.106  APPEAL OF ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR ORDERS.



   (A)   Orders by the Electrical Inspector may be appealed to the
Electrical Utility Board within ten days from service of the order. Unless
appealed, orders shall become final in ten days.



   (B)   If the order is sustained by the Electrical Utility Board, the
order will become final within ten days from the date the Electrical Utility
Board sustains the order, unless an appeal is taken to the Circuit Court.



   (C)   If no administrative appeal is taken from the order issued by
the Electrical Inspector pursuant to this subchapter, or if no appeal is
taken from an order of the Electrical Utility Board sustaining an order of
the Electrical Inspector within the period fixed by this section, the party
upon whom the order was entered shall be deemed to have waived the right to
have the reasonableness or the lawfulness of the order reviewed by a court
and there shall be no trial of those issues in any court in which suit may be
instituted for the penalty for failure to comply with the order.



   (D)   (1)   The Electrical Utility Board shall have jurisdiction
to review all appeals from the orders of the Electrical Inspector.



      (2)   The Electrical Utility Board may reverse or sustain, in
whole or in part, any order of the Electrical Inspector, or may modify any
order.



(Prior Code, § 3-2-8)  (Ord. O-11-009, passed 6-22-2011)



§ 31.107  REMOVAL FROM OFFICE; VACANCY.



   (A)   (1)   The City Council, at its pleasure, may remove the
Electrical Inspector for misconduct or any other cause by two-thirds vote of
Council. The Mayor may remove the Electrical Inspector and must report the
reason for the removal within ten days to Council.



      (2)   The Council, by two-thirds vote, may disapprove of the
removal.



   (B)   Vacancies created by death, resignation, removal from office,
or any other reason shall be filled by the appointment process of § 31.100.



(Prior Code, § 3-2-4)  (Ord. O-11-009, passed 6-22-2011)



§ 31.108  LIMITATION OF LIABILITY.



   The city is not liable for, nor in any respect, bound or obligated by,
any actions including, but not limited to, the issuance of permits or
licenses of the Electrical Inspector which are done or performed outside the
scope of the authority set forth in this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 3-2-10)  (Ord. O-11-009, passed 6-22-2011)



POLICE DEPARTMENT



§ 31.140  CREATION AND SUPERVISION OF DEPARTMENT.



   There is hereby created and established an executive department of the
municipal government of the city to be known as the Police Department, which
shall be under the supervision of the Mayor and the Public Safety Board of
the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 6-7-1)  (Ord. O-11-009, passed 6-22-2011)



§ 31.141  OFFICES.



   (A)   There are hereby created the following offices in the Police
Department, to wit: Chief of Police, lieutenants, special assistant (youth
and community affairs), sergeants, and police officers.



(Prior Code, § 6-7-2)



   (B)   The Police Department shall consist of the offices set forth
in division (A) above, as well as other offices as shall hereafter be created
by ordinance.



(Prior Code, § 6-7-3)  (Ord. O-11-009, passed 6-22-2011)



§ 31.142  CIVILIAN PERSONNEL.



   In addition to the offices referred to in § 31.141, the Police
Department may employ other personnel who shall be civilian employees,
holding no rank in the Police Department. Civilian employees may include, but
not be limited to, radio operators, auxiliary police officers, secretaries,
and crossing guards.



(Prior Code, § 6-7-4)  (Ord. O-11-009, passed 6-22-2011)



§ 31.143  CHIEF OF POLICE.



   The Chief Executive Office of the Police Department shall be the Chief
of Police, who shall be appointed by the City Council, as authorized by ILCS
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 10-2.1-4, the state, and by the City Charter. The Chief of
Police shall perform the duties imposed upon him or her by law or by
ordinance, as well as the duties prescribed by the City Marshal in the City
Charter to the extent that the Charter has not been superseded by the laws of
the state. The Chief of Police shall perform further duties as may from time
to time be assigned to him or her by the Mayor or the City Council. The Chief
of Police shall possess powers and authority as are prescribed for the City
Marshal in the City Charter, as well as further power and authority as are
given a police officer by ordinance or by the laws of the states. The Chief
of Police shall have the ability to appoint a deputy chief, subject to the
confirmation of the City Council.  In the event that the office of the Chief
of Police becomes vacant for any reason, the City Council shall appoint an
Acting Chief of Police and may appoint and ad hoc committee to screen
applicants for the office of Chief of Police and to bring recommendations for
appointment to the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 6-7-5)  (Ord. O-11-009, passed 6-22-2011; Ord. O-18-04,
passed 3-27-2018)



§ 31.144  APPOINTMENTS; DISCHARGES.



   All appointments and promotions to the offices in the Police Department
described in § 31.141 shall be made by the Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners in accordance with the laws of the state pertaining thereto and
in accordance with the rules and regulations promulgated by the Board of Fire
and Police Commissioners. All actions of suspension, removal, discharge, or
reprimand or for offices in the Police Department described in §§ 31.141
and 31.143 shall be conducted by the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners
in accordance with the laws of the state pertaining thereto and in accordance
with the rules and regulations promulgated by the Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners.



(Prior Code, § 6-7-6)  (Ord. O-11-009, passed 6-22-2011)



§ 31.145  SALARIES.



   All officers and civilian employees of the Police Department of the
city shall receive the salary and compensation as shall be established from
time to time by the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 6-7-7)  (Ord. O-11-009, passed 6-22-2011)



§ 31.146  POWER TO ARREST.



   All police officers described in §§ 31.141 and 31.143 shall have the
power to arrest or cause to be arrested, with or without process, any
individual for the violation of any city ordinance or law of the state.



(Prior Code, § 6-7-8)  (Ord. O-11-009, passed 6-22-2011)



§ 31.147  RULES AND REGULATIONS EFFECTIVE UPON APPROVAL.



   Such rules and regulations as may be from time to time promulgated for
the direction and control of the members and personnel of the Police
Department shall be in full force and effect upon their approval by the City
Council.



(Prior Code, § 6-7-9)  (Ord. O-11-009, passed 6-22-2011)



CHAPTER 32:  PURCHASING



Section




General Provisions




   32.01   Purpose of regulations



   32.02   Code of Ethics



   32.03   Conflict of interest



   32.04   Gifts and gratuities



   32.05   Approval of purchases required



   32.06   Purchases near end of fiscal year



   32.07   Energy purchases



   32.08   Change orders




Quotes and Bids




   32.20   Quote solicitation policy



   32.21   Joint purchasing exception to quote requirement



   32.22   Sole source purchases



   32.23   Emergency purchases



   32.24   Competitive bidding exemption




Payments




   32.30   Manual checks



   32.31   Petty cash



   32.32   Credit cards



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 32.01  PURPOSE OF REGULATIONS.



   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to provide the city staff with
guidelines and directions for the acquisition of goods and services. When
used with good judgment and common sense, the policies and procedures
conveyed within will allow the city to obtain required supplies and services
efficiently and economically. City Council approval adopts this chapter as
city policy.



   (B)   The chapter is divided into sections dealing with purchasing
policies and procedures. The policy sections contain all the purchasing
policies reviewed and adopted by the City Council which must be adhered to by
city employees. The procedures sections provide a “how to” guide for
processing purchase requisitions, purchase orders, travel authorization and
expense reports and other procedures regarding payment processing.



   (C)   Employees are expected to read the chapter and provide the
Finance Director with feedback regarding the policies and procedures
contained within. This chapter is designed to be a fluid document and will be
modified from time to time to conform with changes in legislation,
technology, and actual practice. Although it may not answer every question
related to purchasing practices, it does provide general guidelines for
purchasing activities. Employees who need help dealing with specific
situations not covered by the chapter should contact the City Administrator
or Finance Director for assistance. 



   (D)   The Mayor or City Administrator, or his or her designee, shall
be the final authority with regard to enforcement of any of the provisions of
this chapter. Failure to follow the procedures outlined in this chapter may
lead to disciplinary action in accordance with the provisions of the City
Personnel Policy Manual.



(Ord. O-17-07, passed 2-14-2017)



§ 32.02 CODE OF ETHICS.



   (A)   All city personnel engaged in purchasing and related
activities shall conduct business dealings in a manner above reproach in
every respect. Transactions relating to expenditure of public funds require
the highest degree of public trust to protect the interests of the city and
its residents. City employees shall strive to:



      (1)   Ensure that public money is spent efficiently and
effectively and in accordance with statutes, regulations, and city policies;



      (2)   Maintain confidentiality at all times;



      (3)   Not accept gifts or favors from current or potential
suppliers which might compromise the integrity of their purchasing function;



      (4)   Specify generic descriptions of goods wherever possible
in lieu of brand names when compiling specifications;



      (5)   Never allow purchase orders for identical goods or
services to be split or variations to City Council approvals to be made in
order to circumvent established policy;



      (6)   Purchase without favor or prejudice;



      (7)   Ensure that all potential suppliers are provided with
adequate and identical information upon which to base their offer or
quotation, and that any subsequent information is made available to all
bidders;



      (8)   Establish and maintain procedures to ensure that fair
and equal consideration is given to each offer or quotation received and
selection is based upon the lowest total cost compliant bid; and



      (9)   Offer a prompt and courteous response to all inquiries
from potential or existing suppliers.



   (B)   It shall be the responsibility of the City Administrator to
determine if a violation of this Code of Ethics has occurred, and if
disciplinary action is necessary in accordance with the city’s Personnel
Manual.



(Ord. O-17-07, passed 2-14-2017)



§ 32.03  CONFLICT OF INTEREST.



   (A)   Except as may be disclosed to and permitted by the City
Council, it shall be a breach of ethical standards for any employee to
participate directly or indirectly in the purchasing process when the
employee knows that:



      (1)   The employee is contemporaneously employed by a bidder,
vendor or contractor involved in the procurement transaction; or



      (2)   The employee, the employee’s partner, or any member of
the employee’s immediate family holds a position with a bidder, offeror, or
contractor, such as an officer, director, trustee, partner, or the like, or
is employed in a capacity involving personal and substantial participation in
the procurement transaction, or owns or controls an interest in the company;
or



      (3)   The employee, the employee’s partner, or any member of
the employee’s immediate family, has a financial interest arising from the
procurement transaction; or



      (4)   The employee, the employee’s partner, or any member of
the employee’s immediate family, is negotiating, or has an arrangement
concerning, prospective employment with a bidder, vendor, or contractor.



   (B)   The employee’s immediate family shall be defined as a
spouse, children, parents, brothers and sisters, and any other person living
in the same household as the employee.



   (C)   It shall be the responsibility of the City Administrator to
determine if a violation of this section has occurred, and if disciplinary
action is necessary, in accordance with the city’s Personnel Manual.



(Ord. O-17-07, passed 2-14-2017)



§ 32.04  GIFTS AND GRATUITIES.



   (A)   City personnel should be aware that offers of gratitude from
vendors can be designed to compromise objective judgment in product or
service selection. Accordingly, it is city policy to observe the highest
standards of ethics and to shield the employee, the city, and the vendor from
any suggestion or appearance of conflict of interest.



   (B)   No employee shall permit any influence by vendors which could
conflict with the best interest of the city or prejudice the city’s
reputation. Expenditures of city funds to vendors shall not by intention
personally benefit any person officially connected with the city. Employees
shall strive to follow the following guidelines.



      (1)   Tangible gifts or gratuities shall not be accepted where
their value suggests something more than merely a social gesture. The gifts
should be returned with a statement of city policy.  Promotional or
advertising items of nominal value such as key chains, pens, coffee mugs,
calendars and holiday candy are acceptable. Gifts that are capable of being
shared, such as a box of chocolates, shall be shared within the office or
section where the recipient works.



      (2)   Association with vendor representatives at business
meals or business organization meetings is occasionally necessary and is
neither questionable nor unethical, provided the individual keeps himself or
herself free of obligation.



      (3)   Personal loans of money or equipment are not to be
accepted from a vendor or an individual associated with a vendor doing
business with the city.



      (4)   Solicitation of vendors for merchandise or certificates
to serve as door prizes or favors is normally prohibited. However, exceptions
may be approved by the City Administrator with the guidance of the Mayor.



      (5)   Corporate discounts granted to city employees are
acceptable only if they are offered to all city employees and other corporate
clients of the vendor.



   (C)   If in any doubt about the propriety of accepting a gift, the
matter should be referred to the department head who will, if necessary,
discuss the matter with the City Administrator, or his or her designee.



(Ord. O-17-07, passed 2-14-2017)



§ 32.05  APPROVAL OF PURCHASES REQUIRED.



   (A)   In July of each year the department head and staff will
present capital purchases that were included in that fiscal year budget for
council approval.  These purchases will not be brought back to Council
unless the purchase will go over the budgeted amount.  As purchases are made
throughout the year, they will be reported back to Council by the Finance
Director.



   (B)   No employee shall purchase goods or services on behalf of the
city without first seeking approval as required by this policy. All purchases
shall require advance approval of the appropriate supervisor, department
head, the Finance Director, and the City Administrator in accordance with the
guidelines described below.



 


Dollar Limits

 

Required Approvals



$0 - $2,999
 
Supervisor or department head. Budgeted.


$3,000 - $9,999
 
Department head and one of the three of the following: City Administrator,
Finance Director, Mayor. Budgeted


$10,000 - $19,9999
 
If budgeted, no Council approval needed.  Two of three of the following must
sign off: City Administrator, Finance Director, Mayor.


$20,000+
 
Department head, Finance Director, City Administrator, City Council. Budgeted.



 



   (C)   Approval for purchases shall occur before the purchase is
made. At the discretion of the department head, approval levels for
supervisors may be increased to an amount not to exceed the department
head’s authority. In addition, any person responsible for approving
purchases at any level may delegate his or her approval authority to a
designee in the event he or she are unavailable to approve purchases.



(Ord. O-17-07, passed 2-14-2017)



§ 32.06  PURCHASES NEAR END OF FISCAL YEAR.



   (A)   When purchases are made near the end of the fiscal year,
(i.e., June 30), departments shall be responsible for ensuring that they are
expensed (i.e., charged) against the fiscal year in which they were budgeted.
The date goods or services are ordered or contracted for determines which
fiscal year they are expensed against. Consequently, goods and services will
be expensed in the current fiscal year only if they are ordered or contracted
for by June 30.



   (B)   The Finance Director shall issue a reminder notice regarding
year end purchases to all departments each year in May.



(Ord. O-17-07, passed 2-14-2017)



§ 32.07  ENERGY PURCHASES.



   Due to the nature and timing necessary for the lowest-cost purchasing
of spot electricity, natural gas, and diesel or other fuel for the
distribution or generation of electricity, the Director of Electrical
Operations will have the authority to purchase these commodities if the
purchase is within budget or of an emergency nature. The Director of
Electrical Operations will keep the City Council informed of the purchases.



(Ord. O-17-07, passed 2-14-2017)



§ 32.08  CHANGE ORDERS.



   (A)   State statute requires City Council approval of all change
orders for $5,000 or more, and for all change orders which, when combined
with those previously approved, increase or reduce the contract price by more
than $5,000. The following subdivisions are consistent with the statute.



      (1)   It shall be the responsibility of each department head
to ensure that all change orders are submitted to the City Council for
approval. In addition, department heads shall be responsible for monitoring
all contract payouts and retainages, and ensuring that the amount of the
change order is correct.



      (2)   Departments shall follow the procedures established by
the City Council for submitting change orders.



   (B)   The procedures outlined in this section shall not apply to
professional service contracts (e.g., engineering, architectural or land
surveying work). Changes to professional service contracts shall be treated
as contract amendments.



(Ord. O-17-07, passed 2-14-2017)



QUOTES AND BIDS



§ 32.20  QUOTE SOLICITATION POLICY.



   (A)   Employees are responsible for obtaining quotes for purchases
in the instances outlined below. Requisitions submitted without the required
quotes or a satisfactory explanation of why quotes were not obtained (e.g.,
sole source, emergency, standardized vendor and the like) will be returned to
the originator without approval.



      (1)   $0 - $2,999.  One written quote is required; however,
employees are encouraged to seek additional quotes when possible.



      (2)   $3,000 - $9,999.  Two written quotes are required,
however, employees are encouraged to seek additional quotes when possible. 
In industries with very few service providers, the City Administrator may
approve less quotes.  If an item is over a budgeted amount, it must go to
Council for approval.



      (3)   $10,00 - $19,999. Three written quotes must be
obtained.  Physical records regarding the dates, contracts and quotes
received shall be retained in the department's files for auditing purposes.
In industries with very few service providers, the City Administrator may
approve less quotes.  If an item is over a budgeted amount, it must go to
Council for approval.



      (4)   $20,000 and above (construction).  Must be a
competitive sealed bid in accordance with state law and city ordinances,
unless waived by two-thirds majority vote of the City Council. City Council
approval is required for all contracts or purchases of or above this dollar
amount. Hard copies shall be obtained, and provided and retained in the City
Clerk’s files and department’s files for auditing purposes.



      (5)   $20,000 and above (non-construction).  Three written
quotes must be obtained.  Physical records regarding the dates, contracts
and quotes received shall be retained in the department's files for auditing
purposes. In industries with very few service providers, the City
Administrator may approve less quotes.  If an item is over a budgeted
amount, it must go to Council for approval.



   (B)   Items purchased more than once during a fiscal year (e.g.,
forms, copier supplies and the like) do not need quotes every time a purchase
is made. However, competitive quotes for these items shall be sought at time
of purchase or contract renewal to ensure that vendors are competitive.



(Ord. O-17-07, passed 2-14-2017)



§ 32.21  JOINT PURCHASING EXCEPTION TO QUOTE REQUIREMENT.



   (A)   State of Illinois.



      (1)   City employees are authorized to obtain goods and
services using the State Joint Purchasing Program. When available through the
state program, it is not necessary for city employees to obtain quotes or to
competitively bid the goods or services which are sought. Employees shall be
responsible, however, for ensuring that the goods or services are of a
quality sufficient to meet the city’s needs, and that pricing is
competitive.  City employees may seek proposals from area vendors, advising
the vendors of the state program price. The vendors will be encouraged to
submit a proposal for the item with a quote better or as nearly matching the
state program pricing as possible. The City Council shall take into
consideration the total cost of shipping or pick up and delivery of the item
from the state program’s vendor and other tangible costs or savings in its
determination for awarding a purchase.



      (2)   When making purchases using the state’s assigned
vendor, employees shall submit a purchase requisition to the vendor directly,
and shall include the state contract number on the purchase order. This
information should be included on the purchase order by using the extended
description option when entering the purchase requisition.



   (B)   Other units of government. Employees are permitted to purchase
items jointly with other units of government when the price of the goods or
services sought is competitive and the quality meets the city’s standards.
Prior to initiating the transaction, employees shall seek the approval of the
City Administrator. Questions regarding joint purchasing opportunities should
be directed to the City Administrator or Finance Director.



(Ord. O-17-07, passed 2-14-2017)



§ 32.22  SOLE SOURCE PURCHASES.



   (A)   Contracts for parts, supplies, or equipment that are available
only from a single source are referred to as sole source purchases. Sole
source procurements may arise from the following circumstances:



      (1)   Equipment for which there is no comparable competitive
product or is available only from one supplier;



      (2)   Public utility services from natural or regulated
monopolies;



      (3)   A component or replacement part for which there is no
commercially available substitute and which can be obtained only from the
manufacturer;



      (4)   An item where compatibility is the overriding
consideration, such as computer software; or



      (5)   A used item, for example, a television transmitter tower
that becomes immediately available and is subject to prior sale.



   (B)   These items shall not be subject to requirements for seeking
competitive quotes or bids. However, purchases that exceed their budgeted
amount shall be presented to the City Council prior to acquisition.



(Ord. O-17-07, passed 2-14-2017)



§ 32.23  EMERGENCY PURCHASES.



   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      EMERGENCIES.  Events that could not have been foreseen, where
immediate action is necessary to safeguard the public’s health and safety.
In the event of an emergency affecting the public health and safety, the
Mayor, the City Administrator, and department heads, or his or her designee,
may authorize a vendor to perform work necessary to resolve the emergency
without formal bid solicitation. Documentation of the emergency and the need
for immediate action shall be presented to the City Council in a reasonable
period of time following resolution of the crisis.



   (B)   An emergency purchase order can be issued authorizing a vendor
to perform any and all work necessary, only if the public health and safety
could be affected. If the emergency and the need for immediate action exceeds
$10,000, documentation shall be presented to the Mayor and/or City
Administrator prior to authorization.



(Ord. O-17-07, passed 2-14-2017)



§ 32.24  COMPETITIVE BIDDING EXEMPTION.



   (A)   When, in the ordinary course of city business, no single
purchase of, or individual contract for, specific types of supplies,
materials, or services exceeds $20,000, but the total dollar value of all
purchases and/or contracts for the specific types of supplies, materials, or
services during the city’s fiscal year does exceed the amount, the
purchases may not be subject to the competitive bidding requirement, and may
not require the City Council to waive the competitive bidding requirement. At
his or her discretion, the City Administrator shall determine whether these
purchases require City Council approval of a waiver of bids. Where a bid
waiver is determined to not be necessary, the purchases shall still be
subject to the requirements of § 32.20 of this chapter concerning quote
solicitation for purchases under $20,000.



   (B)   It is not the intent of this section to encourage the
circumvention of the bidding requirements and, to the extent practicable,
city staff is encouraged to rely upon the competitive bidding process.
Rather, the competitive bidding exemption provided by this section is
intended to recognize and address those situations in which a competitive
bidding requirement is not necessarily practicable and can be eliminated
without jeopardizing the city’s ability to obtain a low and competitive
price from a qualified responsible contractor/vendor.



(Ord. O-17-07, passed 2-14-2017)



PAYMENTS



§ 32.30  MANUAL CHECKS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      MANUAL CHECKS.  Interim checks issued to vendors as payments for
goods delivered or services performed. The checks are issued between normal
accounts payable cycles, when an emergency or other extenuating circumstance
as determined by the Finance Director, makes it impractical or unreasonable
to process the payment following normal payment methods. As the name implies,
MANUAL CHECKS are labor intensive and time consuming to issue; therefore,
their use as a method of payment shall be restricted to unique or special
circumstances.



   (B)   The Finance Director will not issue manual checks in instances
where reasonable means could have been taken to process the payment following
normal payment methods.



(Ord. O-17-07, passed 2-14-2017)



§ 32.31  PETTY CASH.



   (A)   This policy sets forth procedures for the handling of petty
cash monies at the City Hall and Police Department. It further establishes
the procedures for reporting petty cash disbursements by department to the
Finance Director as well as reimbursements to each petty cash box.



   (B)   Petty cash boxes are located at the City Hall and Police
Department. The persons accountable for these boxes at each of the buildings
are the Finance Director and the Police Department Administrative Assistant.
They are responsible for seeing that the total number of receipts and cash
equal the amounts detailed in division (D)(2) below. The petty cash box is
subject to audit, and the above listed individuals will be accountable for
any non-compliance with this procedure or shortage of funds.



   (C)   The following policy and procedural guidelines have been
established to promote a more efficient and accountable petty cash operation.
All departments within the city are responsible for abiding by this policy.
There are no exceptions.



      (1)   Petty cash disbursements to city employees.



         (a)   Requests for petty cash may be made to the Finance
Director or his/her designee at City Hall and the Administrative Assistant at
the Police Department.



         (b)   There is a $50 limit per petty cash request per
day. Any amount above $50 must be reimbursed via claim voucher submitted
through the accounts payable process. Reimbursable expenses under $50
incurred by an employee for training expenses and the like may be reimbursed
from petty cash rather than through the accounts payable process.



         (c)   No one is allowed to take money from petty cash
without a petty cash request form and/or a receipt which must be signed by
the appropriate supervisor. The petty cash request form must also be signed
by the employee who will receive the money.



         (d)   If a petty cash request form is submitted without
a receipt (e.g., money is requested before a receipt has been obtained), the
person disbursing the money must mark “hold” on the receipt form, and the
employee must bring back a receipt no later than the next business day after
the money is spent, along with the change (if applicable). At this time, the
“hold” is crossed off the receipt form, it is marked “paid”, the
proper dollar amount is written down, and the receipt is put in the petty
cash box.



         (e)   If a receipt is submitted with the petty cash
request form, the employee is reimbursed and no further action by the
employee is needed. At this time, the petty cash request form is marked
“paid” with the date on it and put in the petty cash box.



         (f)   All receipts must be original. If desired, copies
may be made and kept by each individual employee, but the original must be
given to the respective person responsible for petty cash in each department.



         (g)   If for some reason the employee did not obtain a
receipt for submittal with the petty cash request form, supervisory approval
MUST be noted on the petty cash receipt form.



      (2)   All petty cash request forms must contain the following
information:



         (a)   Date;



         (b)   Detailed description of the expenditure;



         (c)   Name of person(s) to receive money;



         (d)   Name of person authorizing receipt of money (must
be a supervisory employee specifically designated by the department);



         (e)   Account number to which the expenditure will be
charged; and



         (f)   Receipt (if received, otherwise the petty cash
request form will be marked “hold”).



      (3)   Reimbursing each petty cash box.



         (a)   As stated above, the persons responsible for the
various petty cash boxes are the Finance Director or his or her designee, and
the Administrative Assistant at the Police Department. They not only disburse
petty cash to various employees, they must reconcile the petty cash box and
request petty cash reimbursements by the payables deadline. It is recommended
that this be done on a quarterly basis, at minimum.



         (b)   The information below depicts the maximum amount
of petty cash allotted for each building.



 


Department

 

Maximum Amount



Police Department
 
$500


City Hall
 
$500



 



         (c)   If the amounts indicated are not sufficient to
meet the needs of the department, the department head can request an increase
in the petty cash allotment. This request must be made to the Finance
Director and approved by the City Administrator.



         (d)   City Hall and the Police Department are required
to submit a petty cash reimbursement sheet by the appropriate accounts
payable deadline.



         (e)   The petty cash reimbursement sheet lists all petty
cash transactions for a certain period of time. This sheet must contain the
following information:



            1.   Detailed list of account numbers;



            2.   Detailed description of charges for each
account number (date, place, name and reason for charge);



            3.   Amount of charges for each account number and
correlating description; and



            4.   All original petty cash receipt slips and
corresponding receipts.



         (f)   Once the petty cash reimbursement form is
completed, it must be forwarded, along with all required documentation and
required signature of preparer, department head or designee, to the Finance
Director. Upon receipt of the above information, the Finance Director shall
review for approval and then reimburse the respective department.



         (g)   The envelope with the petty cash request forms and
receipts is then attached to the file copy of the check that was cut for
reimbursement and is stored with the accounts payable files.



         (h)   Petty cash will be subject to periodic announced
and unannounced audits to determine compliance with these procedures. Any
discrepancies with compliance or cash balance shall be immediately reported
to the Finance Director and a written report shall be provided with copies to
the City Administrator and department head.



         (i)   Any questions regarding these procedures may be
directed to the Finance Director.



(Ord. O-17-07, passed 2-14-2017)



§ 32.32  CREDIT CARDS.



   (A)   The city maintains a corporate credit card for use in making
purchases. Each department head is responsible for the security of the card
and should not permit its use for means other than those permitted by this
policy. Credit cards shall not be used to circumvent the normal payment
process. 



   (B)   As with all purchases made on the city’s behalf, goods
purchased with a credit card are exempt from sales tax. Therefore, employees
shall provide the vendor with a sales tax exemption form in order to avoid
being charged sales tax.



   (C)   When invoices are received, they should be processed using a
claim voucher within 48 hours of receipt to avoid late fees and finance
charges. Receipts for goods or services purchased with a credit card shall be
obtained and submitted to accounts payable when requesting payment. If a
receipt is not issued, a packing slip may be provided to accounts payable.
Payment will not be made unless receipts (or an explanation as to why
receipts are not available with City Administrator approval) are included.



   (D)   The Finance Director shall maintain a list of the credit
cards. The credit cards shall be signed out by the employee and returned as
soon as possible, and shall be checked back in by the Finance Director. The
loss of a card shall be reported to the Finance Director immediately upon
discovery of the loss, and the employee shall take the necessary steps to
cancel use of that card.



(Ord. O-17-07, passed 2-14-2017)



CHAPTER 33:  TAXATION



Section




Taxpayer’s Bill of Rights




   33.01   Scope



   33.02   Definitions



   33.03   Notices



   33.04   Payment; late payment



   33.05   Credits and refunds



   33.06   Audit



   33.07   Appeal of assessment



   33.08   Hearing on appeal



   33.09   Interest and penalties; abatement of penalties



   33.10   Installment contract for payment



   33.11   Statute of limitations



   33.12   Voluntary disclosure of tax due



   33.13   Procedure for internal review of tax lien



   33.14   Publication of tax ordinances required




Utility Occupation and Privilege Tax




   33.25   Tax identified



   33.26   Definitions



   33.27   Specific tax imposed



   33.28   Interstate commerce restriction



   33.29   Retailer occupation tax restriction



   33.30   Collection and return; credits



   33.31   Resellers not subject to tax; application



   33.32   Books and records



   33.33   School and government exemption



   33.34   Exception



   33.35   Tax proceeds




Telecommunications Tax




   33.45   Tax identified



   33.46   Definitions



   33.47   Specific tax imposed



   33.48   Registration by retailers



   33.49   Collection of tax by retailers



   33.50   Filing and remittance by retailers



   33.51   Taxpayer obligation to file and pay



   33.52   Reseller numbers; application



   33.53   Books and records



   33.54   Authority of city to administer and enforce tax provisions



   33.55   School and government exemption



   33.56   Tax proceeds



 



   33.99   Penalty




TAXPAYER’S BILL OF RIGHTS




§ 33.01  SCOPE.



   The provisions of this subchapter shall apply to the city’s
procedures in connection with all of the city’s locally imposed and
administered taxes.



(Prior Code, § 1-10-1)



§ 33.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACT.  The Local Government Taxpayer’s Bill of Rights Act.



   CITY.  The City of Geneseo, Illinois.



   CORPORATE AUTHORITIES.  The city’s Mayor and City Council.



   LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR.  The City Administrator of the city is
charged with the administration and collection of the locally imposed and
administered taxes, including staff, employees or agents, to the extent they
are authorized by the local tax administrator to act in the local tax
administrator’s stead. The local tax administrator shall have the authority
to implement the terms of this subchapter to give full effect to this
subchapter. The exercise of authority by the local tax administrator shall
not be inconsistent with this subchapter and the Act.



   LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX or TAX.  Each tax imposed by the
city that is collected or administered by the city, not an agency or
department of the state. It does not include any taxes imposed upon real
property under the Property Tax Code or fees collected by the city other than
infrastructure maintenance fees.



   NOTICE.  Each audit notice, collection notice, or other similar notice
or communication in connection with each of the city’s locally imposed and
administered taxes.



   TAX ORDINANCE.  Each ordinance adopted by the city that imposes any
locally imposed and administered tax.



   TAXPAYER.  Any person required to pay any locally imposed and
administered tax, and generally includes the person upon whom the legal
incidence of the tax is placed, and, with respect to consumer taxes, includes
the business or entity required to collect and pay the locally imposed and
administered tax to the city.



(Prior Code, § 1-10-2)



§ 33.03  NOTICES.



   (A)   Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice is required to be
given, the  notice is to be in writing mailed not less than seven calendar
days prior to the day fixed for any applicable hearing, audit or other
scheduled act of the local tax administrator.



   (B)   The notice shall be sent by the local tax administrator as
follows:



      (1)   First class or express mail, or overnight mail,
addressed to the persons concerned at the persons’ last known address; or



      (2)   Personal service or delivery.



(Prior Code, § 1-10-3)



§ 33.04  PAYMENT; LATE PAYMENT.



   (A)   Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall be
applied in the following order:



      (1)   First, to the tax due for the applicable period;



      (2)   Second, to the interest due for the applicable period;
and



      (3)   Third, to the penalty for the applicable period.



(Prior Code, § 1-10-5)



   (B)   Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required to be
made to the city pursuant to any tax ordinance shall be considered late
unless it is:



      (1)   Physically received by the city on or before the due
date; or



      (2)   Received in an envelope or other container displaying a
valid, readable United States postmark dated on or before the due date,
properly addressed to the city, with adequate postage prepaid.



(Prior Code, § 1-10-4)



§ 33.05  CREDITS AND REFUNDS.



   (A)   The city shall not refund or credit any taxes voluntarily paid
without written protest at the time of payment in the event that a locally
imposed and administered tax is declared invalidly enacted or
unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction. However, a taxpayer
shall not be deemed to have paid the tax voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked
knowledge of the facts upon which to protest the taxes at the time of
payment, or if the taxpayer paid the taxes under duress.



   (B)   The statute of limitations on a claim for credit or refund
shall be three or less years after the end of the calendar year in which
payment in error was made. The city shall not grant a credit or refund of
locally imposed and administered taxes, interest, or penalties to a person
who has not paid the amounts directly to the city.



   (C)   The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally
imposed and administered taxes, interest, or penalties paid in error shall be
as follows:



      (1)   The taxpayer shall submit to the local tax administrator
in writing a claim for credit or refund together with a statement specifying:



         (a)   The name of the locally imposed and administered
tax subject to the claim;



         (b)   The tax period for the locally imposed and
administered tax subject to the claim;



         (c)   The date of the tax payment subject to the claim
and the canceled check or receipt for the payment;



         (d)   The taxpayer’s recalculation, accompanied by an
amended or revised tax return, in connection with the claim;  and



         (e)   A request for either a refund or a credit in
connection with the claim to be applied to the amount of tax, interest and
penalties overpaid, and, as applicable, related interest on the amount
overpaid; provided, however, that there shall be no refund and only a credit
given in the event the taxpayer owes any monies to the city.



      (2)   Within ten days of the receipt by the local tax
administrator of any claim for a refund or credit, the local tax
administrator shall either:



         (a)   Grant the claim; or



         (b)   Deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with
a statement as to the reason for the denial or the partial grant and denial.



   (D)   In the event the local tax administrator grants, in whole or
in part, a claim for refund or credit, the amount of the grant for refund or
credit shall bear interest at the rate of 7% per annum, based on a year of
365 days and the number of days elapsed, from the date of the overpayment to
the date of mailing of a refund check or the grant of a credit.



(Prior Code, § 1-10-6)



§ 33.06  AUDIT.



   (A)   Any request for proposed audit pursuant to any local
administered tax shall comply with the notice requirements of this subchapter.



   (B)   Each notice of audit shall contain the following information:



      (1)   The tax;



      (2)   The time period of the audit; and



      (3)   A brief description of the books and records to be made
available for the auditor.



   (C)   Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours, and
if the date and time selected by the local tax administrator is not agreeable
to the taxpayer, another date and time may be requested by the taxpayer
within 30 days after the originally designated audit and during normal
business hours.



   (D)   The taxpayer may request an extension of time to have an audit
conducted. The audit shall be conducted not less than seven days nor more
than 30 days from the date the notice is given, unless the taxpayer and the
local tax administrator agreed to some other convenient time. In the event
the taxpayer is unable to comply with the audit on the date in question, the
taxpayer may request another date within the 30 days, approved in writing,
that is convenient to the taxpayer and the local tax administrator.



   (E)   Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the
taxpayer’s business or activities, including original source documents and
books of entry denoting the transactions which had given rise or may have
given rise to any tax liability, exemption or deduction. All books shall be
kept in the English language and shall be subject to and available for
inspection by the city.



   (F)   It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make
available its books and records for inspection by the city. If the taxpayer 
fails to provide the documents necessary for audit within the time provided,
the local tax administrator may issue a tax determination and assessment
based on the tax administrator’s determination of the best estimate of the
taxpayer’s tax liability.



   (G)   If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of a
locally imposed and administered tax as a result of the audit, written notice
of the amount of overpayment shall be given to the taxpayer within 30 days of
the city’s determination of the amount of overpayment.



   (H)   In the event a tax payment was submitted to the incorrect
local governmental entity, the local tax administrator shall notify the local
governmental entity imposing the tax.



(Prior Code, § 1-10-7)



§ 33.07  APPEAL OF ASSESSMENT.



   (A)   The local tax administrator shall send written notice to a
taxpayer upon the local tax administrator’s issuance of a protestable
notice of tax due, a bill, a claim denial, or a notice of claim reduction
regarding any tax. The notice shall include the following information:



      (1)   The reason for the assessment;



      (2)   The amount of the tax liability proposed;



      (3)   The procedure for appealing the assessment; and



      (4)   The obligations of the city during the audit, appeal,
refund, and collection process.



   (B)   A taxpayer who receives written notice from the local tax
administrator of a determination of tax due or assessment may file with the
local tax administrator a written protest and petition for hearing, setting
forth the basis of the taxpayer’s request for a hearing. The written
protest and petition for hearing must be filed with the local tax
administrator within 45 days of receipt of the written notice of the tax
determination and assessment.



   (C)   If a timely written notice and petition for hearing is filed,
the local tax administrator shall fix the time and place for hearing and
shall give written notice to the taxpayer. The hearing shall be scheduled for
a date within 30 days of receipt of the written protest and petition for
hearing, unless the taxpayer requests a later date convenient to all parties.



   (D)   If a written protest and petition for hearing is not filed
within the 45-day period, the tax determination, audit, or assessment shall
become a final bill due and owing without further notice.



   (E)   Upon the showing of reasonable cause by the taxpayer and the
full payment of the contested tax liability along with interest accrued as of
the due date of the tax, the local tax administrator may reopen or extend the
time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing. In no event shall
the time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing be reopened or
extended for more than 90 days after the expiration of the 45-day period.



(Prior Code, § 1-10-8)



§ 33.08  HEARING ON APPEAL.



   (A)   Whenever a taxpayer or a tax collector has filed a timely
written protest and petition for hearing under § 33.07, the local tax
administrator shall conduct a hearing regarding any appeal.



   (B)   No continuances shall be granted except in cases where a
continuance is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the taxpayer.
Lack of preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance
granted shall not exceed 30 days.



   (C)   At the hearing, the local tax administrator shall preside and
shall hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the tax
determination, audit, or assessment. The strict rules of evidence applicable
to judicial proceedings shall not apply.



   (D)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the local tax administrator
shall make a written determination on the basis of the evidence presented at
the hearing. The taxpayer or tax collector shall be provided with a copy of
the written decision.



(Prior Code, § 1-10-9)



§ 33.09  INTEREST AND PENALTIES; ABATEMENT OF PENALTIES.



   (A)   (1)   In the event a determination has been made that a tax
is due and owing, through audit, assessment, or other bill sent, the tax must
be paid within the time frame otherwise indicated.



      (2)   The city hereby provides for the amount of interest to
be assessed on a late payment, underpayment, or nonpayment of the tax, to be
7% per annum, based on a year of 365 days and the number of days elapsed.



      (3)   If a tax return is not filed within the time and manner
provided by the controlling tax ordinance, a late filing penalty of 5% of the
amount of tax required to be shown as due on a return shall be imposed, and a
late payment penalty of 5% of the tax due shall be imposed.  If no return is
filed within the time or manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance and
prior to the city issuing a notice of tax delinquency or notice of tax
liability, then a failure to file penalty shall be assessed equal to 25% of
the total tax due for the applicable reporting period for which the return
was required to be filed. A late filing or payment penalty shall not apply if
a failure to file penalty is imposed by the controlling ordinance.



(Prior Code, § 1-10-10)



   (B)   The local tax administrator shall have the authority to waive
or abate any late filing penalty, late payment penalty, or failure to file
penalty if the local tax administrator shall determine reasonable cause
exists for delay or failure to make a filing.



(Prior Code, § 1-10-11)



§ 33.10  INSTALLMENT CONTRACT FOR PAYMENT.



   The city may enter into an installment contract with the taxpayer for
the payment of taxes under the controlling tax ordinance. The local tax
administrator may not cancel any installment contract so entered, unless the
taxpayer fails to pay any amount due and owing. Upon written notice by the
local tax administrator that the payment is 30 days delinquent, the taxpayer
shall have 30 working days to cure any delinquency. If the taxpayer fails to
cure the delinquency within the 30-day period, or fails to demonstrate good
faith in restructuring the installment contract with the local administrator,
the  installment contract shall be canceled without further notice to the
taxpayer.



(Prior Code, § 1-10-12)



§ 33.11  STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS.



   (A)   The city, through the local tax administrator, shall review
all tax returns in a prompt and timely manner and inform taxpayers of any
amounts due and owing. The taxpayer shall have 45 days after receiving notice
of the reviewed tax returns to make any request for refund or provide any tax
still due and owing.



   (B)   No determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than
four years maximum after the end of the calendar year for which the return
for the applicable period was filed, or for the calendar year in which the
return for the applicable period was due, whichever occurs later.



   (C)   If any tax return is not filed, or if during any four-year
period for which a notice of tax determination or assessment may be issued by
the city, the tax paid was less than 75% of the tax due, the statute of
limitations shall be six years maximum after the end of the calendar year in
which return for the applicable period was due, or end of the calendar year
in which the return for the applicable period was filed.



   (D)   No statute of limitations shall apply if a fraudulent tax
return was filed by the taxpayer.



(Prior Code, § 1-10-13)



§ 33.12  VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE OF TAX DUE.



   For any locally imposed and administered tax for which a taxpayer has
not received a written notice of an audit, investigation, or assessment from
the local tax administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file an application
with the local tax administrator for a voluntary disclosure of the tax due. A
taxpayer filing a voluntary disclosure application must agree to pay the
amount of tax due, along with interest of 1% per month, for all periods prior
to the filing of the application but not more than four years before the date
of filing the application. A taxpayer filing a valid voluntary disclosure
application may not be liable for any additional tax, interest, or penalty
for any period before the date the application was filed.  However, if the
taxpayer incorrectly determined and underpaid the amount of tax due, the
taxpayer is liable for the underpaid tax along with applicable interest on
the underpaid tax, unless the underpayment was the result of fraud on the
part of the taxpayer, in which case the application shall be deemed invalid
and void. The payment of tax and interest must be made by no later than 90
days after the filing of the voluntary disclosure application or the date
agreed to by the local tax administrator. However, any additional amounts
owed as a result of an underpayment of tax and interest previously paid under
this chapter must be paid within 90 days after a final determination and the
exhaustion of all appeals of the additional amount owed or the date agreed to
by the local tax administrator, whichever is longer.



(Prior Code, § 1-10-14)



§ 33.13  PROCEDURE FOR INTERNAL REVIEW OF TAX LIEN.



   (A)   The local tax administrator shall establish an internal review
procedure regarding any liens filed against any taxpayers for unpaid taxes.



   (B)   Upon a determination by the local tax administrator that the
lien is valid, the lien shall remain in full force and effect. If the lien is
determined to be improper, the local tax administrator shall:



      (1)   Timely remove the lien at the city’s expense;



      (2)   Correct the taxpayer’s credit record; and



      (3)   Correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed
lien.



(Prior Code, § 1-10-16)



§ 33.14  PUBLICATION OF TAX ORDINANCES REQUIRED.



   Any locally administered tax ordinance shall be published via normal or
standard publishing requirements. The posting of a tax ordinance on the
Internet shall satisfy the publication requirements.  Copies of all tax
ordinances shall be made available to the public upon request at the City
Clerk’s office.



(Prior Code, § 1-10-15)



UTILITY OCCUPATION AND PRIVILEGE TAX



§ 33.25  TAX IDENTIFIED.



   The taxes imposed by this subchapter shall be known as the Municipal
Utility Taxes, and shall be imposed in addition to all other taxes imposed by
the city, state, or any other unit of local government.



(Prior Code, § 6-11-1)



§ 33.26  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CITY.  The City of Geneseo, Illinois.



   GROSS RECEIPTS.  The consideration received for distributing,
supplying, furnishing or selling gas for use or consumption and not for
resale, and the consideration received for distributing, supplying,
furnishing, or selling water for use or consumption and not for resale, and
for all services rendered in connection therewith valued in money, whether
received in money or otherwise, including cash, credit, services, and
property of every kind of material and for all services rendered therewith,
and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the cost of the
service, product or commodity supplied, the cost of materials used, labor or
service cost, or any other expenses whatsoever. GROSS RECEIPTS shall not
include that portion of the consideration received for distributing,
supplying, furnishing, or selling gas or water to units of local government
and school districts described in § 33.33 during the period in which the
exemption authorized in § 33.33 is in effect. GROSS RECEIPTS do not include:



      (1)   Amounts added to customers’ bills under ILCS  Ch.
220, Act 5, § 9-222;



      (2)   Amounts added to customers’ bills by taxpayers who are
not subject to rate regulation by the Illinois Commerce Commission for the
purpose of recovering any of the tax liabilities described in  ILCS  Ch.
220, Act 5, § 9-222; or



      (3)   Amounts added to customers’ bills under ILCS Ch. 220,
Act 5, § 9-221.



   PERSON.  Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership,
association, joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation, limited
liability company, municipal corporation, the state or any of its political
subdivisions, any state university created by statute, or a receiver,
trustee, guardian or other representative appointed by order of any court.



   PERSON MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE.  Any person
having or maintaining within this state, directly or by a subsidiary or other
affiliate, an office, generation facility, distribution facility,
transmission facility, sales office or other place of business, or any
employee, agent or other representative operating within this state under the
authority of the person or its subsidiary or other affiliate, irrespective of
whether the place of business or agent or other representative is located in
this state permanently or temporarily, or whether the person, subsidiary or
other affiliate is licensed or qualified to do business in this state.



   PUBLIC UTILITY.  A utility as described in § 3-105 of the Public
Utilities Act, ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 3-105, and shall include alternative
retail electric suppliers as defined in § 16-102 of that Act.



   PURCHASE AT RETAIL.  Any acquisition of electricity by a purchaser for
purposes of use or consumption, and not for resale, but shall not include the
use of electricity by a public utility directly in the generation,
production, transmission, delivery or sale of electricity.



   PURCHASER.  Any person who uses or consumes, within the corporate
limits of the city, gas, electricity, or water acquired in a purchase at
retail.



   RETAILER.  Every person engaged in the business of making sales at
retail as defined in this subchapter. The city may, in its discretion, upon
application, authorize the collection of the tax imposed under this
subchapter by any retailer not maintaining a place of business within the
state who, to the satisfaction of the city, furnished adequate security to
ensure collection and payment of the tax. The retailer shall be issued,
without charge, a permit to collect the tax. When authorized, it shall be the
duty of the retailer to collect the tax upon all of the gross charges for
gas, electricity, or water in the city in the same manner and subject to the
same requirements as a retailer maintaining a place of business within the
city.



   RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THE STATE.  Any retailer
having or maintaining within the state, directly or by a subsidiary, an
office, distribution facilities, sales office, warehouse, or other place of
business, or any agent or other representative operating within the state
under the authority of the retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective of
whether the place of business or agent or other representative is located
there permanently or temporarily, or other retailer or subsidiary which is
licensed to do business in the state.



   SALE AT RETAIL.  The supplying or furnishing of gas, electricity, and
water, and all services rendered in connection therewith for a consideration,
to persons other than the federal and state governments, and state
universities created by statute, and other than between a parent corporation
and its wholly-owned subsidiaries or between wholly-owned subsidiaries, when
the tax thereon has already been paid to a retailer and the gross charge made
by one corporation to another corporation is not greater than the gross
charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not for resale.



   SERVICE ADDRESS.  The location at which gas, electricity, or water
services are received by a taxpayer.



   TAX COLLECTOR.  The person delivering gas, electricity, or water to
the purchaser.



   TAXPAYER.  A person who individually or through his or her agents,
employees, or permittees engages in the act or privilege of originating in or
of receiving in this city gas, electricity, or water and who incurs a tax
liability under this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 6-11-2)



§ 33.27  SPECIFIC TAX IMPOSED.



   (A)   A tax is imposed upon all persons engaged in the following
occupations or privileges:



      (1)   All persons engaged in the business of distributing,
supplying, furnishing, or selling gas for use or consumption within the
corporate limits of the city, and not for resale, at the rate of 5% of the
gross receipts therefrom;



      (2)   All persons engaged in the business of distributing,
supplying, furnishing, or selling water for use or consumption within the
corporate limits of the city, and not for resale, at the rate of 5% of the
gross receipts therefrom; and



      (3)   The privilege of using or consuming electricity acquired
in a purchase at retail and used or consumed within the corporate limits of
the city, at the following tax rates, calculated on a monthly basis, for each
purchaser:



         (a)   For the first 2,000 kilowatt-hours used or
consumed in a month, $0.354 per kilowatt-hour;



         (b)   For the next 48,000 kilowatt-hours used or
consumed in a month, $0.232 per kilowatt-hour;



         (c)   For the next 50,000 kilowatt-hours used or
consumed in a month, $0.209 per kilowatt-hour;



         (d)   For the next 400,000 kilowatt-hours used or
consumed in a month, $0.203 per kilowatt-hours;



         (e)   For the next 500,000 kilowatt-hours used or
consumed in a month, $0.197 per kilowatt-hour;



         (f)   For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or
consumed in a month, $0.186 per kilowatt-hour;



         (g)   For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or
consumed in a month, $0.183 per kilowatt-hour;



         (h)   For the next 5,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or
consumed in a month, $0.180 per kilowatt-hour;



         (i)   For the next 10,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or
consumed in a month, $0.177 per kilowatt-hour; and



         (j)   For all electricity used or consumed in excess of
20,000,000 kilowatt-hours in a month, $0.174 per kilowatt-hour.



   (B)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, no utility tax shall be
assessed upon bills for gas, electricity, and water service rendered to the
city.



(Prior Code, § 6-11-3)



§ 33.28  INTERSTATE COMMERCE RESTRICTION.



   No tax is imposed by this chapter with respect to any act or privilege
transacted in interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent to which the act
or privilege may not, under the Constitution and statutes of the United
States, be made the subject of taxation by this state or any political
subdivision thereof.



(Prior Code, § 6-11-4)



§ 33.29  RETAILER OCCUPATION TAX RESTRICTION.



   No person engaged in the business of distributing, supplying,
furnishing, or selling gas, electricity, or water shall be subject to
taxation under the provisions of this chapter for transactions which are, or
may become subject to, taxation under the provisions of a retailer’s
occupation tax of this city adopted pursuant to the provisions of state
statutes so authorizing a tax, nor shall any tax authorized in this chapter
be imposed upon any person engaged in any of the above-defined businesses
unless the tax is imposed in like manner and at the same rate upon all
persons engaged in businesses of the same class in the city, whether
privately or municipally owned or operated, or exercising the same privilege
within the city.



(Prior Code, § 6-11-5)



§ 33.30  COLLECTION AND RETURN; CREDITS.



   (A)   The tax imposed by this subchapter shall be collected from the
taxpayer by a retailer maintaining a place of business in the state and
making or effectuating the sale at retail or delivering gas, electricity, or
water, and shall be remitted by the tax collector to the city. Any tax
required to be collected by this chapter and any tax collected by the tax
collector shall constitute a debt owed by the tax collector to the city.
Retailers shall collect the tax from the purchaser by adding the tax to the
gross charge for selling or supplying gas, electricity, or water when sold
for use, in the manner prescribed in this chapter.  Persons delivering gas,
electricity, or water shall also be authorized to add to the gross charge an
amount equal to 3% of the tax they collect to reimburse them for their
expenses incurred in keeping records, billing customers, preparing and filing
returns, remitting the tax, and supplying data to the city upon request, less
any charges allowed by the State Commerce Commission that permit them to
recover their expenses. For the purposes of this chapter, any partial payment
of a billed amount not specifically identified by the purchaser shall be
deemed to be for the delivery of gas, electricity, or water. The tax shall
constitute a debt of the purchaser to the retailer or deliverer who provides
the taxable services until paid and, if unpaid, is recoverable at law in the
same manner as the original charge for the taxable services. If the retailer
or deliverer fails to collect the tax from the purchaser, then the purchaser
shall be required to pay the tax directly to the city. Whenever possible, the
tax authorized by this chapter shall, when collected, be stated as a distinct
item separate and apart from the gross charge for gas, electricity, or water.



   (B)   Each tax collector shall, on a monthly basis, file a return in
a form prescribed by the city. The return and accompanying remittance shall
be due on or before the last day of the month following the month during
which the tax is collected or is required to be collected pursuant to this
chapter. The return shall include the tax collector’s name and principal
place of business, the gross receipts during the collection period upon which
the tax is imposed, the amount of tax, and other reasonable and related
information as the city may require. The tax collector making the return
provided for in this chapter shall, at the time of making the return, pay to
the city the amount of tax imposed in this chapter; provided, that in
connection with any return, the tax collector may, if the tax collector so
elects, report and pay an amount based upon the tax collector’s total
billings of gross charges subject to the tax during the period for which the
return is made, exclusive of any amounts previously billed, with prompt
adjustments or later payments based upon any differences between the billings
and the taxable gross charges.



   (C)   If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which
was not due under the provisions of this subchapter, whether the result of a
mistake of fact or an error of law, then the amount shall be credited against
any tax due or to become due under this subchapter from the tax collector who
made the erroneous payment; provided, that no amounts erroneously paid more
than three years prior to the filing of a claim therefore shall be so
credited. No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of
this subchapter shall be commenced more than three years after the due date
of the amount.



(Prior Code, § 6-11-6)



§ 33.31  RESELLERS NOT SUBJECT TO TAX; APPLICATION.



   (A)   If a person who receives gas, electricity, or water in this
city claims to be a reseller of the gas, electricity, or water, the person
shall apply to the city for a resale number, and shall state facts which will
show why the applicant is not liable for any tax imposed by this subchapter
on any of the purchases, and shall furnish additional information as the city
may reasonably require.



   (B)   Upon approval of the application for a resale number under
this section, the city shall assign a resale number to the applicant and
shall certify the number to the applicant. The city may cancel any number
which is obtained through misrepresentation, or which is used to sell or
supply gas, electricity, or water tax-free when the actions in fact are not
for resale, or which no longer apply because of the person’s having
discontinued the making of resales.



   (C)   Except as provided in this section, the act of selling or
supplying gas or water and the privilege of using electricity in this city
shall not be made tax-free on the grounds of being a sale for resale unless
the person has an active resale number from the city and furnishes that
number to the retailer in connection with certifying to the retailer that any
sale to the person is non-taxable because of being a sale for resale.



   (D)   If a reseller has acquired gas, electricity or water partly
for use or consumption and partly for resale, the reseller shall pay the tax
imposed by this subchapter directly to the city on the amount of gas,
electricity, or water that the reseller uses or consumes, and shall collect
tax on the amount of gas, electricity, or water delivered by the reseller to
a purchaser.



   (E)   Any person who delivers gas, electricity, or water to a
reseller having an active resale number and complying with all other
conditions of this section shall be excused from collecting and remitting the
tax on any portion of the gas, electricity, or water delivered to the
reseller, provided that the person reports to the city the total amount of
gas, electricity, or water delivered to the reseller, and other information
that the city may reasonably require.



(Prior Code, § 6-11-7)



§ 33.32  BOOKS AND RECORDS.



   Every tax collector, and every taxpayer required to pay the tax imposed
by this subchapter, shall keep accurate books and records of its business or
activity, including contemporaneous books and records denoting the
transactions that gave rise, or may have given rise, to any tax liability
under this subchapter. The books and records shall be subject to and
available for inspection at all times during regular business hours of the
day.



(Prior Code, § 6-11-8)



§ 33.33  SCHOOL AND GOVERNMENT EXEMPTION.



   All units of local government and school districts whose territory is
included within the city, in whole or in part, are exempt from the utility
taxes imposed by this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 6-11-9)



§ 33.34  EXCEPTION.



   Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing,
or selling gas or water shall not be subject under this section for
transactions that are or may become subject to taxation under the provisions
of any Municipal Retailers Occupation Tax adopted by the city and in effect.



(Prior Code, § 6-11-10)



§ 33.35  TAX PROCEEDS.



   It is the intention of the city that all tax receipts under this
subchapter shall be deposited in the city’s Capital Improvement, Repair and
Replacement Fund for the repair and reconstruction of the city’s streets,
related sidewalks, storm sewer systems, traffic control signs and other
related improvements within the city’s public ways.



(Ord. 1965, passed 3-9-2010)



TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX



§ 33.45  TAX IDENTIFIED.



   The tax imposed by this subchapter shall be known as the Municipal
Telecommunications Tax, and shall be imposed in addition to all other taxes
imposed by the city, state, or any other unit of local government.



(Prior Code, § 6-12-1)



§ 33.46  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AMOUNT PAID.  The amount charged to a taxpayer’s service address in
the city, regardless of where the amount is billed or paid.



   CITY.  The City of Geneseo, Illinois.



   GROSS CHARGE.  The amount paid for the act or privilege of originating
or receiving telecommunications in the city and for all services rendered in
connection therewith, valued in money whether paid in money or otherwise,
including cash, credits, services, and property of every kind or nature, and
shall be determined without any deduction on account of the cost of the
telecommunications, the cost of the materials used, labor or service costs,
or any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is extended, the amount
thereof shall be included only as and when paid. However, GROSS CHARGE shall
not include:



      (1)   Any amounts added to a purchaser’s bill because of a
charge made pursuant to:



         (a)   The tax imposed by this subchapter;



         (b)   Additional charges added to a purchaser’s bill
pursuant to § 9-222 of the Public Utilities Act, ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, §
9-222;



         (c)   The tax imposed by the Telecommunications Excise
Tax Act, ILCS  Ch. 35, Act 630, §§ 1 et seq.; or



         (d)   The tax imposed by § 4251 of the Internal Revenue
Code, 26 U.S.C. § 4251:



      (2)   Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received
outside of the city;



      (3)   Charges for leased time on equipment, or charges for the
storage of data or information or subsequent retrieval, or the processing of
data or information intended to change its form or content.  Equipment
includes, but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data
processing equipment, tabulating equipment, or accounting equipment, and also
includes the usage of computers under a time-sharing agreement;



      (4)   Charges for customer equipment, including equipment that
is leased or rented by the customer from any source, wherein charges are
disaggregated and separately identified from other charges;



      (5)   Charges to business enterprises certified under §
9-222.1 of the Public Utilities Act, ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 9-222.1, to the
extent of the exemption and during the period of time specified by the
Department of Commerce and Community Affairs;



      (6)   Charges for telecommunications and all services and
equipment provided in connection therewith between a parent corporation and
its wholly owned subsidiaries, or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the
tax imposed under this subchapter has already been paid to a retailer and
only to the extent that the charges between the parent corporation and wholly
owned subsidiaries, or between wholly owned subsidiaries, represent expense
allocation between the corporations and not the generation of profit for the
corporation rendering the service;



      (7)   Bad debts (BAD DEBT.  Any portion of a debt that is
related to a sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise
deductible or excludable that has become worthless or uncollectable, as
determined under applicable federal income tax standards. If the portion of
the debt deemed to be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and
pay the tax on that portion during the reporting period in which the payment
is made.);



      (8)   Charges paid by inserting coins in coin-operated
telecommunication devices; or



      (9)   Amounts paid by telecommunications retailers under the
Telecommunications Municipal Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act, ILCS Ch. 35,
Act 635, §§ 1 et seq.



   INTERSTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS.  All telecommunications that either
originate or terminate outside this state.



   INTRASTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS.  All telecommunications that originate
and terminate within this state.



   PERSON.  Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership,
association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited
liability company, or a receiver, trustee, guardian or other representative
appointed by order of any court, the federal and state governments, including
state universities created by statute, or any city, town, county, or other
political subdivision of this state.



   PURCHASE AT RETAIL.  The acquisition, consumption, or use of
telecommunications through a sale at retail.



   RETAILER.  Every person engaged in the business of making sales at
retail as defined in this section. The city may, in its discretion, upon
application, authorize the collection of the tax hereby imposed by any
retailer not maintaining a place of business within this state, who to the
satisfaction of the city, furnishes adequate security to insure collection
and payment of the tax. The retailer shall be issued, without charge, a
permit to collect the tax. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of the
retailer to collect the tax upon all of the gross charges for
telecommunications in the city in the same manner and subject to the same
requirements as a retailer maintaining a place of business within the city.



   RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE.  Any retailer
having or maintaining within this state, directly or by a subsidiary, an
office, distribution facilities, transmission facilities, sales office,
warehouse or other place of business, or any agent or other representative
operating within this state under the authority of the retailer or its
subsidiary, irrespective of whether the place of business or agent or other
representative is located here permanently or temporarily, or whether the
retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business in this state.



   SALE AT RETAIL.  The transmitting, supplying or furnishing of
telecommunications and all services rendered in connection therewith for a
consideration, to persons other than the federal and state governments, and
state universities created by statute, and other than between a parent
corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries, or between wholly owned
subsidiaries, when the tax has already been paid to a retailer and the gross
charge made by one corporation to another corporation is not greater than the
gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not for
resale.



   SERVICE ADDRESS.  The location of telecommunications equipment from
which telecommunications services are originated or at which
telecommunications services are received by a taxpayer. If this is not a
defined location, as in the case of mobile phones, paging systems, maritime
systems, air-to-ground systems and the like, SERVICE ADDRESS shall mean the
location of a taxpayer’s primary use of the telecommunication equipment as
defined by telephone number, authorization code, or location where bills are
sent.



   TAXPAYER.  A person who individually, or through his or her agents,
employees, or permittees, engages in the act or privilege of originating in
the city or receiving in the city telecommunications and who incurs a tax
liability under this subchapter.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS.  Messages or information transmitted through use
of local, toll and wide area telephone service, channel services, telegraph
services, teletypewriter service, computer exchange services, cellular mobile
telecommunications service, specialized mobile radio services, paging
service, or any other form of mobile and portable one-way or two-way
communications, or any other transmission of messages or information by
electronic or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber
optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite or similar facilities. The
definition of TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include value added services in
which computer processing applications are used to act on the form, content,
code, and protocol of the information for purposes other than transmission.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include purchase of telecommunications by a
telecommunications service provider for use of a component part of the
service provided by the telecommunications service producer to the ultimate
retail consumer who originates or terminates the taxable end-to-end
communications. Carrier access charges, right of access charges, charges for
use of inter-company facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the
subsequent provision used as a component of, or integrated into, end-to-end
telecommunications service shall be a non-taxable as sales for resale.
Prepaid telephone calling arrangements shall not be considered
telecommunications subject to the tax imposed under this subchapter. For
purposes of this section, PREPAID TELEPHONE CALLING ARRANGEMENTS means that
term as defined in § 2-27 of the Retailers’ Occupation Tax Act, ILCS Ch.
35, Act 120, § 2-27.



(Prior Code, § 6-12-2)



§ 33.47  SPECIFIC TAX IMPOSED.



   (A)   A tax is imposed upon:



      (1)   The act or privilege of originating in the city or
receiving in the city intrastate telecommunications by a person at a rate of
5% of the gross charge for telecommunications purchased at retail from a
retailer by the person; and



      (2)   The act or privilege of originating in the city, or
receiving in the city, interstate telecommunications by a person at a rate of
5% of the gross charge for telecommunications purchased at retail from a
retailer by the person. To prevent actual multi-state taxation of the act or
privilege that is subject to taxation under this division, any taxpayer, upon
proof that the taxpayer has paid a tax in another state on the event, shall
be allowed a credit against the tax authorized by this division to the extent
of the amount of the tax properly due and paid in the other state which was
not allowed as a credit against any other state or local tax in this state.



   (B)   The tax imposed by this subchapter is not imposed on any act
or privilege to the extent that the act or privilege may not, under the
constitution or statutes of the United States, be made subject to taxation by
the city.



(Prior Code, § 6-12-3)



§ 33.48  REGISTRATION BY RETAILERS. 



   Every retailer maintaining a place of business in this state shall
register with the city within 30 days after the effective date of this
subchapter, or the date of becoming a retailer, whichever is later.



(Prior Code, § 6-12-6)



§ 33.49  COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILER.



   (A)   Any retailer maintaining a place of business in this state,
and making or effectuating a sale at retail, shall collect the tax imposed by
this subchapter from the taxpayer and remit it to the city as provided by §
33.50.



   (B)   Any tax required to be collected pursuant to this subchapter,
and any tax collected by the retailer, shall constitute a debt owed by the
retailer to the city.



   (C)   The retailer shall collect the tax from the taxpayer by adding
the tax to the gross charge for the act or privilege of originating or
receiving telecommunications when sold for use in the manner prescribed by
this subchapter.



   (D)   The tax imposed by this subchapter shall constitute a debt of
the purchaser to the retailer providing taxable services until paid and, if
unpaid, is recoverable at law in the same manner as the original charge for
taxable services.



   (E)   The city shall, upon application, authorize the collection of
this tax by any retailer not maintaining a place of business in this state
who, to the satisfaction of the city, furnishes adequate security to ensure
collection and payment of the tax. The retailer shall be issued, without
charge, a permit to collect the tax imposed by this subchapter. When so
authorized, it shall be the duty of the retailer to collect the tax upon all
of the gross charges for telecommunications originated or received in the
city in the same manner, and subject to the same requirements, as a retailer
maintaining a place of business in this state.



   (F)   The tax authorized by this subchapter shall, when collected,
be stated as a distinct item separate and apart from the gross charges for
telecommunications.



   (G)   Retailers may retain 1.75% of the tax they collect to
reimburse them for expenses incurred in connection with collecting and
remitting the tax, less any charges allowed by the State Commerce Commission
that permit them to recover the expenses. This reimbursement shall not be
allowed for taxes not timely remitted to the city.



(Prior Code, § 6-12-4)



§ 33.50  FILING AND REMITTANCE BY RETAILERS.



   On or before the last day of each calendar month, every retailer
maintaining a place of business in this state, and every retailer authorized
by the city to collect the tax imposed by this subchapter, shall file with
the city a remittance return and shall remit all applicable taxes for the
preceding calendar month. The return shall be filed on a form prescribed by
the city, containing information as the city may reasonably require.
Notwithstanding, if the total amount of tax to be remitted regularly is less
than $50 for a month, the tax may be remitted quarterly upon written approval
of the City Treasurer.



(Prior Code, § 6-12-5)



§ 33.51  TAXPAYER OBLIGATION TO FILE AND PAY.



   (A)   If a retailer fails to collect the tax imposed by this
subchapter from a taxpayer, as required by § 33.49, then the taxpayer shall
pay the tax directly to the city.



   (B)   On or before the last day of each calendar month, every
taxpayer that has not paid the tax imposed by this subchapter to a retailer
shall file with the city a tax return and pay the tax upon the gross charges
the taxpayer paid to the retailer during the preceding calendar month. The
return shall be filed on a form prescribed by the city, containing such
information as the city may reasonably require.



(Prior Code, § 6-12-7)



§ 33.52  RESELLER NUMBERS; APPLICATION.



   (A)   If a person who originates or receives telecommunications in
the city claims to be a reseller of telecommunications, the person shall
apply to the city for a resale number. The applicant shall state facts
showing why it is not liable for the tax imposed by this subchapter on any
purchases of telecommunications, and shall furnish additional information as
the city may reasonably require.



   (B)   Upon approval of the application, the city shall assign a
resale number to the applicant and shall certify the number to the applicant.



   (C)   The city may cancel the resale number of any person if the
number:



      (1)   Was obtained through misrepresentation;



      (2)   Is used to originate or receive telecommunications
tax-free when the telecommunications are not for resale; or



      (3)   Is no longer necessary because the person has
discontinued making resales.



   (D)   The act or privilege of originating or receiving
telecommunications in the city shall not be made tax-free on the ground of
being a sale for resale unless the person has an active resale number issued
by the city, and furnishes that number to the retailer in connection with
certifying to the retailer that a sale is non-taxable as a sale for resale.



(Prior Code, § 6-12-8)



§ 33.53  BOOKS AND RECORDS.



   Every retailer maintaining a place of business in this state, every
retailer authorized by the city to collect the tax imposed by this
subchapter, and every taxpayer required by § 33.51 to pay the tax directly
to the city, shall keep accurate books and records of its business or
activity, including original source documents and books of entry denoting the
transactions that gave rise, or may have given rise, to any tax liability or
exemption. All books and records shall be kept in the English language and,
at all times during regular business hours of the day, shall be subject to
and available for inspection by the city.



(Prior Code, § 6-12-9)



§ 33.54  AUTHORITY OF CITY TO ADMINISTER AND ENFORCE TAX PROVISIONS.



   The city is authorized to adopt, promulgate and enforce rules and
regulations pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this
subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 6-12-10)



§ 33.55  SCHOOL AND GOVERNMENT EXEMPTION.



   All units of local government and school districts whose territory is
included within the city, in whole or in part, are exempt from the taxes
imposed by this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 6-12-11)



§ 33.56  TAX PROCEEDS.



   It is the intention of the city that all tax proceeds under this
subchapter be available for such public uses and purposes as may be
designated by the City Council on an annual basis, with such designation to
be made at the March meeting of the City Council each year.



(Ord. 1965, passed 3-9-2010)



§ 33.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any tax collector who fails to make a return, or who makes a
fraudulent return, or who willfully violates any other provision of § 33.30,
is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to
a fine of not less than $100 or more than $500, and, in addition, shall be
liable in a civil action for the amount of tax due.



(Prior Code, § 6-11-6)



   (B)   Any tax collector who fails to make a return, or who makes a
fraudulent return, or who willfully violates any other provision of §§ 
33.45 through 33.55, is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be subject to a fine of not less than $100 or more than $500, and, in
addition, shall be liable in a civil action for the amount of tax due.



(Prior Code, § 6-12-12)



CHAPTER 34:  CIVIL EMERGENCIES AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT



Section




Emergency Services Disaster Agency




   34.01   Agency established



   34.02   Agency Coordinator



   34.03   Oath of office



   34.04   Office space



   34.05   Appropriation; levy of tax



   34.06   Agency functions



   34.07   Compensation



   34.08   Reimbursement by state



   34.09   Mobile Support Team



   34.10   Agreement with other political subdivisions



   34.11   Exercise of emergency power



   34.12   Purchases and expenditures




Civil Emergencies




   34.25   Definitions



   34.26   Interpretation of subchapter



   34.27   Declaration of emergency



   34.28   Curfew



   34.29   Emergency orders



   34.30   Duration of emergency declaration



   34.31   Notification of media



EMERGENCY SERVICES DISASTER AGENCY



§ 34.01  AGENCY ESTABLISHED.



   There is hereby created the City ESDA to prevent, minimize, repair, and
alleviate injury or damage resulting from disaster caused by enemy attack,
sabotage, or other hostile action, or from natural or manmade disaster, in
accordance with the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act, being ILCS, Ch.
20, Act 3305. This ESDA shall consist of the Coordinator, and additional
members as may be selected by the Coordinator.



(Prior Code, § 3-4-1)



§ 34.02  AGENCY COORDINATOR.



   (A)   The Coordinator of the City ESDA shall be appointed by the
City Council and shall serve until removed by same. The Coordinator shall
have direct responsibility for the organization, administration, training,
and operation of the ESDA, subject to the direction and control of the City
Council, as provided by statute.



   (B)   In the event of the absence, resignation, death, or inability
to serve as the Coordinator, the City Council shall be and act as Coordinator
until a new appointment is made as provided in this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 3-4-2)



§ 34.03  OATH OF OFFICE.



   Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the City ESDA
organization shall, before entering upon his or her duties, subscribe to the
following oath, which shall be filed with the Coordinator:



   I, ____________________________________, do solemnly swear (or affirm)
that I will support and defend and bear true faith and allegiance to the
Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of
Illinois, and the territory, institutions, and facilities thereof, both
public and private, against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I take
this obligation freely, without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion;
and that I will well and faithfully discharge the duties upon which I am
about to enter. And I do further swear (or affirm) that I do not advocate,
nor am I, nor have I been, a member of any political party or organization
that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of
this State by force or violence; and that during such time as I am affiliated
with the City of Geneseo ESDA organization, I will not advocate nor become a
member of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of
the government of the United Sates or of this State by force or violence.



(Prior Code, § 3-4-10)



§ 34.04  OFFICE SPACE.



   The City Council is authorized to designate space in a city building,
or elsewhere, as may be provided for by the City Council for the City ESDA as
its office.



(Prior Code, § 3-4-11)



§ 34.05  APPROPRIATION; LEVY OF TAX.



   The City Council may make an appropriation for ESDA purposes in the
manner provided by law and may levy, in addition, for ESDA purposes only, a
tax not to exceed $0.05 per $100 of the assessed value of all taxable
property in addition to all other taxes, as provided by the State ESDA Act of
1975. However, that amount collectible under the levy shall in no event
exceed $0.25 per capita.



(Prior Code, § 3-4-12)



§ 34.06  AGENCY FUNCTIONS.



   The City ESDA shall perform functions within the city as shall be
prescribed in and by the State ESDA plan and program prepared by the
governor, and orders, rules, and regulations as may be promulgated by the
Governor, and, in addition, shall perform duties outside the corporate limits
as may be required pursuant to any mutual aid agreement with any other
political subdivision, municipality, or quasi-municipality entered into as
provided in the State ESDA Act of 1975.



(Prior Code, § 3-4-3)



§ 34.07  COMPENSATION.



   Members of the ESDA who are paid employees or officers of the city, if
called for training by the State Director of ESDA, shall receive for the time
spent in training the same rate of pay as is attached to the position held.
Members who are not city employees or officers shall receive for training
time compensation as may be established by the Mayor with the consent of the
City Council.



(Prior Code, § 3-4-7)



§ 34.08  REIMBURSEMENT BY STATE.



   The State Treasurer may receive and allocate to the appropriate fund
any reimbursement by the state to the city for expenses incident to training
members of the ESDA as prescribed by the State Director of ESDA, compensation
for services and expenses of members of a Mobile Support Team while serving
outside the city in response to a call by the Governor or State Director of
ESDA, as provided by law, and any other reimbursement made by the state
incident to ESDA activities as provided by law.



(Prior Code, § 3-4-8)



§ 34.09  MOBILE SUPPORT TEAM.



   (A)   All or any members of the City ESDA organization may be
designated as members of a Mobile Support Team created by the Director of the
State ESDA as provided by law. The leader of the Mobile Support Team shall be
designated by the Coordinator of the City ESDA organization.



   (B)   Any member of a Mobile Support Team who is a city employee or
officer while serving on call to duty by the Governor or the State Director
shall receive the compensation and have the powers, duties, rights, and
immunities incident to employment or office. Any member who is not a paid
officer or employee of the city while serving shall receive from the state
reasonable compensation as provided by law.



(Prior Code, § 3-4-4)



§ 34.10  AGREEMENT WITH OTHER POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS.



   The Coordinator of ESDA may negotiate mutual aid agreements with other
cities or political subdivisions of the state, but no such agreement shall be
effective until it has been approved by the Mayor with the consent of the
City Council and by the State Director of ESDA.



(Prior Code, § 3-4-5)



§ 34.11  EXERCISE OF EMERGENCY POWER.



   If the Governor proclaims that a disaster emergency exists, in the
event of actual enemy attack upon the United States, or the occurrence within
the state of a major disaster resulting from enemy sabotage or other hostile
action, or from manmade or natural disaster, it shall be the duty of the City
ESDA to cooperate fully with the State ESDA and with the Governor in the
exercise of emergency power as provided by law.



(Prior Code, § 3-4-6)



§ 34.12  PURCHASES AND EXPENDITURES.



   (A)   The City Council may, on recommendation of the City
Coordinator of ESDA, authorize any purchase of contract necessary to place
the city in a position to combat effectively any disaster resulting from the
explosion of any nuclear bomb or other bomb or missile, and to protect the
public health and safety, protect property, and provide emergency assistance
to victims in the case of that disaster, or from manmade or natural disaster.



   (B)   In the event of enemy-caused or other disaster, the City
Coordinator of ESDA is authorized, on behalf of the city, to procure
services, supplies, equipment, or material as may be necessary for these
purposes, in view of the exigency, without regard to the statutory procedures
or formalities normally prescribed by law pertaining to city contract or
obligations, as authorized by the State ESDA Act of 1975, provided that if
the Mayor meets at the time he or she shall act subject to the directions and
restrictions imposed by that body.



(Prior Code, § 3-4-9)



CIVIL EMERGENCIES



§ 34.25  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CIVIL EMERGENCY.   A riot or unlawful assembly characterized by the
use of actual force or violence, or any threat to use force, if accompanied
by immediate power to execute, by three or more persons acting together
without authority of law; or any natural disaster or manmade calamity,
including flood, conflagration, cyclone, tornado, earthquake, or explosion,
within the corporate limits of the city, resulting in or threatening the
death or injury of persons, or the destruction of property to such an extent
that extraordinary measures must be taken to protect the public health,
safety, and welfare.



   CURFEW.   A prohibition against any person or persons walking,
running, loitering, standing, or motoring upon any alley, street, highway,
public property, or vacant premises within the corporate limits of the city,
excepting officials of any governmental unit and persons officially
designated to duty with reference to the civil emergency.



(Prior Code, § 7-6-1)



§ 34.26  INTERPRETATION OF SUBCHAPTER.



   Nothing contained in this subchapter shall be construed to impair the
powers contained in the code of ordinances of the city, giving powers to the
Police and Fire Departments, but shall be construed together with existing
ordinances now in effect for the safety and welfare of the citizens of the
city.



(Prior Code, § 7-6-7)



§ 34.27  DECLARATION OF EMERGENCY.



   (A)   Whenever an emergency exists, the Mayor shall declare the
existence by means of a written declaration setting forth the facts which
constitute the emergency.



   (B)   The written declaration of emergency shall be signed by the
Mayor under oath and shall contain the following information:



      (1)   The type and nature of the emergency within the
categories set forth in § 34.25;



      (2)   The facts to substantiate that the particular emergency
exists; and



      (3)   A specific declaration that a state of emergency exists.



   (C)   This written declaration of emergency shall be filed with the
City Clerk as soon as practical.



(Prior Code, § 7-6-2)



§ 34.28  CURFEW.



   After proclamation of a civil emergency by the Mayor, he or she may
order a general curfew applicable to geographical areas of the city, or to
the city as a whole, as he or she deems advisable, and applicable during the
hours of the day or night as he or she deems necessary in the interest of the
public safety and welfare.



(Prior Code, § 7-6-3)



§ 34.29  EMERGENCY ORDERS.



   (A)   After the proclamation of a civil emergency, the Mayor may
also, in the interest of public safety and welfare, make any or all of the
orders listed in division (B) below.



   (B)   (1)   Order the closing of all retail liquor stores,
including taverns and private clubs and portions thereof wherein the
consumption of intoxicating liquor and beer is permitted.



      (2)   Order the discontinuance of the sale of alcoholic liquor
by a wholesaler or retailer.



      (3)   Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing, or
giving away of gasoline or other liquid flammable or combustible products in
any container other than a gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor vehicle.



      (4)   Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing,
dispensing, or giving away of any firearms or ammunition of any character
whatsoever.



(Prior Code, § 7-6-4)



§ 34.30  DURATION OF EMERGENCY DECLARATION.



   (A)   The proclamation herein authorized shall be effective for a
period of 48 hours unless sooner terminated by a proclamation of the Mayor
indicating that the civil emergency no longer exists. The Mayor shall have
the power to re-proclaim the existence of a civil emergency at the end of
each 48-hour period during the time the civil emergency exists.



   (B)   Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, the state of
emergency shall expire not later than the adjournment of the first regular
meeting of the City Council after the state of emergency is declared.



(Prior Code, § 7-6-5)



§ 34.31  NOTIFICATION OF MEDIA.



   Upon issuing the proclamation herein authorized, the Chief of Police
shall notify the news media situated within the city and shall cause three
copies of the proclamation declaring the existence of the emergency to be
posted at City Hall, the police station, and the post office within the city.



(Prior Code, § 7-6-6)



CHAPTER 35:  RESERVED



CHAPTER 36: ADMINISTRATIVE CODE HEARING DEPARTMENT



Section



   36.01   Purpose



   36.02   Definitions



   36.03   Non-exclusivity



   36.04   Code Hearing Department; establishment; jurisdiction



   36.05   Code Hearing Department; organization



   36.06   Compensation of Code Hearing personnel



   36.07   Commencement of hearings



   36.08   Hearing procedures



   36.09   Enforcement of judgment



   36.10   Enforcement of motor vehicle violations; citations



   36.11   Determination of liability; motor vehicle citations



   36.12   Lessor of vehicle-liability



   36.13   Immobilization program



   36.14   Driver's license suspension



   Appendix A:   Administrative adjudication fine schedule



§ 36.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for a fair and efficient
system of enforcement of city ordinances as may be allowed by law and
directed by ordinance, through the administrative adjudication of violations
of such city ordinances and by establishing a schedule of fines and
penalties, and authority and procedures for collection of unpaid fines and
penalties.



(Ord. O-12-061, passed 9-11-2012)



§ 36.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the words described below shall have
the meanings ascribed to them herein unless the context in which such terms
are used requires otherwise:



   CODE. Any city ordinance, law, rule, regulation or code, except such
ordinances for which the potential penalty described therein includes a
period of incarceration, any offense under the Illinois Vehicle Code or a
similar offense that is a traffic regulation governing the movement of
vehicles, and any reportable offense under Section 6-204 of the Illinois
Vehicle Code.



   HEARING OFFICER.  A person appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the City Council to preside over administrative hearings, as set
forth in this chapter.



   OWNER.



      (a)   For the purpose of a violation relating to real
property, the person to whom the County Collector sent the last ascertainable
tax bill; and



      (b)   For the purpose of a violation relating to motor
vehicles, the person to whom the motor vehicle is registered, as provided by
the records of the Secretary of State of Illinois. Any person so described
herein may present clear and convincing evidence to overcome the presumption
that such person is the owner of the property and/or motor vehicle for which
the person received a notice of violation.



(Ord. O-12-061, passed 9-11-2012)



§ 36.03  NON-EXCLUSIVITY.



   The provisions of this chapter shall not preclude the city from using
other methods or proceedings to enforce the city code, including, but not
limited to, the institution of any action in the Circuit Court of Henry
County, Illinois, or any administrative proceeding.



(Ord. O-12-061, passed 9-11-2012)



§ 36.04  CODE HEARING DEPARTMENT; ESTABLISHMENT; JURISDICTION.



   (A)   ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 1-2.2-1 et seq., "Code Hearing
Departments", ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 11-31.1-1 et seq., "Building Code
Violations", and ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-208.3 "Administrative
Adjudication of Violations of Traffic Regulations Concerning the Standing,
Parking or Condition of Vehicles", as from time to time amended, are hereby
adopted in their entirety and any person charged with the violation of a
municipal ordinance may be prosecuted under and in accordance with the
provisions herein.



   (B)   There is hereby established a Code Hearing Department as an
independent agency of the city, which is authorized to provide for and
operate a system of administrative adjudication, as more fully described
herein, which shall have jurisdiction over the adjudication and enforcement
of any violation of the city code, including but not limited to parking and
vehicle registration violations, housing, building and zoning code
violations, and engineering and health safety violations, but excluding
ordinances for which the potential penalty described therein includes a
period of incarceration, any offense under the Illinois Vehicle Code or a
similar offense that is a traffic regulation governing the movement of
vehicles, and any reportable offense under Section 6-204 of the Illinois
Vehicle Code.



(Ord. O-12-061, passed 9-11-2012)



§ 36.05  CODE HEARING DEPARTMENT; ORGANIZATION.



   The Code Hearing Department shall be comprised of a Hearing Officer, a
Code Administrator, any designated member of law enforcement, and any other
duly appointed person or persons deemed necessary for the efficient
administration of the Code Hearing Department, with the following powers and
authority:



   (A)   Hearing Officer. All adjudicatory hearings shall be presided
over by a Hearing Officer.



      (1)   Prior to conducting administrative adjudication
hearings, the Hearing Officer shall have successfully completed a formal
training program which includes the following:



         (a)   Instruction on the rules of procedure of the
administrative adjudication hearings that they will conduct and preside over;



         (b)   Orientation to each subject area of the code for
which they may adjudicate a violation;



         (c)   Observation of administrative adjudication
hearings; and



         (d)   Participation in hypothetical cases, including
ruling on evidence and issuing final orders.



      (2)   In addition, a Hearing Officer must be an attorney
licensed to practice law in the State of Illinois for at least three years. A
Hearing Officer may not be an inspector or law enforcement officer employed
by the city.



      (3)   Hearing Officers are hereby authorized, empowered and
directed to:



         (a)   Hear testimony and accept evidence that is
relevant to the existence of an ordinance violation;



         (b)   Issue subpoenas directing witnesses to appear and
give relevant testimony or tangible items at an administrative adjudication
hearing, upon the request of the parties or their representatives;



         (c)   Preserve and authenticate the record of the
administrative adjudication hearings, including all exhibits and evidence
introduced at the hearing;



         (d)   Issue a determination, based on the evidence
presented at the administrative adjudication hearing, of whether a code
violation occurred or exists.  The Hearing Officer's determination shall be
in writing and shall include written findings of fact and law, a decision,
and an order including the fine, penalty or other action with which the
defendant must comply; and



         (e)   Impose penalties consistent with the applicable
Code and assess costs upon finding a party liable for the charged violation,
except, however, that in no event shall the Hearing Officer have authority
(i) to impose a penalty of incarceration, or (ii) impose a fine in excess of
$750. The maximum monetary fine under this division (e) shall be exclusive of
costs of enforcement or costs incurred by the city to secure compliance with
the code and shall not be applicable to cases to enforce the collection of
any tax imposed and collected by the city.



   (B)   Code Administrator.  The Code Administrator shall either be
an employee of the city appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of
the City Council, or an independent contractor or agency contracted by the
city to perform such duties as enumerated herein. The Code Administrator is
hereby authorized, empowered and directed to:



      (1)   Operate and manage the system of administrative
adjudication of all code violations as may be permitted by law and directed
by ordinance;



      (2)   Adopt, distribute and process all notices as may be
required under this chapter or as may reasonably be required to carry out the
purpose of this chapter;



      (3)   Collect moneys paid as fines and/or penalties assessed
after a final determination of liability or to coordinate with the Finance
Department for such purpose;



      (4)   Certify copies of final determinations of all code
violations adjudicated pursuant to this chapter, and any factual reports
verifying the final determination of any violation which were issued in
accordance with this chapter or the laws of the State of Illinois, including
ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-208.3 (standing, parking or conditions of
vehicles) as from time to time amended;



      (5)   Certify reports to the Secretary of State concerning
initiation of suspension of driving privileges in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter and those of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-306.5
(failure to pay fine - suspension);



      (6)   Promulgate rules and regulations reasonably necessary
for the efficient operation and maintenance of the system of administrative
adjudication hereby established; and



      (7)   Collect unpaid fines and penalties through private
collection agencies that may be retained by the city or by requesting the
City Attorney to act on behalf of the city in filing complaints in the Henry
County Circuit Court, seeking judgments for unpaid fines or penalties and
pursuing all post-judgment remedies available under current law.



   (C)   Automation.  The Code Administrator is hereby further
authorized, empowered and directed to operate and maintain a computer program
for the system of administrative adjudication hereby established, on a
day-to-day basis, including, but not limited to:



      (1)   Inputting of violation notice information;



      (2)   Establishing hearing dates and notice dates;



      (3)   Recording fine and penalty assessment and payments;



      (4)   Issuing payment receipts;



      (5)   Issuing succeeding notice of hearing dates and/or final
determinations of liability, issuing notices of impending immobilization,
issuing notices of impoundment, and issuing notices of impending driver's
license suspension as may be required, in accordance with the Illinois
Vehicle Code. Nothing in this section is intended to preclude the Code
Administrator from including one or more of the above notices in the same
notice report; and



      (6)   Keeping accurate records of appearances and
non-appearances at administrative adjudication hearing, pleas entered and
fines and other penalties assessed and paid.



   (D)   Security.  The city may choose to provide security for
administrative adjudication hearings, in order to maintain hearing room
decorum and perform such other duties or acts as may be reasonably required
and as directed by the Hearing Officer or the Code Administrator.



(Ord. O-12-061, passed 9-11-2012)



§ 36.06  COMPENSATION OF CODE HEARING DEPARTMENT PERSONNEL.



   Authorization for compensation for each of the positions stated in §
36.05 shall be made by the City Council through the annual budget or
appropriation process. Compensation shall be determined by the City Council
within approved budget or appropriation limitations.



(Ord. O-12-061, passed 9-11-2012)



§ 36.07  COMMENCEMENT OF HEARINGS.



   (A)   (1)   A proceeding before a Hearing Officer shall be
instituted upon the filing with the Code Administrator of a written sworn
pleading, complaint or citation by any authorized official of the city,
including law enforcement officers, code enforcement officers, and such other
employees as authorized.



      (2)   In the event a complaint causing the initiation of a
hearing is filed by a tenant or occupant of a dwelling who is not also the
owner thereof, no action for eviction, abatement of a nuisance, forcible
entry and detainer or other similar proceeding, whether it be civil or
criminal, shall be threatened or instituted against such tenant or occupant
solely because such tenant or occupant files such complaint or agrees to
testify or present tangible evidence at an administrative adjudication
hearing. The foregoing sentence shall not apply if the owner proves by a
preponderance of the evidence that such tenant or occupant is the proximate
cause of the violation for which the hearing is commenced.



   (B)   Defendants shall be served with a copy of the written sworn
pleading, complaint or citation along with a notice of hearing in a manner
reasonably calculated to give them actual notice of the proceeding instituted
against them, by one of the following means:



      (1)   Personal service upon a party or its authorized agent;



      (2)   Service by certified mail, return receipt requested, at
the party's last known address;



      (3)   Service by first class mail, postage prepaid, at the
party's last known address; or



      (4)   If the party's last known address cannot be ascertained
after a diligent search, by posting a copy of the sworn pleading, complaint
or citation in a conspicuous place upon the property or motor vehicle where
the violation is found when the party is the owner of the property or motor
vehicle.



      (5)   Any notice presented by first class or certified mail,
or by posting, shall be deemed served three days after the deposit of such
notice in the U.S. Mail or the posting of such notice.



   (C)   Notices of hearing shall include:



      (1)   The type and nature of the ordinance violation to be
adjudicated, including a reference to the appropriate section of the code,
and the potential fines which may result from a finding of liability. And,
with respect to code violations related to the standing, parking or condition
of a vehicle, a summary of the information contained on the citation as set
forth in § 36.10(B) below;



      (2)   With respect to code violations related to the standing,
parking or condition of a vehicle, the means by which the respondent may
waive the right to a hearing and pay the applicable fine for the alleged
violation, and that payment of the indicated fine, and of any applicable
penalty for late payment, shall operate as a final disposition of the
violation;



      (3)   The date and times available for an administrative
adjudication hearing;



      (4)   The legal authority and jurisdiction under which the
hearing is to be held;



      (5)   The penalties for a failure to appear at the hearing; in
addition, with respect to code violations related to the standing, parking or
condition of a vehicle, the notices shall state that vehicle immobilization
and driver's license suspension may be imposed if fines and penalties are not
paid in full; and



      (6)   Any witnesses or complainants who may be called to
testify for the city who are not employees or officers thereof.



   (D)   Administrative adjudication hearings shall be scheduled and
docketed by the Code Administrator no less than 30 and no more than 40 days
after the notice of hearing is served on the defendant.



(Ord. O-12-061, passed 9-11-2012)



§ 36.08  HEARING PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Parties shall be provided with an opportunity for a hearing
before or during which they may exercise any or all of the following rights:



      (1)   Be represented by counsel, at their own expense.
Defendants shall not be entitled to have an attorney appointed to represent
them;



      (2)   Present and cross-examine witnesses;



      (3)   Request the Hearing Officer to issue subpoenas to direct
the attendance and testimony of relevant witnesses or the production of
relevant tangible evidence.



   (B)   Rules of evidence shall not govern. The formal and technical
rules of evidence shall not apply in an administrative adjudication hearing
authorized under this chapter. Evidence, including hearsay, may be admitted
only if it is the type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in
the conduct of their affairs.



   (C)   Standard of proof.  Administrative adjudication hearings are
civil in nature. The city shall bear the standard of proof to prove by a
preponderance of the evidence the occurrence or existence of a violation of
the code. A sworn, written pleading, complaint or citation shall constitute
prima facie evidence of the violation.



   (D)   Defenses.  It shall be a defense to a code violation charged
under this chapter if the owner, his attorney, or any other agent or
representative proves by a preponderance of the evidence that:



      (1)   The code violation alleged in the notice did not in fact
exist at the time of the citation, pleading or complaint;



      (2)   The code violation alleged in the notice occurred before
the owner became the owner of the real or personal property. Notwithstanding
the foregoing sentence, any existing order to correct a code violation and/or
sanctions imposed by the city as a result of a finding of a code violation
under this chapter shall attach to the property as well as to the owner of
the property, so that a finding of a code violation against one owner cannot
be avoided by conveying or transferring the property to another owner. Any
subsequent transferee or owner of the property takes the same subject to the
findings, decision and order of a Hearing Officer under this chapter.



   (E)   Continuances.  No continuances shall be authorized by a
Hearing Officer for any administrative adjudication hearing commenced under
this chapter except in cases where a continuance is absolutely necessary to
protect the rights of the defendant or owner. Lack of preparation shall not
be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance authorized by a Hearing Officer
shall not exceed 30 days.



   (F)   Judicial review.  Any final decision by a Hearing Officer
that a code violation does or does not exist shall constitute a final
determination for purposes of judicial review and shall be subject to review
under the Illinois Administrative Review Law, ILCS Ch. 735, Act 5, §§ 3-101
et seq., or as hereinafter amended. Any person filing for judicial review
under the Administrative Review Law shall be subject to the assessment of
costs for the preparation and certification of the record of proceedings
before the Hearing Officer. Such cost shall be assessed as $100 for the first
page of the transcript and $25 for each page thereafter. Any failure to pay
such fee shall subject the party seeking review to the provisions of ILCS Ch.
735, Act 5, § 3-109, including dismissal of the complaint on motion of the
city.



(Ord. O-12-061, passed 9-11-2012)



§ 36.09  ENFORCEMENT OF JUDGMENT.



   (A)   Any fine, other sanction or costs imposed, or part of any
fine, other sanction or cost imposed, remaining unpaid after the exhaustion
of or the failure to exhaust judicial review procedures under the Illinois
Administrative Review Law are a debt due and owing the city and may be
collected in accordance with applicable law.



   (B)   Failure of the defendant to pay such fine or penalty after the
exhaustion of or the failure to exhaust judicial review procedures under the
Illinois Administrative Review Law may result in the city filing a petition
in the Circuit Court of Henry County to have reduced to judgment any unpaid
fine or penalty with costs, and, if applicable: (1) the immobilization of the
person's vehicle for failure to pay fines or penalties for five or more
parking violations and (2) the suspension of the person's driver's license
for failure to pay fines or penalties for ten or more parking violations.



   (C)   Upon the entry of a judgment upon the findings and
determination of the Hearing Officer, and such judgment being recorded in the
manner required by Article XII of the Illinois Code of Civil Procedure (ILCS
Ch. 735, Act 5, §§ 12-101 et seq.), or by the Uniform Commercial Code (ILCS
Ch. 810, Act 5, §§ 1-101 et seq.), a lien shall be imposed on the real
estate or personal property, or both, of the defendant in the amount of any
debt due and owing the city under this chapter.



   (D)   A Hearing Officer may not vacate any final determination of
liability.



(Ord. O-12-061, passed 9-11-2012)



§ 36.10  ENFORCEMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLE VIOLATIONS; CITATIONS.



   (A)   Whenever any vehicle is parked in violation of any provision
of the code prohibiting or restricting vehicular parking, stopping or
standing, the owner shall be prima facie responsible for the violation and
subject to the penalty therefor.



   (B)   Whenever any vehicle is parked in violation of any provision
of the code prohibiting or restricting vehicular parking, stopping or
standing, any law enforcement officer, traffic control aide, other designated
member of law enforcement, parking enforcement aide or other person
designated by the Code Administrator observing such violation may issue a
parking violation notice, and serve the notice on the owner of the vehicle by
handing it to the operator of the vehicle, if he is present, or by affixing
it to the vehicle in a conspicuous place. The issuer of the notice shall
specify on the notice his identification number, the particular parking
regulation allegedly violated, the make and state registration number of the
cited vehicle, and the place, date, time and nature of the alleged violation
and shall certify the correctness of the specified information by signing his
name as provided in Section 11-208.3 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, ILCS Ch.
625, Act 5, § 11-208.3, as amended. The foregoing shall not relieve the Code
Administrator from the duties set forth in § 36.07 above with respect to
scheduling a hearing on such alleged violation and providing notice thereof.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person, other than the owner of
the vehicle or his designee, to remove from a vehicle a parking violation
notice affixed pursuant to this chapter.



   (D)   The Code Administrator shall distribute parking violation
notices to parking enforcement aides, other persons authorized to issue
parking violating notices, and law enforcement for issuance pursuant to these
provisions. All parking enforcement aides, other persons authorized to issue
parking violation notices, and law enforcement must retain a receipt for
every notice issued.



   (E)   The Code Administrator shall compile and maintain complete and
accurate records relating to all parking violation notices issued and the
dispositions thereof, whether by payment of the fine or by final
determination of the Hearing Officer. In addition, the Code Administrator
shall make certified reports to the Secretary of State pursuant to Section
6-306.5 of the Illinois Vehicle Code.



(Ord. O-12-061, passed 9-11-2012)



§ 36.11  DETERMINATION OF LIABILITY; MOTOR VEHICLE CITATIONS.



   (A)   Where a respondent either fails to pay the indicated fine
prior to the hearing or fails to appear at a hearing a final determination of
parking violation liability shall be entered in the amount of the fine
indicated on the notice of violation. Fines shall be set by reference to the
table described in Appendix A to this chapter. Failure to pay the fine within
21 days of a final determination of parking violation liability will result
in the imposition of a late payment penalty pursuant to division (B) herein.
Upon the occurrence of a final determination of parking violation liability
and after expiration of the period in which judicial review under the
Illinois Administrative Review Law may be sought any unpaid fine or penalty
will constitute a debt due and owing the city.



   (B)   Failure by any respondent to pay or mail payment of the fine
for a parking violation within 21 days of the issuance of the final
determination of liability will automatically subject the respondent to a
penalty for late payment. The penalty for late payment shall be the amount
set forth in the table described in Appendix A to this chapter. Failure to
pay or mail payment of the fine after an additional 60-day period will result
in the fine being referred to a collection agency and will automatically
subject the respondent to an additional administrative fee of $25.



   (C)   Defenses.  A person charged with a parking violation may
contest the charge through an administrative adjudication hearing limited to
one or more of the following grounds with appropriate evidence to support:



      (1)   That the respondent was not the owner or lessee of the
cited vehicle at the time of the violation;



      (2)   That the cited vehicle or its state registration plates
were stolen at the time the violation occurred;



      (3)   That the relevant signs prohibiting or restricting
parking, if necessary, were missing or obscured:



      (4)   That the relevant parking meter was inoperable or
malfunctioned through no fault of the respondent;



      (5)   That the facts alleged in the parking violation notice
are inconsistent or do not support a finding that the specified regulation
was violated.



(Ord. O-12-061, passed 9-11-2012)



§ 36.12  LESSOR OF VEHICLE–LIABILITY.



   In accordance with Section 11-1306 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, no
person who is the lessor of a vehicle pursuant to a written lease agreement
shall be liable for a violation of any standing or parking regulation of this
chapter involving such vehicle during the period of the lease if upon receipt
of a notice of violation he shall, within 60 days thereafter, provide to the
Code Administrator the name and address of the lessee. Upon receipt of a
lessor's notification of the name and address of his lessee, pursuant to
Section 11-1305 or 11-1306 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, the Code
Administrator shall cause a notice of violation to be sent to the lessee as
provided herein. If the lessor fails to provide the Code Administrator with
the name and address of the lessee within 60 days of receiving notice, the
lessor shall be liable for the full amount of the violation and late
penalties, and a final determination will be issued.



(Ord. O-12-061, passed 9-11-2012)



§ 36.13  IMMOBILIZATION PROGRAM.



   (A)   (1)   The Code Administrator is hereby authorized to direct
and supervise a program of vehicle immobilization for the purpose of
enforcing the parking regulations of the code.  The program of vehicle
immobilization shall provide for immobilizing any eligible vehicle, as
defined in division (B) below, by placement of a restraint in such a manner
as to prevent its operation.



      (2)   If the eligible vehicle is parked or left in violation
of any provision of the traffic code for which such vehicle is subject to an
immediate tow, or in any place where it constitutes an obstruction or hazard,
or where it impedes city workers during such operations as snow removal, the
Code Administrator may cause the eligible vehicle immediately to be towed to
a vehicle pound or relocated to a legal parking place and there restrained.



   (B)   (1)   When the registered owner of a vehicle has
accumulated five or more final determinations of parking violation liability
for which the fines and penalties, if applicable, have not been paid in full,
the Code Administrator shall cause a notice of impending vehicle
immobilization to be sent as prescribed in this chapter.



      (2)   The notice of impending vehicle immobilization shall
state the name and address of the registered owner, the state registration
number of the vehicle or vehicles registered to such owner, and the serial
numbers of parking violation notices which have resulted in final
determination of liability for which the fines or penalties remain unpaid.
Failure to pay the fines and penalties owed within 21 days from the date of
the notice will result in the inclusion of the state registration number of
the vehicle of such owner on an immobilization list. A person may challenge
the validity of the notice of impending vehicle immobilization by requesting
a hearing and appearing in person to submit evidence which would conclusively
disprove eligibility. Such hearing shall not be a forum to readjudicate the
findings of fact and law issued by the Hearing Officer. Upon a request for a
hearing, the Code Administrator shall schedule the hearing for the next
regular hearing date. Documentary evidence which would conclusively disprove
liability shall be based on the following grounds:



         (a)   That all fines and penalties for the parking
violations cited in the notice have been paid in full; or



         (b)   That the registered owner has not accumulated five
or more final determinations of parking violation liability which were unpaid
at the time the notice of impending vehicle immobilization was issued.



   (C)   Upon immobilization of an eligible vehicle, a notice shall be
affixed to the vehicle in a conspicuous place. Such notice shall warn that
the vehicle is immobilized and that any attempt to move the vehicle may
result in its damage. The notice shall also state that the unauthorized
removal of or damage to the immobilizing restraint is a violation of Sections
16-1 and 21-1 of the Illinois Criminal Code. The notice shall also provide
information specifying how release of the immobilizing restraint may be had,
and how the registered owner may obtain an immobilization hearing. If the
restraint has not been released within 24 hours of its placement, the
restraint shall be released and the vehicle towed and impounded.



   (D)   The owner of an immobilized vehicle or other authorized person
may secure the release of the vehicle by paying the immobilization, towing
and storage fees provided in division (G) herein, and all fines and penalties
remaining due on each final determination of parking violation liability
issued to such person.



   (E)   The owner of an immobilized vehicle shall have the right to a
hearing to determine whether the immobilization or any subsequent towing and
impoundment was erroneous, if the owner files a written request for a hearing
with the Code Administrator within 14 days after immobilization or 14 days of
the date of the notice sent pursuant to division (F) herein, whichever is
later. Such hearing shall not be a forum to readjudicate the findings of fact
and law issued by the Hearing Officer. The determination of the hearing
officer regarding the validity of the immobilization shall become final for
the purpose of judicial review under the Administrative Review Law of
Illinois upon issuance. The owner shall be limited to the same defenses
prescribed in division (B) above.



   (F)   Within ten days after a vehicle has been impounded, a notice
of impoundment shall be sent by first class mail, to the address of the
registered owner as listed with the Secretary of State. The notice shall
state that the owner has the right to request a post-immobilization and
post-towing hearing as provided in division (E) herein, and that if the
vehicle is not claimed within 60 days from the date of the notice, the
vehicle may be sold or otherwise disposed of in accordance with Section 4-208
of the Illinois Vehicle Code.



   (G)   The fee for immobilization shall be $50. In addition, a fee
for towing subsequent to the immobilization and a storage fee for every
24-hour period the vehicle is retained shall be assessed. No fees shall be
assessed for any immobilization or tow which has been determined to be
erroneous.



   (H)   It shall be unlawful to relocate or tow any vehicle restrained
by an immobilization device without the approval of the Code Administrator or
his designee. The registered owner of the immobilized vehicle and any person
who relocates an immobilized vehicle in violation of this division shall each
be subject to a penalty of $750 for each such violation.



(Ord. O-12-061, passed 9-11-2012)



Cross-reference:



   Abandoned vehicles, Ch. 91



   Authorization to remove vehicles, § 72.07



   Parking time limit; authorization to remove illegally stopped vehicle,
§ 71.073



   Removal of vehicle; charge, § 92.58



§ 36.14  DRIVER'S LICENSE SUSPENSION.



   (A)   When a person has failed to pay any fine or penalty due and
owing pursuant to this chapter on ten or more parking violations, the Code
Administrator shall cause a notice of impending driver's license suspension
to be sent in the form as required by the Secretary of State. The notice
shall state that failure to pay the amount owing within 45 days of the date
of the notice will result in the city notifying the Secretary of State that
the person is eligible for initiation of suspension proceedings pursuant to
Section 6-306.5 of the Illinois Vehicle Code.



   (B)   If a person sent a notice pursuant to division (A) fails to
pay the amount owing within the time stated on the notice, the Code
Administrator may file with the Secretary of State, a certified report, in
accordance with Section 6-306.5(c) of the Illinois Vehicle Code, that the
person is eligible for initiation of suspension proceedings. The Code
Administrator shall assess a $20 filing fee against the person named in the
certified report to reimburse the city for the expense of preparing and
filing the certified report with the Secretary of State.



   (C)   A person named in a certified report filed pursuant to
division (B) may, within 21 days of the date of the notice sent by the
Secretary of State pursuant to Section 6-306.5(b) of the Illinois Vehicle
Code; file with the Code Administrator a written statement and supporting
documentation to challenge the report; provided, however, the grounds for
such challenge shall be limited to (1) the person not having been the owner
or lessee of the vehicle or vehicles receiving ten or more parking violations
notices on the date or dates such notices were issued; (2) the person having
already paid the fine and penalty for the ten or more violations indicated on
the report; (3) or the person not having accumulated ten or more final
determinations of parking violation liability. The Code Administrator shall
send notice of the decision on the challenge to the report after receipt
thereof.



   (D)   If a person named in a certified report has paid the
previously reported fine or penalty or if the report is determined by the
Code Administrator to be in error, the Code Administrator shall notify the
Secretary of State in accordance with Section 6-306.5(d) of the Illinois
Vehicle Code. A certified copy of such notification shall be given, upon
request and at no charge, to the person named therein.



   (E)   An administrative hearing to contest an impending suspension
or suspension may be had upon filing a written request with the Secretary of
State. Such hearing shall not be a forum to readjudicate the findings of fact
and law issued by the Hearing Officer. The filing fee for this hearing shall
be $20, to be paid at the time the request is made. The city shall reimburse
the Secretary of State for all reasonable costs incurred by the Secretary as
a result of filing a certified report, including but not limited to the costs
of providing the required notice and the costs incurred by the Secretary in
any hearing conducted with respect to the report and any appeal from such a
hearing. In the event the owner is found eligible for suspension such owner
shall reimburse the city for all of the foregoing costs.



(Ord. O-12-061, passed 9-11-2012)



APPENDIX A:  ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION FINE SCHEDULE



 

 
Registration & Parking Violations not otherwise listed
 
Parking in a Fire Lane and near a Fire Hydrant
 
Unauthorized Parking in Handicapped Parking Spaces
 
All other Violations


Original Fine
 
$25
 
$50
 
$100
 
$100


Late Payment Penalty 1
 
$25  ($50 - cumulative)
 
$50    ($100)
 
$100    ($200)
 
$100    ($200)


Administrative Fee2
 
$35
 
$35
 
$35
 
$35



 



1 The late payment penalty is cumulative and in addition to the original
fine.  Consequently, a respondent who fails to pay the original fine after
21 days shall be liable, if found guilty, for both the original fine and the
late payment penalty.  The late payment penalty shall not apply if a
respondent requests a hearing during the first 21 days.



2 The administrative fee is the same for all violations since it is assessed
strictly to offset the cost of assigning the fine to a collection agency for
processing on the city's behalf.  The fine will be assigned to a collection
agency 60 days after liability has been confirmed by the hearing officer.



(Ord. O-12-061, passed 9-11-2012; Ord. O-13-091, passed 6-25-2013)



CHAPTER 37: BUDGET SYSTEM



Section



   37.01   Adoption



   37.02   Budget Officer



   37.03   Power and duties



   37.04   Budget



   37.05   Passage of annual budget



   37.06   Capital improvement repair or replacement fund



   37.07   Delegation of authority



   37.08   Contingency purposes



   37.09   Public inspection of budget



   37.10   Abandonment of budget system



§ 37.01  ADOPTION.



   That the budget process, provided in the ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§
8-2-9.1 through 8-2-9.10 be and the same is hereby adopted as the budget
system for the city.



(Ord. O-17-16, passed 5-9-2017)



§ 37.02  BUDGET OFFICER.



   The City Administrator is hereby designated and appointed as the Budget
Officer to the city.



(Ord. O-17-16, passed 5-9-2017)



§ 37.03  POWER AND DUTIES.



   The Budget Officer shall have those powers and duties set forth in ILCS
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-2-9.2, as amended from time to time, including but not
limited to the following:



   (A)   Permit and encourage and establish the use of efficient
planning, budgeting, auditing, reporting, accounting, and other fiscal
management procedures in all municipal departments, commissions, and boards.



   (B)   Compile an annual budget in accordance with ILCS Ch. 65, Act
5, § 8-2-9.3.



   (C)   Examine all books and records of all municipal departments,
commissions, and boards which relate to monies received by the municipality,
municipal departments, commissions, and boards, and paid out by the
municipality, municipal departments, commissions, and boards, debts and
accounts receivable, amounts owed by or to the municipality, municipal
departments, commissions, and boards.



   (D)   Obtain such additional information from the municipality,
municipal departments, commissions, and boards as may be useful to the Budget
Officer for purposes of compiling a municipal budget, such information to be
furnished by the municipality, municipal departments, commissions, and boards
in the form required by the Budget Officer. Any department, commission or
board which refuses to make such information as is requested of it available
to the Budget Officer shall not be permitted to make expenditures under any
subsequent budget for the municipality until such municipal department,
commission, or board shall comply in full with the request of the Budget
Officer.



   (E)   Establish and maintain such procedures as shall insure that no
expenditures are made by the municipality, municipal departments,
commissions, or boards except as authorized by the budget.



(Ord. O-17-16, passed 5-9-2017)



§ 37.04  BUDGET.



   The Budget Officer shall compile a budget which shall contain estimates
of revenues available to the municipality for the fiscal year for which the
budget is drafted, together with recommended expenditures for the
municipality and all of the municipalities departments, commissions and
boards. Revenue estimates and expenditure recommendations shall be presented
in a manner which is in conformity with good fiscal management practices and
otherwise in compliance with ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-2-9.3.  The budget
shall contain actual or estimated revenues and expenditures for the two years
immediately preceding the fiscal year for which the budget is prepared.  So
far as is possible, the fiscal data for such two preceding fiscal years shall
be itemized in a manner which is in conformity with the chart of accounts set
forth in ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-2-9.3. Each budget shall show the specific
fund for which each anticipated expenditure shall be made.



(Ord. O-17-16, passed 5-9-2017)



§ 37.05  PASSAGE OF ANNUAL BUDGET.



   The passage of the annual budget by the corporate authorities shall be
in lieu of passage of the Appropriation Ordinance, as required by ILCS Ch.
65, Act 5, § 8-2-9 and shall be adopted by the corporate authorities before
the beginning of the fiscal year to which it applies.



(Ord. O-17-16, passed 5-9-2017)



§ 37.06  CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT REPAIR OR REPLACEMENT FUND.



   The budget may contain an amount not to exceed 3% of the equalized
assessed value of property subject to taxation by the municipality to be
accumulated in a separate fund for the purpose or purposes of specific
capital improvements, repairs and/or replacements of specific types of
municipal equipment or other tangible property, both real and personal, to be
designated as the capital improvement repair or replacement fund, all as
provided in ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-2-9.5.



(Ord. O-17-16, passed 5-9-2017)



§ 37.07  DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY.



   The City Council may delegate authority to heads of municipal
departments, boards or commissions to delete, add to, change or create
sub-classes within object classes budgeted previously, to the department,
board or commission subject to such limitation or requirement for prior
approval by the Budget Officer of the municipality, as the Council upon a
two-thirds vote of the corporate authorities then holding office may
establish.  By a two-thirds vote of the corporate authorities then holding
office, the annual budget of the municipality may be revised by deleting,
adding to, changing or creating sub-classes within object classes and object
classes themselves.  No revision of the budget shall be made increasing the
budget in the event funds are not available to effectuate the purpose of the
revision.



(Ord. O-17-16, passed 5-9-2017)



§ 37.08  CONTINGENCY PURPOSES.



   The annual budget may contain money set aside for contingency purposes
not to exceed 10% of the total budget, less the amount set aside for
contingency purposes, which monies may be expended for contingencies upon a
majority vote of the corporate authorities then holding office.



(Ord. O-17-16, passed 5-9-2017)



§ 37.09  PUBLIC INSPECTION OF BUDGET.



   The tentative annual budget shall be conveniently made available to
public inspection for at least ten  days prior to the passage of the annual
budget. The City Council may make such tentative budget available by
publication in the journal of the proceedings of the corporate authorities or
by posting the budget on the city website, providing a copy in the City
Clerk's office, in another public location, or in such other form as the
corporate authorities may, from time to time, direct. Not less than one week
after the tentative budget has been made available to public inspection and
prior to final action on the budget, the corporate authority shall hold at
least one public hearing on the tentative annual budget, after which hearing
or hearings, the tentative budget may be further revised and passed without
any further inspection, notice or hearing. Notice of this hearing shall be
given by publication in the newspaper having general circulation in the
municipality at least one week prior to the time of the hearing.



(Ord. O-17-16, passed 5-9-2017)



§ 37.10  ABANDONMENT OF BUDGET SYSTEM.



   The budget system in lieu of the annual appropriation ordinance may be
abandoned by two-thirds majority vote of the corporate authorities then
holding office.



(Ord. O-117-16, passed 5-9-2017)



CHAPTER 38: ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE TO DETERMINE ELIGIBILITY
FOR BENEFITS UNDER THE  PUBLIC SAFETY EMPLOYEE BENEFITS ACT



Section



   38.01   Purpose



   38.02   Administrative composition



   38.03   Procedure



§ 38.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to provide a fair and efficient method
of determining the eligibility of applicants for the benefits enumerated
under the Public Safety Employee Benefits Act (820 ILCS 320/1 et seq.)
(PSEBA). All benefits provided applicants pursuant to PSEBA will be
consistent with PSEBA.



(Ord. O-17-20, passed 8-8-2017)



§ 38.02  ADMINISTRATIVE COMPOSITION.



   (A)   Appointment of a PSEBA Claims Administrator. The Mayor, with
the consent of the Council, is hereby authorized to appoint a person to hold
the position of PSEBA Claims Administrator for the purpose of scheduling and
making all necessary arrangements for the holding of hearings under this
Administrative Procedure. Such duties include, but are not limited to:



      (1)   Receiving and filing applications for PSEBA benefits;



      (2)    Receiving and filing all documents required by this
chapter to accompany such claims;



      (3)   Reviewing applications for completeness and returning
incomplete applications to the applicant;



      (4)   Upon receipt of a complete application, scheduling
hearings in accordance with the availability of the applicant, his or her
counsel, counsel for the city, and the Hearing Officer; and posting and
publishing a Notice of Hearing in accordance with the Illinois Open Meetings
Act, 5 ILCS 120/1;



      (5)   At the direction of the Hearing Officer, posting and
publishing required amended notices of hearing in the event that any hearing
date should be continued to a later date;



      (6)   Arranging for a court reporter to prepare a
transcription of the hearing;



      (7)   Receiving and filing the determination of the Hearing
Officer and any order, ruling, or intermediate or supplemental determination
of the Hearing Officer;



      (8)   Responding to requests for information or subpoenas
relating to an application for PSEBA benefits or a hearing thereon; and



      (9)   Preparation of the record of any application and hearing
thereon for purposes of the Illinois Administrative Review Law, 735 ILCS
5/3-101, et seq.



      (10)   In the absence of an express appointment under this
subsection A, the PSEBA Claims Administrator shall be the City Clerk.



   (B)   Appointment of a Hearing Officer. The Mayor, with the consent
of the Council, is hereby authorized to appoint a person to hold the position
of Hearing Officer for the purpose of holding hearings and making
determinations concerning the eligibility for persons claiming benefits under
PSEBA. In making such selection, the Mayor shall consider:



      (1)   The candidate's ability to perform the duties set forth
herein;



      (2)   The background and experience data made available to the
Mayor; and



      (3)   The qualifications of the candidate, including but not
limited to, the requirement that the candidate must be an attorney licensed
to practice law in the State of Illinois, preferably for at least five years,
with a knowledge of and experience in labor and employment law, general civil
procedure, and administrative practice.



   (C)   Power of the Hearing Officer. The Hearing Officer shall have
all of the powers granted to him or her under applicable state statutes and
the common law relative to the conduct of administrative hearings, including
the power to:



      (1)   Preside over all city hearings involving PSEBA;



      (2)   Administer oaths;



      (3)   Hear testimony and accept evidence that is relevant to
the issue of eligibility for benefits under PSEBA of an applicant for such
benefits;



      (4)   Issue subpoenas to secure attendance of witnesses and
the production of relevant papers and documents upon the request of one or
more of the parties to a hearing or their representatives;



      (5)   Rule upon objections concerning the admissibility of
evidence;



      (6)   Preserve and authenticate the record of any hearing and
all exhibits that are introduced into evidence at the hearing; and



      (7)   Issue a determination based on the evidence presented at
the hearing.



      (8)   If the determination is that the applicant is eligible
for PSEBA benefits, issue a finding as to the extent of the reduction, if
any, of PSEBA benefits resulting from the existence of health insurance
benefits payable from any other source.



(Ord. O-17-20, passed 8-8-2017)



§ 38.03  PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Application for PSEBA benefits. A PSEBA benefit application
form prepared by the city shall be the standard form required for PSEBA
benefit applicants to use in requesting benefits under PSEBA. The completed
form, which shall be signed, sworn to by the applicant, and notarized to
certify the truthfulness of the information submitted, shall be delivered to
the PSEBA Claims Administrator. Information required by the form shall
include:



      (1)   The full particulars of the employee's claim for
benefits, including the date, time, place, and nature of the injury giving
rise to the claim for benefits;



      (2)   The names of any witnesses to the injury and the
circumstances under which it occurred, together with any other factual
circumstances surrounding the incident(s) alleged to have occasioned the
injury;



      (3)   The names, ages, and relationship to the applicant of
the legal dependents for whom PSEBA benefits may be claimed; and



      (4)   Information relating to the existence of health
insurance benefits payable from any other source, which information must be
current as of the date of application.



   The application also must be accompanied by:



      (1)   The written decision of any public safety pension board
determining or declaring the injury to have been incurred in the applicant's
line of duty as a public safety employee of the city;



      (2)   A signed medical authorization release authorizing the
collection and production by voluntary agreement or subpoena, of information,
including protected medical information, relating to the injury and the
incident giving rise to the injury; and



      (3)   If the applicant is seeking reimbursement for health
insurance premium payments or out-of-pocket payments for PSEBA-related health
insurance coverage or medical expenses, copies of all payment records or
receipts for payments made by the applicant.



   (B)   Application review. The PSEBA Claims Administrator shall
review the application for completeness. If incomplete, the PSEBA Claims
Administrator shall return the application to the applicant for completion in
accordance with the requirements of division (A) of this section. If
complete, the PSEBA Claims Administrator shall forward the completed
application to the Hearing Officer and, after determining the availability of
the parties, shall give notice concerning the holding of a hearing on the
application. No hearing on the application shall be held until the
application is complete.



   (C)   Administrative hearing. The conduct of the administrative
hearing shall be as follows:



      (1)   Upon receipt of a completed application, the Hearing
Officer shall arrange for the posting and publishing of a notice of hearing
in accordance with the Illinois Open Meetings Act, 5 ILCS 120/1, et seq.,
notifying the parties and the public of the date, time, and place of a
hearing to be held on the application.



      (2)   The parties to the hearing, who may be represented by
counsel or other representative, shall be the applicant and the city. Both
the applicant and the city are necessary parties to the hearing. Other
parties may be allowed to intervene upon motion in the proceedings if the
Hearing Officer determines that such parties have a substantial interest in
the proceedings and that the participation of such parties could assist in
the fair and efficient determination of the outcome of the proceedings.



      (3)   Upon motion by a party or intervening party, or
determination upon consultation with the parties and intervening parties by
the Hearing Officer, the initial hearing date or any subsequent date for the
hearing may be reset by the Hearing Officer to mutually convenient dates and
times.



      (4)   Hearings shall be held on the date and time and at the
place specified in the notice of hearing, as originally set or reset and
posted and published in accordance with law.



      (5)   All hearings shall be attended by a certified court
reporter whose presence at the hearing has been arranged by the PSEBA Claims
Administrator at the direction of the Hearing Officer, and a transcript of
all proceedings shall be made and preserved.



      (6)   The applicant and the city, along with any interveners
whose participation in the hearing has been allowed by the Hearing Officer,
may examine and cross-examine witnesses, introduce exhibits, and request the
issuance of subpoenas to compel the appearance of relevant witnesses or the
production of relevant documents.



      (7)   It shall be the applicant's obligation at the hearing to
present in evidence any and all documents, including medical records, that
were presented to any public safety pension board that considered the
applicant's claim for a duty-related pension. All other medical records,
employment records, military records, and records establishing dependency
status (including marriage and birth certificates) that are relevant to the
applicant's claim for PSEBA benefits shall be admissible at the hearing and
shall be obtainable by any party requesting a subpoena for such records,
subject to the requirements of applicable law.



      (8)   Upon conclusion of the hearing, the parties may make
closing arguments on the record or, if either necessary party so requests,
may submit post-hearing briefs in support of their positions, which briefs
may contain appropriate citations to legal authority.



      (9)   The determination by the Hearing Officer as to whether
the applicant is eligible for benefits under PSEBA shall be in writing, shall
include findings of fact and conclusions of law, and shall be consistent with
PSEBA. If the Hearing Officer determines that the applicant is eligible for
benefits under PSEBA, the determination shall include a finding as to the
extent of the reduction, if any, of PSEBA benefits resulting from the
existence of health insurance benefits payable from any other source.



      (10)   Such determination shall constitute a final
determination for the purpose of appeal to a court of competent jurisdiction.



(Ord. O-17-20, passed 8-8-2017; Ord. O-17-25, passed 10-10-2017)



TITLE V:  PUBLIC WORKS



   Chapter



      50.   GARBAGE, BRUSH, AND YARD WASTE



      51.   SEWERS



      52.   PUBLIC UTILITY BILLING



      53.   WATER



      54.   ELECTRICITY



      55.   INTERCONNECTION AND NET METERING PROGRAMS



CHAPTER 50:  GARBAGE, BRUSH, AND YARD WASTE



Section




Garbage Collection




   50.01   Definitions



   50.02   Exclusive residential collection license



   50.03   Commercial collection



   50.04   Authority to collect



   50.05   Frequency of collection



   50.06   Containers provided by contractor



   50.07   Number of residential containers limited



   50.08   Care, placement and removal of containers



   50.09   Hazardous materials and hot ashes to be separated from other
garbage



   50.10   Failure to use container unlawful



   50.11   Wind blown accumulations unlawful



   50.12   Dropping of refuse from vehicle unlawful



   50.13   Dumping of refuse on property without owner’s consent
unlawful



   50.14   Unlicensed collector handling curbside recyclables unlawful



   50.15   Disposal of garbage other than in incinerator or landfill
unlawful



   50.16   Accumulation of offensive substance prohibited



   50.17   Prima facie evidence of responsibility




Brush and Yard Waste Pickup




   50.30   Definitions



   50.31   Yard waste pickup



   50.32   Brush pickup



   50.33   Full tree permit



   50.34   Special pickup



   50.35   City compost area use



 



   50.99   Penalty




GARBAGE COLLECTION




§ 50.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ASHES.  Residue from fires used for cooking and for heating buildings,
and the residue from incinerators.



   COLLECTOR.  Any individual, firm, or corporation that shall go from
place to place within the city on any vehicle, mechanical or otherwise, for
the purpose of collecting garbage, refuse, ashes, or recyclables; or any
individual who shall engage in the business of collecting garbage, refuse,
ashes, or recyclables.



   GARBAGE.  Organic wastes resulting from the handling, preparation,
cooking, and consumption of food, as well as organic wastes from the
handling, storage, and sale of produce.



   RECYCLABLES.  Newspapers; corrugated cardboard; magazines; junk mail;
aluminum cans; steel tin cans; #1 and #2 plastics; clear, green and brown
glass; textiles; and other materials as determined by the label on the
recycling toter.



   REFUSE.  Combustible trash including, but not limited to, paper,
cartons, boxes, barrels, wood, excelsior, tree branches, yard trimmings, wood
furniture, bedding; noncombustible trash including, but not limited to,
metals, tin cans, metal furniture, dirt, small quantities of rock and pieces
of concrete, glass, crockery, other mineral wastes; street rubbish including,
but not limited to, street sweepings, dirt, leaves, catch basin dirt,
contents of litter receptacles; provided, REFUSE shall not include earth and
wastes from building operations, nor shall it include solid wastes resulting
from industrial processes and manufacturing operations such as food
processing wastes, boiler house cinders, lumber scraps and shavings.



(Prior Code, § 7-8-1)  (Ord. O-12-068, passed 12-11-2012)



§ 50.02  EXCLUSIVE RESIDENTIAL COLLECTION LICENSE.



   (A)   A single exclusive residential collection license shall be
issued by the City Clerk to the contract collector as determined after
competitive bidding has been conducted and a contractor has been selected by
the City Council. Exclusive residential garbage and refuse collection shall
be defined as all necessary garbage and refuse collection relating to
residential units of a four-plex or less.



   (B)   This contract shall specify a rate structure of collection,
and any other terms agreed upon between the parties. Violation of the rate
provisions of the contract shall be grounds for the city, in its discretion,
to revoke the residential collection therein.



   (C)   The terms of the contract between the city and the entity
holding the exclusive residential collection license are incorporated by
reference into this section, and shall be binding as if fully set forth
herein. A true and correct copy of the contract is filed at City Hall, 115
South Oakwood Avenue, Geneseo, Illinois, and is available for viewing by the
public. The terms of the contract shall be binding in the event of any
conflict with any other terms of Chapter 50.



(Prior Code, § 7-8-2)  (Ord. O-12-062, passed 9-25-2012; Ord. O-12-068,
passed 12-11-2012)



§ 50.03  COMMERCIAL COLLECTION.



   (A)   Collectors collecting commercial garbage, refuse, and brush
within the city limits shall register with the city by furnishing a
certificate of insurance showing comprehensive general liability insurance,
property damage insurance, and workers’ compensation insurance, sufficient
to cover the costs of potential liability that may arise out of or from the
discharge of the collector’s duties. The collector’s comprehensive
general liability insurance policy shall include an endorsement designating
the city as an additional insured.



   (B)   The collector shall indemnify and hold harmless the city, and
its officers and employees, from liabilities and related expenses of any kind
which may arise out of or from the discharge of the collector’s duties.



(Prior Code, § 7-8-3)  (Ord. O-12-068, passed 12-11-2012)



§ 50.04  AUTHORITY TO COLLECT.



   No person other than the officials or employees of the city, or the
person the city may have licensed or registered, shall collect garbage,
refuse, brush, recyclables or other trash or waste in the city for hire.



(Prior Code, § 7-8-16) (Ord. O-12-068, passed 12-11-2012)



§ 50.05  FREQUENCY OF COLLECTION.



   The collection of garbage and refuse from residential units shall be
made in accordance with the exclusive residential collection contract.



(Prior Code, § 7-8-11)



§ 50.06  CONTAINERS PROVIDED BY CONTRACTOR.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of every owner, or his or her agent, or
occupant of any house, building, flat, apartment, or tenement in the city
where persons reside, board, or lodge, or where animal or vegetable food is
prepared or served, or where garbage or refuse, as defined, is created, to
provide for the house, building, flat, apartment, or tenement, and at all
times to maintain in good order and repair, containers as hereinafter
specified.



   (B)   In the residential area, all containers shall not be of less
than 35-gallon nor more than 95-gallon capacity, and are the property of the
contractor. The exception is the yard waste toters; they are the property of
the owner. The containers shall be tightly covered, watertight, of rigid
construction, and provided with suitable handles at the sides. Liners or bags
of heavy duty plastic film may be used, but must be properly sealed at the
top of the liner or bag and must not be punctured or broken.



   (C)   The city, at its option, may require owners or agents
operating multiple dwelling structures of a four-plex or less to provide one
or more cubic yard containers for each multiple dwelling using the
residential collection service provided by the city.



   (D)   The city, at its option, may require the use of one or more
cubic yard containers for each business.



(Prior Code, § 7-8-13)  (Ord. O-12-068, passed 12-11-2012)



§ 50.07  NUMBER OF RESIDENTIAL CONTAINERS LIMITED.



   In residential areas, the number of containers per week per residential
unit shall be limited to the equivalent of one toter for refuse and one for
recycling, additional toters may be rented from the contractor.



(Prior Code, § 7-8-14)  (Ord. O-12-068, passed 12-11-2012)



§ 50.08  CARE, PLACEMENT AND REMOVAL OF CONTAINERS.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of every person requesting garbage or
refuse collection, either of the city or any person having a residential
contract with the city, or any private collector registered with the city, to
place or cause to be placed the containers referred to in this subchapter at
a convenient place upon the premises at the times and in the manner as may be
directed by the city or collection contractor. No container set out to be
collected, whether collected by the city, by a person having a contract with
the city, or by any other private collector, shall remain on the street
right-of-way for more than 24 hours.



(Prior Code, § 7-8-12)



   (B)   Each and every container for garbage or refuse shall be
maintained in a sanitary condition.



(Prior Code, § 7-8-15)



§ 50.09  HAZARDOUS MATERIALS AND HOT ASHES TO BE SEPARATED FROM OTHER
GARBAGE.



   Hot ashes or refuse which is explosive, toxic, or otherwise of
hazardous nature shall not be mixed or mingled with refuse that is to be
collected by the city or collected by any person having a contract for
collection with the city.



(Prior Code, § 7-8-10)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.10  FAILURE TO USE CONTAINER UNLAWFUL.



   It shall be unlawful to place or permit to remain anywhere in the city
any garbage or other material subject to decay, other than leaves or grass,
excepting in a tightly covered, watertight container of rigid construction.



(Prior Code, § 7-8-4)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.11  WIND BLOWN ACCUMULATIONS UNLAWFUL.



   It shall be unlawful to cause or permit to accumulate any dust, ashes,
refuse, or recyclables of a nature that it can be blown away by the wind,
anywhere in the city.



(Prior Code, § 7-8-6)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.12  DROPPING OF REFUSE FROM VEHICLE UNLAWFUL.



   It shall be unlawful to deposit, or permit to fall, from any vehicle
any garbage, refuse, ashes, manure, or offensive or nauseous substance on any
public street or alley in the city; provided, that this section shall not be
construed to prohibit placing garbage, refuse, ashes, or recyclables in a
container complying with the provisions of this subchapter, preparatory to
having the material collected and disposed of in the manner provided herein.



(Prior Code, § 7-8-7)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.13  DUMPING OF REFUSE ON PROPERTY WITHOUT OWNER’S CONSENT UNLAWFUL.



   It shall be unlawful to dump or place any garbage, refuse, ashes or
recyclables on any premises in the city without the consent of the owner of
the premises.



(Prior Code, § 7-8-8)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.14  UNLICENSED COLLECTOR HANDLING CURBSIDE RECYCLABLES UNLAWFUL.



   It shall be unlawful for any person other than a city collector, or a
collector licensed or registered with the city as herein provided, to remove,
displace, uncover, or otherwise disturb any recyclable materials placed at
the curb.



(Prior Code, § 7-8-9)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.15  DISPOSAL OF GARBAGE OTHER THAN IN INCINERATOR OR LANDFILL UNLAWFUL.



   It shall be unlawful to dispose of any garbage, refuse, brush, yard
waste or ashes anywhere in the city, excepting in an in-building incinerator
or other disposal device properly constructed and operated under local,
state, or federal law, or in a lawfully established landfill site. Material
not so properly disposed of shall be placed in containers for collection by
the city or licensed or registered collector.  Property owners or tenants of
residential units of a four-plex or less shall use the city's contracted
residential garbage collection service exclusively, and commercial and
industrial property owners shall use garbage collectors licensed or
registered by the city exclusively. All residential customers shall be billed
and shall pay for residential garbage collection in accordance with the
city's contract for garbage collection. In the event that the city is
required to take legal action to collect any fees provided in this section,
the city may add to the bill for collection its reasonable attorneys fees
incurred thereby.



(Prior Code, § 7-8-17)  (Ord. O-12-069, passed 12-11-2012; Ord. O-13-083,
passed 4-23-2013)   Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.16  ACCUMULATION OF OFFENSIVE SUBSTANCE PROHIBITED.



   No pile or deposit of manure, garbage, miscellaneous waste, refuse, of
any kind whatsoever, or accumulation of any offensive or nauseous substance,
shall be made within the limits of the city.



(Prior Code, § 7-8-5)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.17  PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE OF RESPONSIBILITY.



   The fact that garbage, refuse, ashes, or recyclables remain on any
occupant’s premises in the city in violation of this subchapter shall be
prima facie evidence that the occupant of the premises is responsible for the
violation of this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 7-8-19)




BRUSH AND YARD WASTE PICKUP




§ 50.30  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BRUSH.  Brown-stemmed branches, tree trunks not to exceed 60 inches in
length and four inches in diameter, and shrub prunings with large diameter
stems.



   YARD WASTE.  Leaves, flowers, prunings of small diameter,
green-stemmed shrubs, plant stalks, garden waste, and grass clippings.



(Prior Code, § 6-10-1) (Ord. O-12-068, passed 12-11-2012)



§ 50.31  YARD WASTE PICKUP.



   (A)   All yard waste from residential dwelling units within the city
shall be picked up as provided by the city's hauling contract.



   (B)   Yard waste to be picked up must be placed in a separate
special 32-gallon biodegradable Kraft paper bag, or in a toter as may be
provided or permitted by the city's hauling contract.



(Prior Code, § 6-10-2)  (Ord. O-12-068, passed 12-11-2012; Ord. O-16-188,
passed 12-13-2016)



§ 50.32  BRUSH PICKUP.



   (A)   All brush, as defined in § 50.30 above, will be picked up
without charge as long as it is tied in bundles being no more than two feet
in diameter, five feet in length, and weighing not more than 50 pounds. Small
twigs may be placed in Kraft bags or toters. 



   (B)   Brush will be picked up as provided by the city's hauling
contract, and must be placed at the curb by 7:00 a.m. on the day of pick-up.



(Prior Code, § 6-10-3) (Ord. O-12-068, passed 12-11-2012; Ord. O-16-188,
passed 12-13-2016)



§ 50.33  FULL TREE PERMIT.



   (A)   Residents of the city who wish to remove a tree or trees from
their property may have the city haul away the debris by purchasing a full
tree pickup permit at City Hall for a minimum of $25. A separate permit is
required for each full tree cut down and placed parallel at the curb. If the
homeowner’s work is to take place over an extended period of time, a
separate permit is required for each date the city picks up debris from in
front of the resident’s property.



   (B)   Residents who choose to not bundle smaller piles of brush or
shrubs may have the city haul away the debris by purchasing a non-bundled
brush permit for $15.



   (C)   Full tree pickup permits will not be issued to residents who
contract the removal of trees and brush. Contractors who remove trees shall
be responsible for removal and disposal of trees and brush.



(Prior Code, § 6-10-4)



§ 50.34  SPECIAL PICKUP.



   (A)   The city will pick up Christmas trees and wreaths placed on
the curb during the months of December and January. Tree stands must be
removed. Long evergreen garlands must be bundled as described in § 50.32 of
this subchapter.



   (B)   Special pickups due to storms will be announced as needed and
at the authorization of the Public Works Director.



(Prior Code, § 6-10-5)  (Ord. O-12-068, passed 12-11-2012)



§ 50.35  CITY COMPOST AREA USE.



   (A)   City departments may deposit brush and tree limbs at the city
compost area.



   (B)   Any dumping at the city compost area, except that which is
expressly authorized under this section or at the authorization of the City
Public Service Superintendent, is prohibited, and shall be deemed in
violation of this section.



   (C)   Upon meeting the requirements set forth herein, any private
business may use the city burn pile for disposal of trees, brush, and
shrubbery.



      (1)   The applicant must provide a certificate of liability
insurance in good standing in the amount of $1,000,000 naming the city as
also insured. The certificate will be kept on file at City Hall.  The
applicant must maintain a valid certificate and update the certificate every
six months.



      (2)   The applicant must complete a burn pile access permit
application for each location and customer for which they provide service.
The property owner/customer must sign and date the permit once the job has
been completed. Permit fee is $50 per location. High use applicants may
choose an annual permit for $300 with a $100 key deposit.  The key can be
kept by the applicant for one year.  The burn pile access permit is
available and shall be filed at City Hall.



      (3)   Once the permit application is completed and the permit
fee has been paid, the applicant will be issued a gate key to the burn pile
area. The key must be returned to City Hall or the yellow utilities payment
drop-box in the City Hall parking lot at the completion of each permit job,
and no later than 48 hours after issuance.



      (4)   The location of the applicant’s work must be within
the corporate limits of the city, with no exception.



      (5)   The city will accept trees, brush, and shrubs. Tree
trunk sections shall be no more than six feet in length. Tree trunk sections
over 24 inches in diameter shall be no more than six feet in length. Wood
chips are permitted. Whole shrubs are permitted. Grubbed out tree stumps are
prohibited. Stump grindings are prohibited.



   (D)   Any person or applicant deemed in violation of the provisions
of this policy, as stated below, shall risk loss of burn pile access
privileges:



      (1)   Lapse or suspension of liability insurance coverage;



      (2)   Failure to obtain brush pile access permit for each
customer or location;



      (3)   Failure to pay permit fee or any other bill owed to the
city;



      (4)   Disposal of materials other than acceptable items as
stated above;



      (5)   Disposal of any materials from locations or job sites
outside of city limits;



      (6)   Copying of burn pile area gate key;



      (7)   Failure to return gate key within 48 hours;



      (8)   If use of the permit is by any other party other than
the contractor that was issued the permit.



   (E)   The first violation of the provisions in division (D) above
will result in a verbal warning issued by the Public Works Director and
documented in the contractor’s file. A second violation will result in a
written warning issued by the Public Works Director and placed in the
contractor’s file. A third violation will result in permanent revocation of
the contractor’s burn pile access privileges, and subject the contractor to
a fine, as described in this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 6-10-6) (Am. Ord. O-12-036, passed 3-13-2012)



§ 50.99  PENALTY.



   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not
less than $25 per day nor more than $750 per day.



(Ord. O-13-092, passed 8-13-2013)



CHAPTER 51:  SEWERS



Section




General Provisions




   51.001   Use of public sewers required



   51.002   Permitted and non-permitted uses



   51.003   Authority of Chief Wastewater Operator



   51.004   Unlawful to damage sewage works



   51.005   Enforcement and compliance




Testing and Treatment




   51.020   Interceptors, preliminary treatment, and control manhole
required



   51.021   Industrial waste testing required




Building Sewers and Connections




   51.035   Owner and user liability



   51.036   Permit required; fee



   51.037   Installation and safety specifications



   51.037.5  Sanitary sewer system construction



   51.038   Sewage lift station




Sewer Service Outside City




   51.050   When service permissible



   51.051   Permit required; fee



   51.052   Disconnection by city permitted



   51.053   Owner responsible for expense and maintenance




Private Sewage Disposal




   51.065   Permitted in absence of public sewer



   51.066   Permit required; fee; requirements



   51.067   Discontinuance of use required




Sewer Service Charges




   51.080   Wastewater service charges



   51.081   Basic user charge



   51.082   Debt service charge



   51.083   Capital improvement charge



   51.084   Surcharge



   51.085   Review of charge



   51.086   Measurement of flow



 



   51.999   Penalty



   Appendix A:  Rate schedule




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 51.001  USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or
permit to be deposited, in any unsanitary manner on public or private
property within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city,
any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within
the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sewage or
other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with subsequent provisions of this subchapter.



   (C)   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to
construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other
facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.



   (D)   The owner of all the houses, buildings, or properties used for
human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes situated within
the city, and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there
is now located or may in the future be located any public sanitary sewer of
the city, is hereby required, at the owner’s expense, to install suitable
toilet facilities therein and to connect the facilities directly with the
proper public sewer, in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter,
within 90 days after date of official notice to do so, provided that the
public sewer is within 100 feet of the property line.



   (E)   The owner of the property, the occupant thereof, and the user
of the service, shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for the service
to the property. The service is furnished to the property by the city only
upon the condition that the owner of the property, occupant, and user of the
service are jointly and severally liable therefore to the city. Property
owners shall be responsible for maintaining and repairing sewer service lines
to the main sewer line.



(Prior Code, § 6-4-1)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.002  PERMITTED AND NON-PERMITTED USES.



   (A)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm
water, surface water, ground water roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any
sanitary sewer.



   (B)   Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be
discharged to the sewers which are specifically designated as storm sewers,
or to a natural outlet approved by the Public Service Superintendent.



   (C)   Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be
discharged on approval of the Public Service Superintendent to a storm sewer
or natural outlet.



   (D)   No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any of
the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:



      (1)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other
flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas;



      (2)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous
solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage
treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public
nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage
treatment plant;



      (3)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5, or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works; or



      (4)   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of size
capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference
with the proper operation of the sewage works, such as, but not limited to,
ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers,
tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair, and
fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers and the like,
either whole or ground by garbage grinders, grass clippings, weeds or other
vegetation.



   (E)   No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, the
following described substances, materials, waters, or wastes, if it appears
likely in the opinion of the Chief Wastewater Operator that the wastes can
harm either the sewers’ sewage treatment process or equipment, have an
adverse effect on the receiving stream, or can otherwise endanger life, limb,
public property, or constitute a nuisance.  In forming an opinion as to the
acceptability of these wastes, the Chief Wastewater Operator will give
consideration to factors such as the quantities of subject wastes in relation
to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the
sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage
treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment
plant, and maximum limits established by regulatory agencies. The substances
prohibited are:



      (1)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150
° F;



      (2)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous
materials, or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or
containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures
between 32 ° F and 150 ° F;



      (3)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The
installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of
three-fourths horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the
review and approval of the Plumbing Inspector;



      (4)   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron
pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solution, whether neutralized or not;



      (5)   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper,
zinc, or similar objectionable or toxic substances, or wastes exerting an
excessive chlorine requirement to the degree that any  material received in
the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits
established by the Chief Wastewater Operator for the materials;



      (6)   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste
or odor producing substances in concentrations exceeding limits which may be
established by the Chief Wastewater Operator, as necessary, after treatment
of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal, or
other public agencies of jurisdiction for the discharge to the receiving
waters;



      (7)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of half life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the Chief Wastewater
Operator in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations;



      (8)   Any wastes or waters having a pH in excess of 9.5;



      (9)   Any mercury or any of its compounds in excess of 0.0005
mg/l as Hg at any time except as permitted by the Chief Wastewater Operator
in compliance with applicable state and federal regulations;



      (10)   Any cyanide in excess of .005 mg/l at any time except
as permitted by the Chief Wastewater Operator in compliance with applicable
state and federal regulations;



      (11)   Materials which exert or cause:



         (a)   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids
(such as, but not limited to, fullers earth, lime slurries, and lime
residues), or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium
chloride and sodium sulfate);



         (b)   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited
to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions);



         (c)   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine
requirements in quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage
treatment works; and



         (d)   Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes
constituting slugs. SLUG shall mean discharge of water, sewage, or industrial
waste which, in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of low,
exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes and more than five
times the average 24-hour concentration of flows during normal operation.



      (12)   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not
amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes
employed, or are amenable to treatment only to the degree that the sewage
treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of agencies having
jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.



(Prior Code, § 6-4-2)  (Ord. O-13-076, passed 3-12-2013)   Penalty, see §
51.999



§ 51.003  AUTHORITY OF CHIEF WASTEWATER OPERATOR.



   (A)   If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be
discharged, to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or
possess the characteristics enumerated in § 51.002 and/or which are in
violation of the standards for pretreatment provided in 40 C.F.R. part 403,
June 26, 1978, and any amendments thereto, and which, in the judgment of the
Chief Wastewater Operator, may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage
works, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a
hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the Chief Wastewater Operator
may:



      (1)   Reject the wastes;



      (2)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for
discharge to the public sewers;



      (3)   Require control over the quantities and rates of
discharge; and/or



      (4)   Require payment to cover the added costs of handling and
treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges, under the
provisions of this subchapter.



   (B)   If the Chief Wastewater Operator permits the pretreatment or
equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and
equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the Chief Wastewater
Operator, and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes,
ordinances, and laws.



(Prior Code, § 6-4-3)



§ 51.004  UNLAWFUL TO DAMAGE SEWAGE WORKS.



   No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently
break, damage, destroy, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or
equipment which is a part of the sewage works.



(Prior Code, § 6-4-12)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.005  ENFORCEMENT AND COMPLIANCE.



   (A)   The Water and Sewer Superintendent and the Plumbing Inspector,
and other duly authorized employees of the city, the State Environmental
Protection Agency, and the United States Environmental Protection Agency,
bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter
all properties for the purposes of inspection, observations, measurement,
sampling, and testing, in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter.



   (B)   The Water and Sewer Superintendent and the Plumbing Inspector,
or their representative, shall have no authority to inquire into any
processes, including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper,
or other industries, beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind
and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste
treatment.



   (C)   While performing the necessary work on private properties
referred to in this section, the Water and Sewer Superintendent and the
Plumbing Inspector, or duly authorized employees of the city, the State
Environmental Protection Agency, and the United States Environmental
Protection Agency, shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises
established by the company, and the company shall be held harmless for injury
or death to the city employees, and the city shall indemnify the company
against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage
asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling
operating, except as may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to
maintain conditions as required in § 51.021.



   (D)   (1)   The Water and Sewer Superintendent and the Plumbing
Inspector, and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper
credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all private
properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the
purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying
within the easement.



      (2)   All entry and subsequent work, if any, on the easement
shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated
easement pertaining to the private property involved.



(Prior Code, § 6-4-13)




TESTING AND TREATMENT




§ 51.020  INTERCEPTORS, PRELIMINARY TREATMENT, AND CONTROL MANHOLE REQUIRED.



   (A)   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in
the opinion of the Water and Sewer Superintendent or the Plumbing Inspector,
they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease
in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful
ingredients; except, that interceptors shall not be required for private
living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and
capacity approved by the Water and Sewer Superintendent or the Plumbing
Inspector, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for
cleaning and inspection.



   (B)   Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are
provided, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective
operation by the owner at the owner’s expense.



   (C)   Each industry shall be required to install a control manhole
and, when required by the Water and Sewer Superintendent or the Plumbing
Inspector, the  owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole together with the
necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate
observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. The manhole, when
required, shall be accessibly and safely located and shall be constructed in
accordance with plans approved by the Water and Sewer Superintendent or the
Plumbing Inspector. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at the
owner’s expense and shall be maintained by the owner so as to be safe and
accessible at all times.



(Prior Code, § 6-4-4)



§ 51.021  INDUSTRIAL WASTE TESTING REQUIRED.



   (A)   The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer
carrying industrial wastes shall provide laboratory measurements, tests, and
analyses of waters and wastes to illustrate compliance with this subchapter
and any special conditions for discharge established by the city or
regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the discharge.



   (B)   The number, type, and frequency of laboratory analyses to be
performed by the owner shall be as stipulated by the city, but no less than
once per year, the industry must supply a complete analysis of the
constituents of the wastewater discharge to assure that compliance with
federal, state, and local standards are being met. The owner shall report the
results of measurements and laboratory analyses to the city at the times and
in the manner as prescribed by the city. The owner shall bear the expense of
all measurements, analyses, and reporting required by the city. At times as
deemed necessary, the city reserves the right to take measurements and
samples for analysis by an outside laboratory service.



   (C)   All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics
of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this subchapter shall be
determined in accordance with the latest edition of IEPA Division of
Laboratories Manual of Laboratory Methods, and shall be determined at the
control manhole provided, or, upon suitable samples taken at the control
manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control
manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the
public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling
shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of
constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards
to life, limb, and property. The particular analyses involved will determine
whether a 24-hour composite of all out falls of a property is appropriate, or
whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always,
BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from 24-hour composites of all
out falls, whereas pHs are determined from periodic grab samples.



   (D)   No statement contained in this section shall be construed as
preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any
industrial concern, whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or
character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment
therefore, in accordance with §§ 51.080 through 51.086 of this chapter, by
the industrial concern, provided the payments are in accordance with federal
and state guidelines for user charge system.



(Prior Code, § 6-4-5)




BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS




§ 51.035  OWNER AND USER LIABILITY.



   (A)   The owner of property, the occupant thereof, and the user of
the service shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for the service to
the property. The service is furnished to the property by the city only upon
the condition that the owner of the property, occupant, and user of service
are jointly and severally liable therefore to the city. Property owners shall
be responsible for maintaining and repairing sewer service lines from the
sewer main, including the tap at the main.



   (B)   All disposals by any person into the sewer system are unlawful
except those discharges in compliance with federal standards promulgated
pursuant to the Federal Act, and more stringent state and local standards.



(Prior Code, § 6-4-6)



§ 51.036  PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE.



   (A)   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections
with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance
thereof, without first obtaining a written permit from the Plumbing Inspector
approved by the Water and Sewer Superintendent.



   (B)   (1)   There shall be two classes of sewer permits:



         (a)   For residential wastewater service; and



         (b)   For commercial, institutional/governmental, or
industrial wastewater service.



      (2)   In either case, the owner or owner’s agent shall make
application on a special form furnished by the Water and Sewer Superintendent.



   (C)   The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans,
specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of
the Water and Sewer Superintendent. Industrial entities must provide
information describing its wastewater constituents, characteristics, and type
of activity. A fee of $100 shall be paid to the city at the time an
application for either a Class A or Class B sanitary sewer connection permit
is submitted to the city.



   (D)   A building sewer permit will only be issued, and a sewer
connection shall only be allowed, if it can be demonstrated that the
downstream sewerage facilities, including sewers, pump stations, and
wastewater treatment facilities, have sufficient reserve capacity to
adequately and efficiently handle the additional anticipated waste load.



(Prior Code, § 6-4-6)



§ 51.037  INSTALLATION AND SAFETY SPECIFICATIONS.



   (A)   All costs and expenses incident to the installation and
connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall
indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be
occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.



   (B)   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided
for every building, except where one building stands at the rear of another
on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to
the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the
building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building
and the whole considered as one building sewer.



   (C)   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new
buildings only when they are found on examination and testing by the Water
and Sewer Superintendent to meet all requirements of this subchapter.



   (D)   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a
building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the
pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the
requirements of the Building and Plumbing Code, or other applicable rules and
regulations of the city. In the absence of code provisions or in
amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate
specifications of the American Society of Testing Materials, Water Pollution
Control Federation Manual of Practice No. 9, and Standard Specifications for
Water and Sewer Main Construction in the state shall apply.



   (E)   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the
building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which
any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer,
sanitary sewage carried by the building drain shall be lifted by a means
which is approved in accordance with this section, and discharged to the
building sewer.



   (F)   No person(s) shall make connection of roof downspouts,
exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface
runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is
connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.



   (G)   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer
shall conform to the requirements of the Building and Plumbing Code or other
applicable rules and regulations of the city or the procedures set forth in
appropriate specifications of the American Society of Testing Materials,
Water Pollution Control Federal Manual of Practice No. 9, and Standard
Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in the state. All
connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the
prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the Water and Sewer
Superintendent before installation.



   (H)   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the
Water and Sewer Superintendent or the Plumbing Inspector when the building
sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The
connection shall be made under the supervision of the Plumbing Inspector, the
Water and Sewer Superintendent, or a designated representative.



   (I)   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be
adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public
from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property
disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner
satisfactory to the city and in accordance to the city code of ordinances.



(Prior Code, § 6-4-6)



§ 51.037.5  SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   Designed to meet or exceed all regulations of the state
statutes, State Environmental Protection Agency, and United States
Environmental Protection Agency in regard to sanitary sewer construction.



   (B)   Minimum sewer main specifications shall be SDR 26 PVC pipe
equivalent or better.



   (C)   Lift station design and location must be approved by the Chief
Wastewater Operator and the Water and Sewer Superintendent. Lift stations
shall be designed and constructed to be no less than five feet in diameter
and contain only submersible pumps.



   (D)   Service line extends from the sanitary sewer system to the lot
line of each lot.



   (E)   Service lines of each lot are clearly marked after completion
of the improvements.



   (F)   Drawings and plans for the proposed collection system must be
approved by the Chief Wastewater Operator and the Water and Sewer
Superintendent prior to construction.



   (G)   Any sewer not meeting a minimum depth of three feet shall be
insulated.



(Prior Code, § 4-1-10)  (Ord. O-15-138, passed 8-11-2015)



§ 51.038  SEWAGE LIFT STATION.



   (A)   A sewage lift station may be constructed by a person for
connection to the sewerage system of the city. The sewage lift station shall
be designed and constructed in accordance with all regulations of the state
statutes, the State Environmental Protection Agency, and the United States
Environmental Protection Agency. An application must be submitted to the
Water and Sewer Board, and the Water and Sewer Board must accept the design
prior to installation.



   (B)   The application must furnish information showing the contract
installed price, engineering data, construction design, operation manual, and
any other information from which the number of units of capacity of the lift
station can be determined. The unit of capacity is established as follows:



      (1)   Individual dwelling:  one unit;



      (2)   Commercial establishments:  two units;



      (3)   Motel or hotel:  one-third unit per rental space plus
one unit per permanent residence; and



      (4)   New subdivisions:  one unit per residential lot; two
units per commercial lot.



   (C)   The lift station and any easements shall be dedicated to the
city prior to acceptance of wastewater. All expenses, including legal
expenses incurred prior to dedication, are not reimbursable by the city, nor
chargeable to the city.



(Prior Code, § 6-4-10)




SEWER SERVICE OUTSIDE CITY




§ 51.050  WHEN SERVICE PERMISSIBLE.



   Any property located outside the city limits which is currently
connected to and serviced by the city’s sewer system shall be allowed to
continue to be so serviced, subject to the rate provisions of §§ 51.080
through 51.086 of this chapter, and subject to all other applicable city
ordinances and regulations.



(Prior Code, § 6-4-11)



§ 51.051  PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE.



   (A)   Any property contiguous to but located outside the corporate
limits of the city which is not currently connected to and serviced by the
city’s sewer system shall not be allowed to receive sewer service unless
and until the property is annexed into the city.



   (B)   Notwithstanding this prohibition, the city may supply sewer
service to any property located outside the corporate limits, and not
contiguous therewith, provided that all of the following conditions apply:



      (1)   There are sewer service mains currently adjacent to the
property or within the proximity that, in the discretion of the Water and
Sewer Superintendent of the city, it is reasonable to connect sewer service
lines to the property;



      (2)   The owner requesting connection to the city’s sewer
system obtains a permit and pays for the cost of the extension and connection
and any permit fees required by the city; and



      (3)   The owners of the property enter into an agreement to
annex to the city at the time the property does become contiguous to the
city, which agreement shall run with the land.



   (C)   The fees herein above provided shall be in addition to any
charge for inspection as heretofore or hereafter provided. All connections,
installations, and repairs shall be inspected and are required to conform to
like standards, both as to material and manner of installation, as
connections made within the city shall apply with equal force to connections
made or continued by virtue of this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 6-4-11)



§ 51.052  DISCONNECTION BY CITY PERMITTED.



   (A)   In the event that any owner of any property outside the limits
of the city, which property is presently or will be connected to the sewer
system of the city, fails to make application and be granted a permit, the
Water and Sewer Superintendent shall plug the sewer connection at the point
of entry to the city sewer system. The Water and Sewer Superintendent shall
also discontinue city’s water service.



   (B)   In the event that the Council determines at any time that the
sewer system is overloaded, the city may, and the right is reserved, upon
three months notice to the occupants of the property concerned, mailed to the
address to which bills are customarily addressed, close and disconnect from
the city sewer system any sewer serving property outside the limits of the
city. However, no disconnection for this reason shall be ordered for a period
of one year from and after the effective date of this subchapter.



   (C)   In the event any sewer improvement or replacement program is
undertaken by the city, either within the one-year period or after, the
financing of which is provided for either by a voluntary program or by the
levying of assessments upon property within the limits of the city, then
users of the sewer system outside the limits of the city shall be required to
pay a proportional share of the cost of the improvement or replacement
program, the share to be fixed as to each property serviced in a manner
substantially like the manner in which the amount assessed against property
within the limits of the city is fixed. However, in regard to property
outside the limits of the city, the determination of the Council of the city
as to the amounts payable from each property shall be final, and in the event
payment is not made in the manner and at the time fixed by the Council, water
and sewer service may be discontinued.



   (D)   In the event charges for sewage disposal are imposed within
the city, the charge as is provided shall automatically increase by the
amount of the charge made for like service within the city.



(Prior Code, § 6-4-11)



§ 51.053  OWNER RESPONSIBLE FOR EXPENSE AND MAINTENANCE.



   The city assumes no obligation for any sewer from the point of
connection with the city sewer system. All repairs, maintenance, easements,
connections, and extensions outside the limits of the city and including the
connection within the city limits necessary to connect to existing city’s
sewer system shall be at the expense of the owners of the properties served.



(Prior Code, § 6-4-11)




PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL




§ 51.065  PERMITTED IN ABSENCE OF PUBLIC SEWER.



   Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under § 51.001, the
building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system
complying with the provisions of § 51.066 of this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 6-4-7)



§ 51.066  PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE; REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Before commencement of construction of a private sewage
disposal system, the owner shall first meet any and all requirements of the
county. The owner will also obtain a written permit signed by a County Health
Official. The application for the permit shall be made on a form furnished by
the city, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications,
and other information as deemed necessary by the Plumbing Inspector, the
Water and Sewer Superintendent, or a County Health Official.



   (B)   A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become
effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the
County Health Official.



   (C)   The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private sewage
disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the State Private
Sewage Disposal Licensing Act and Code, and with the State Environmental
Protection Agency. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal
system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the
lot is less than 7,500 square feet.  No septic tank or cesspool shall be
permitted to discharge to any natural outlet.



   (D)   The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage
disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times and at no expense to
the city.



   (E)   No statement contained in this section shall be construed to
interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the County
Health Department.



(Prior Code, § 6-4-8)



§ 51.067  DISCONTINUANCE OF USE REQUIRED.



   (A)   At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property
served by a private sewage disposal system, a direct connection shall be made
to the public sewer in compliance with this subchapter.



   (B)   When a public sewer becomes available, the building sewer
shall be connected to the sewer within 60 days after notification by the
County Health Department that the private sewage disposal system is declared
nonfunctional. The private sewage disposal system shall be cleaned of sludge
and filled with clean bank run gravel or dirt.



(Prior Code, § 6-4-9)




SEWER SERVICE CHARGES




§ 51.080  WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGES.



   The wastewater service charge for the use of and for service supplied
by the wastewater facilities of the city shall consist of a basic user
charge, a debt service charge, a capital improvement charge, and applicable
surcharges.



(Prior Code, § 6-5-1)



§ 51.081  BASIC USER CHARGE.



   (A)   The basic user charge is levied on all users to recover the
operation and maintenance plus replacement (O, M and R) costs, and shall be
based on water usage, as recorded by water meters or sewage meters, for
wastes having the following normal domestic concentrations:



      (1)   A five day, 20 ° C biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) of
240 mg/l; and



      (2)   A suspended solids content of 243 mg/l.



   (B)   A basic user charge shall be computed as follows:



      (1)   Estimate the annual wastewater volume, pounds of BOD,
and pounds of SS to be treated;



      (2)   Estimate the projected annual revenue required to
operate and maintain the wastewater facilities, including a replacement fund
for the year, for all works categories;



      (3)   Proportion the estimated O, M and R costs to each user
class by volume, BOD, and SS;



      (4)   Proportion the estimated O, M and R costs to wastewater
facility categories by volume, BOD, and SS;



      (5)   Compute costs per 1,000 gallons for normal domestic
strength sewage; and



      (6)   Compute surcharge costs per pound for BOD and SS
concentrations in excess of normal domestic strengths.



(Prior Code, § 6-5-2)



§ 51.082  DEBT SERVICE CHARGE.



   The debt service charge is computed by apportioning the annual debt
service as a fixed charge per billing period.



(Prior Code, § 6-5-3)



§ 51.083  CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT CHARGE.



   The capital improvement charge is levied on users to provide for
capital improvements, extensions, or reconstruction of the sewage treatment
works. The capital improvement charge is computed by apportioning the annual
amount to be accrued as a fixed charge per billing period.



(Prior Code, § 6-5-4)



§ 51.084  SURCHARGE.



   (A)   A surcharge will be levied to all users whose waters exceed
the normal domestic concentrations of BOD and SS, as recorded by water meters
or sewage meters, for all wastes which exceed the 240 mg/l and 243 mg/l
concentration for BOD and SS, respectively.



   (B)   The concentration of wastes used for computing surcharges
shall be established by waste sampling. Waste sampling shall be performed as
often as may be deemed necessary by the Chief Wastewater Operator and shall
be binding as a basis for surcharges.



(Prior Code, § 6-5-5)



§ 51.085  REVIEW OF CHARGE.



   The adequacy of the wastewater and water service charge will be
reviewed not less often than annually by the City Council during the annual
budget preparation for the city. The wastewater and water service charges
shall be revised periodically to reflect a change in local capital costs,
operation, maintenance, and replacement costs.



(Prior Code, § 6-5-6)  (Ord. O-12-054, passed 7-10-2012)



§ 51.086  MEASUREMENT OF FLOW.



   (A)   The volume of flow used for computing basic user charges and
surcharges shall be the metered water consumption read to the lowest
increments of ten gallons.



   (B)   If the person discharging wastes into the public sewers
procures any part, or all, of their water from sources other than the
city’s waterworks system, and all or part of which is discharged into the
public sewers, then the person shall install and maintain, at their expense,
a water meter approved by the Water and Sewer Superintendent for the purpose
of determining the volume of water obtained from these other sources.



   (C)   Devices for measuring the volume of waste discharges may be
required by the Water and Sewer Superintendent if these volumes cannot
otherwise be determined from the metered water consumption records.



   (D)   Metering devices for determining the volume of waste shall be
installed, owned, and maintained by the person. Following approval and
installation, the meters may not be removed, unless service is canceled,
without the consent of the Water and Sewer Superintendent.



(Prior Code, § 6-5-8)



§ 51.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   (1)   Any person found to be violating any provision of
§§ 51.001 through 51.067 of this chapter, except § 51.004, shall be served
by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and
providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof.
The offender shall, within the period of time stated in the notice,
permanently cease all violations. The city may revoke any permit for sewage
disposal as a result of any violation of any provision of this chapter.



      (2)   Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the
time limit provided shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, on conviction
thereof, shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $750 for each
violation. Each day in which any violation shall continue shall be deemed a
separate offense.



      (3)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall become liable to the city by reasons of the violation.



(Prior Code, 6-4-14)



   (B)   Any person violating § 51.004 shall be subject to immediate
arrest under charge of disorderly conduct.



(Prior Code, § 6-4-12)



APPENDIX A:  RATE SCHEDULE



Schedule



      I.   Basic user rate



      II.   Fixed user rate



      III.   Unmetered user rate



      IV.   Surcharge rates



SCHEDULE I.  BASIC USER RATE.



   A basic user charge shall be applied to all users per monthly billing
period.  The basic user rates, copies of which are on file in the office of
the City Clerk, are adopted and incorporated as part of this code of
ordinances as fully as if set out at length herein.



(Prior Code, § 6-5-9)   (Ord. O-12-053, passed 7-10-2012; Ord. O-18-24,
passed 12-11-2018)



SCHEDULE II.  FIXED USER RATE.



   A fixed charge associated with debt service charges and capital
improvement charge is hereby established per billing period.  The fixed
charges, copies of which are on file in the office of the City Clerk, are
adopted and incorporated as part of this code of ordinances as fully as if
set out at length herein.



(Prior Code, § 6-5-10)   (Ord. O-12-053, passed 7-10-2012; Ord. O-18-24,
passed 12-11-2018)



SCHEDULE III.  UNMETERED USER RATE.



   (A)   All non-metered residential users of the wastewater facilities
shall pay a flat rate charge.



   (B)   In the event use of the wastewater facilities is determined by
the Chief Water Operator to be in excess of 6,000 gallons per month, the
Chief Water Operator may require the flat rate user to install metering
devices on the water supply or sewer main to measure the amount of service
supplied.



   (C)    The non-metered rates, copies of which are on file in the
office of the City Clerk, are adopted and incorporated as part of this code
of ordinances as fully as if set out at length herein.



(Prior Code, § 6-5-11)  (Ord. O-12-053, passed 7-10-2012; Ord. O-18-24,
passed 12-11-2018)



SCHEDULE IV.  SURCHARGE RATES.



   The rates of surcharges for BOD and SS, copies of which are on file in
the office of the City Clerk, are adopted and incorporated as part of this
code of ordinances as fully as if set out at length herein.



(Prior Code, § 6-5-12)



CHAPTER 52:  PUBLIC UTILITY BILLING



Section




General Provisions




   52.01   Financial reporting system



   52.02   Deposit of revenue



   52.03   Restrictions on water use




Service and Billing




   52.15   Application for service



   52.16   Deposit required



   52.17   Discontinuation of service; notice



   52.18   Processing fee



   52.19   Restrictive use of water



   52.20   Deferred payment arrangement for delinquent bills



   52.21   Liability for payment of services



   52.22   Billing cycle; mailing of bills



   52.23   Bills due; late charge; exception



   52.24   Taxes



   52.25   Budget billing



   52.26   Placement of lien for failure to pay bills



   52.27   Availability



   52.28   Monthly credit



   52.29   Application of credit



   52.30   Contract period



   52.31   Parameters for utility payments and billing



   52.32   Electronic meters required




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 52.01  FINANCIAL REPORTING SYSTEM.



   (A)   The City Treasurer shall establish a proper system of accounts
and shall keep proper books, records, and accounts in which complete and
current entries shall be made of all transactions relative to each of the
city’s public utility systems.



   (B)   The City Council shall cause to be made an audit by an
independent auditing firm of the books of the Municipal Electric Light and
Power Public Utility to show the receipts and disbursements of the Electric
Utility system. The audit shall be presented to the City Council within six
months of the end of the preceding fiscal year.



   (C)   The Water and Sewer Board shall cause to be made an audit by
an independent auditing firm of the books of the Waterworks System and
Sewerage System to show the receipts and disbursements of the waterworks
system and the sewerage system. The audit shall be presented to the City
Council within six months of the end of the preceding fiscal year.



   (D)   Audit reports shall be prepared in accordance with generally
accepted accounting principles for state and local government as provided in
the current edition of Governmental Accounting, Auditing, and Financial
Reporting, published by the Municipal Finance Officers Association.



   (E)   The State Environmental Protection Agency or the United States
Environmental Protection Agency, or their authorized representatives, shall
have access to any books, documents, papers, and records of the city which
are applicable to the city’s sewerage system user charges for the purpose
of making audit, examination, excerpts, and transcriptions thereof to insure
compliance with the special conditions relating to the city’s grant number
C172010-01.



(Prior Code, § 6-6-15)  (Ord. O-11-009, passed 6-22-2011)



§ 52.02  DEPOSIT OF REVENUE.



   (A)   All revenues and moneys derived from the operation of the
Municipal Electric Light and Power Public Utility shall be deposited in the
operating account of the Municipal Electric Light and Power Public Utility.



   (B)   All revenues and moneys derived from the operation of the
Waterworks System Utility shall be deposited in the operating account of the
Waterworks System Utility.



   (C)   All revenues and moneys derived from the operation of the
Sewerage System Utility shall be deposited in the operating account of the
Sewerage System Utility.



   (D)   All revenues and moneys shall be held by the City Treasurer
separate and apart from private funds and separate from all other funds of
the city, and all of the sum, without any deductions whatsoever, shall be
deposited into the respective accounts by the City Treasurer no later than
two days after receipt of the same.



   (E)   The treasurer shall administer the funds in every respect in
the manner provided by statute of the Revised Cities and Villages Act,
effective January, 1942.



(Prior Code, § 6-6-14)



§ 52.03  RESTRICTIONS ON WATER USE.



   (A)   The Mayor or Water and Sewer Superintendent shall have the
power whenever, in their opinion, the public good requires it, to proclaim
that no water from the waterworks system of the city shall be used for the
named purposes. It shall be unlawful for any person to use water from the
city waterworks system for the named purposed during the time when the Mayor
or the Water and Sewer Superintendent shall by proclamation have prohibited
its use.



   (B)   The Mayor or the Water and Sewer Superintendent of the city
may, whenever it is in the best interest of the city, shut off the water
either permanently or for the length of time as shall be deemed advisable.
When the city water is shut off, no damage shall be asked or claimed by
reason thereof by any user or heirs, assigns, tenants, or legal
representatives.



(Prior Code, § 6-6-5)




SERVICE AND BILLING




§ 52.15  APPLICATION FOR SERVICE.



   An application for initial electric or water service must be done in
person at the Municipal Utilities Office, 115 S. Oakwood Avenue. Service
shall be disconnected for lack of an application.



(Prior Code, § 6-6-1)  (Ord. 1936, passed 4-14-2009)



§ 52.16  DEPOSIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   Residential.  A deposit for electric service and a deposit
for water and sewer service shall be paid by a person requesting service at a
particular address in the city. The amount of each such deposit shall be such
amount as set by the utility payment policy then in force and effect at the
time of the request. The deposit is required of all persons requesting
service within the city. In addition, a such deposits shall be required for
all persons who currently receive utility service from the city and who fall
into one of the following categories:



      (1)   Have failed to pay a final utility bill at a prior
address;



      (2)   Have tendered payment of a utility bill that has been
dishonored or rejected for insufficient funds; or



      (3)   Have had a notice of shut-off physically delivered to
the property receiving service one or more times within the prior 12 months.
The deposit shall be paid in accordance with the utility payment policy then
in force and effect.



   (B)   Commercial.



      (1)   A deposit for electric service and a deposit for water
and sewer service shall be paid by all commercial or industrial customers
making an initial request for service from the city. The amount of the
deposit shall be such amount as set by the Utility Payment Policy then in
force and effect at the time of the request. The deposit is required from all
commercial and industrial customers and all deposit requirements must be
fulfilled within 120 days of commencing service.



      (2)   A deposit shall be required for all commercial customers
that began receiving service after December 31, 2013 and who have not made a
deposit with the city. The amount of the deposit shall be such amount as set
by the utility payment policy then in force and effect at the time of the
request.



      (3)   A deposit shall be required from any commercial
customers that began receiving service prior to January 1, 2014 that fall
into one of the following categories:



         (a)   Have failed to pay a final utility bill at a prior
address;



         (b)   Have delivered bad checks in payment of utility
bills; or



         (c)   Have had a notice of shut-off physically delivered
to the property receiving service. The amount of the deposit shall be such
amount as set by the utility payment policy then in force and effect at the
time of the request.



   (C)   Deposits.  All deposits provided for in this section shall be
deposited in interest-bearing accounts in accordance with city investment
policies. Refunds and adjustments to commercial deposits shall be made as per
the utility payment policy then in force and effect at the time of the
request.



   (D)   Representatives of the Municipal Utilities reserve the right
to investigate all requests for initial and reconnected service and shall
require a deposit as allowed in this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 6-6-2)  (Ord. 1936, passed 4-14-2009; Ord. O-14-122, passed
11-11-2014; Ord. O-01-01, passed 2-14-2017; Ord. O-17-31, passed 12-12-2017)



§ 52.17  DISCONTINUATION OF SERVICE; NOTICE.



   Electric and water service shall be terminated if any of the following
conditions occur:



   (A)   A customer fails to pay a deposit when required under the
provisions of this subchapter;



   (B)   A customer fails to pay for past services more than eight days
in arrears;



   (C)   A deferred payment arrangement cannot be reached with the
customer and owner, or the customer does not adhere to the deferred payment
arrangement;



   (D)   Nonpayment for unmetered electric or water service;



   (E)   Failure, after written notice has been delivered mailed to the
customer’s address in which a non-operating or faulty meter is located, to
permit the city physical access to install a replacement meter or to repair a
meter;



   (F)   User’s property has been determined unsafe by any of the
city’s inspectors or the City Fire Chief;



   (G)   A customer obtains electric or water service by fraudulent
means or submitted an application which contained misrepresentation,
falsifications, or material omission of requested information of the
applicant; or



   (H)   Wherein any connection in violation of the provisions of this
subchapter is known to exist.



(Prior Code, § 6-6-3)  (Ord. 1936, passed 4-14-2009; Ord. O-14-122, passed
11-11-2014; Ord. O-17-03, passed 1-10-2017; Ord. O-17-31, passed 12-12-2017;
Ord. O-18-05, passed 6-12-2018)



§ 52.18  PROCESSING FEE.



   A processing fee for disconnection of service shall be charged when an
account reaches shut-off status as defined in the utility payment policy and
in such amounts as provided therein.



(Prior Code, § 6-6-4)  (Ord. 1936, passed 4-14-2009; Ord. O-17-31, passed
12-12-2017)



§ 52.19  RESTRICTIVE USE OF WATER.



   (A)   The Mayor or City Administrator shall have the power whenever,
in his or her opinion, the public good requires it to proclaim that no water
from the waterworks system of the city shall be used for the named purposes.
It shall be unlawful for any person to use water from the city waterworks
system for the named purposed during the time when the Mayor or the City
Administrator shall by proclamation have prohibited its use.



   (B)   The Mayor or the City Administrator of the city may, whenever
it is in the best interest of the city, shut off the water either permanently
or for a length of time as shall be deemed advisable. When the city water is
shut off no damage shall be asked or claimed by reason thereof by any user or
heirs, assigns, tenants, or legal representatives.



(Prior Code, § 6-6-5)  (Ord. O-17-31, passed 12-12-2017)



§ 52.20  DEFERRED PAYMENT ARRANGEMENT FOR DELINQUENT BILLS.



   Customers may request a deferred payment arrangement for delinquent
bills in accordance with the utility payment policy then in force and effect.



(Prior Code, § 6-6-6)  (Ord. 1936, passed 4-14-2009; Ord. O-17-31, passed
12-12-2017)



§ 52.21  LIABILITY FOR PAYMENT OF SERVICES.



   The owner of the premises, the occupant thereof, and the user of the
service shall each be jointly and severally liable to pay for the service to
the premises, and the service is furnished to the premises by the city only
upon the condition that the owner of the premises, occupant, and user of the
services are jointly and severally liable therefore to the city.



(Prior Code, § 6-6-7)  (Ord. O-17-31, passed 12-12-2017)



§ 52.22  BILLING CYCLE; MAILING OF BILLS.



   Charges for utility services and billing for utility services shall be
as per the utility payment policy then in force and effect.



(Prior Code, § 6-6-9)  (Ord. 1936, passed 4-14-2009; Ord. O-17-31, passed
12-12-2017)



§ 52.23  BILLS DUE; LATE CHARGE; EXCEPTION.



   (A)   A bill will be due and payable as per the utility payment
policy then in force and effect.



   (B)   A penalty charge of 1.5% per month times any unpaid amount
due, excluding taxes, shall be added to the billed amount to all bills not
paid by the due date.



(Prior Code, § 6-6-10)  (Ord. 1936, passed 4-14-2009; Ord. O-17-09, passed
3-14-2017; Ord. O-17-31, passed 12-12-2017)



§ 52.24  TAXES.



   All taxes or charges imposed or levied by any legally empowered taxing
body, and which taxes or charges have been ordered by the City Council, shall
be included on the bill.



(Prior Code, § 6-6-11)  (Ord. O-17-31, passed 12-12-2017)



§ 52.25  BUDGET BILLING.



     Customers may request and enter into budget billing agreements with
the city as per the utility payment policy then in force and effect.



(Prior Code, § 6-6-12)  (Ord. O-17-31, passed 12-12-2017)



§ 52.26  PLACEMENT OF LIEN FOR FAILURE TO PAY BILLS.



   Whenever a bill for public utility service charges remains unpaid after
the due date, the City Administrator shall cause a statement of lien claims
to be filed with the County Recorder of Deeds. The statement of lien claims
shall be filed in accordance with the most current federal and state
regulations relating to lien claims.



(Prior Code, § 6-6-13)  (Ord. 1936, passed 4-14-2009; Ord. O-17-31, passed
12-12-2017)



§ 52.27  AVAILABILITY.



   (A)   This rate is available only to new commercial or industrial
loads which begin receiving service after July 1, 2010, at an existing
facility served, or previously served, by the City of Geneseo which has been
vacant for at least six months.  This rate is available in conjunction with
service under any of the city’s commercial or industrial electric rate
schedules.



   (B)   Any customer desiring to receive service under this rate shall
provide written application to the city of such desire.  Such notice shall
provide the city with information concerning the load to be served and the
customers’  facilities and shall provide the basis of the city
representation that the characteristics of the load will meet the minimum
eligibility requirements of the electric rate schedule to which this rate
applies.



   (C)   All terms and conditions of the electric rate schedule
applicable to the customer shall apply to service supplied to the customer
except as modified by this rate.



(Ord. 1967, passed 4-13-2010)



§ 52.28  MONTHLY CREDIT.



   The customer will receive a monthly credit on the bill calculated on
the then-effective electric rate.  The schedule of monthly credits will be
calculated as described below in § 52.29.



(Ord. 1967, passed 4-13-2010)



§ 52.29  APPLICATION OF CREDIT.



   Beginning with the date on which service under the then-effective
electric rate is to commence for the eligible load, a monthly credit based on
the following schedule will be applied to the total bill, including basic
service and monthly minimum $/meter, demand charges, energy charges excluding
other applicable rates and special charges, if any.



      Period         Discount



      Months 1-12      20%



      Months 13-24      10%



(Ord. 1967, passed 4-13-2010)



§ 52.30  CONTRACT PERIOD.



   Prior to receiving service under this rate, the customer must enter
into an agreement to purchase electricity from the city for a minimum period
of five years.  Either party can terminate the agreement at the end of the
original term upon 60 days prior written notice. The agreement is made a part
hereof and is attached as Exhibit A to the ordinance codified herein.



(Ord. 1967, passed 4-13-2010)



§ 52.31  PARAMETERS FOR UTILITY PAYMENTS AND BILLING.



   The budget billing, payment arrangements, disconnects, ACH policy,
deposits, processing fee, billing cycle/mailing of bills, bills due/late
charge/exception, bad payments and initial service outlined in Exhibit A to
Ordinance O-17-30, are incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein.



(Ord. O-17-30, passed 12-12-2017)



§ 52.32  ELECTRONIC METERS REQUIRED.



   Any customer who refuses to permit the city to install a meter of the
type selected by the city as part of the city’s billing system for either
electric or water service, and thereby causes the city to use methods
different from those of its selected system to read such a meter to determine
consumption amounts, whether for electric or water service, shall be charged
an additional $20 per reading.  Should the existing meter fail to accurately
meter consumption then, upon two days notice delivered to the address at
which the failing or faulty meter is located, should the customer continue to
refuse to permit the city to install a meter of the type selected by the city
such customer shall be subject to disconnection from that utility service
until the new meter of the type selected by the city is installed.



(Ord. O-18-05, passed 6-12-2018)



CHAPTER 53:  WATER



Section




General Provisions




   53.01   Meter required for use of city water



   53.02   Meter service fee



   53.03   Tapping fee; prerequisites and requirements



   53.04   Cross-connection control



   53.05   Owner and user liability



   53.06   City permitted to supply outside of city limits



   53.07   Leakage



   53.08   Special requirement circumstances



   53.09   Public safety



   53.10   Water distribution system construction



   53.11   Fire protection system construction



   53.12   Billing rates




Community Well Protection




   53.20   Purpose



   53.21   Definitions



   53.22   Prohibited conduct



   53.23   Waivers, exceptions and minimal hazard certificates



   53.24   Exclusion




Groundwater




   53.35   Definitions



   53.36   Use of groundwater as potable water supply



   Appendix A:  Rate schedule



Cross-reference:



   Plumbing Code, see Ch. 152




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 53.01  METER REQUIRED FOR USE OF CITY WATER.



   (A)   All water obtained in any way from the city waterworks system,
except when drawn from fire hydrants by officers of the City Fire Protection
District or employees of the city, shall pass through a water meter between
the water mains of the city and the outlet of the service pipe through which
water is obtained for use.



   (B)   The Water and Sewer Superintendent may permit the obtainment
of city water without passing through a meter for the following
circumstances, provided the conditions set forth are met:



      (1)   The filling of any movable water tank from the
waterworks system, provided that the rate established is paid before the
filling of the tank; and



      (2)   The use of city water for training sessions of the City
Fire Protection District, provided the Fire Chief, or a ranking
representative, shall notify the Water and Sewer Superintendent of the time
and place of the planned training exercise and obtain written authorization
from the Water and Sewer Superintendent.



(Prior Code, § 6-2-3)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 53.02  METER SERVICE FEE.



   (A)   A service charge for the cost of the meter and for the cost of
installing a water meter shall be paid for initial installations.



   (B)   There shall be placed in all service pipes immediately within
the wall of the building supplied, a brass stop and waste cock before the
meter; also, a brass shut-off valve on discharge side of the meter. The meter
is to be set in a horizontal position, and shall be placed in a place easily
accessible, and at least eight inches from the outside wall of the building,
and where the water in the same will not freeze. All pipe shall be free from
all accumulation of all kinds before the same are attached to meter and the
meter shall be sealed. No meter, or the seal thereon, shall be removed
without permission from the Water Department. No by-pass or T shall be
installed in the service pipes between the shut-off box and the meter.



   (C)   All damage done to meters that have been installed which is
caused by negligence or misconduct of any person other than city employees
shall be paid by the owners of the premises.



   (D)   Whenever the use of water is discontinued, the city shall have
the right to remove the meter. If the owner of the premises desires again to
use water, the owner shall have a meter installed in the manner of an initial
installation. If a user is requesting to have the water service shut off
after seasonal occupancy, the city will shut the service off and may remove
the meter. Upon re-occupancy, at the user’s request, the city will turn the
water service back on and install a meter if one was removed. This seasonal
service is offered free of charge as an attempt by the Water Department to
decrease the number of weather related water breaks.



   (E)   Whenever a user states that a water meter is not registering
properly, the following shall apply: 



      (1)   The Water and Sewer Superintendent  will make one
complimentary test and inspection of the meter within a three-year period;



      (2)   The user will be charged $40 for any test in excess of
the one complimentary test, should the meter be found to be accurate within
2%. Any additional test may be requested, and a fee of actual cost shall be
charged as applicable.



   (F)   If a meter fails to register correctly, then when the Water
and Sewer Superintendent can determine the amount of the inaccuracy, the
Water and Sewer Superintendent shall adjust the user’s current bill. When
the amount of inaccuracy can not be determined, then the bill shall be
determined by using the previous year’s consumption for the month in
question times the rates for water currently in effect.



(Prior Code, § 6-2-5)



§ 53.03  TAPPING FEE; PREREQUISITES AND REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to dig up or into city streets, alleys,
or property of the city for the purpose of tapping any of the water mains
without first obtaining a permit. It shall be unlawful for any person, either
with or without a permit, to do so except upon the terms and conditions
contained in this section.



   (B)   The Water Department may, in the performance of their duties,
tap into water mains without a permit.



   (C)   A permit fee of $100 shall be collected for each water system
connection. For any connection which serves a building with more than one
living unit, except condominium complex, a permit fee of $100 for the first
unit plus a fee of $50 per additional unit and for any additional unit added
within an 18-month period from issuance of a permit, shall be collected.
However, a $100 fee for any unit added after the 18-month period shall be
collected. Each unit of a condominium complex is a separate building and
requires a permit for each. The City Treasurer shall deposit all fees
collected into the Water operating account. Permits for water system
connection shall be issued by the Plumbing Inspector.



   (D)   A permit shall not be granted to tap, or cause to be tapped,
any water main of the city for the acquisition of water from the waterworks
system of the city to anyone who is not the actual and bona fide owner of the
property.



   (E)   A licensed plumber shall perform the work of tapping or
connecting with any water mains of the city. The licensed plumber may have
helpers assist them in the work.



   (F)   Licensed plumbers pay to the city the cost of repairs of all
damages to the city’s water mains, hydrants, fixtures, equipment, or to any
part of the city’s waterworks system, and any other expenses the city may
incur whenever the damages are the result of the improper or unskillful
workmanship or doing of any work performed. The city may avail itself to the
plumber’s bond, but shall not be limited in its recovery against the
plumber or property owner by the amount of the bond.



   (G)   All trenches, unions, joints, fixtures, and attachments in any
way connected with the waterworks system of the city shall be inspected by
the Water and Sewer Superintendent. However, the Water and Sewer
Superintendent  may designate the Plumbing Inspector to make inspections.
Inspections shall be made before the work is covered, hidden from view, or
used for obtaining water from the waterworks system. If the workmanship is
determined to be defective, the defect shall be corrected.



   (H)   Saddles shall be supported by four inch cement block or
equivalent under the direct supervision of the Water and Sewer Superintendent
or the Plumbing Inspector.



   (I)   No white or red lead shall be used on any joint. Service taps
shall be made at a 45-degree angle between horizontal and vertical.



   (J)   City water mains must be tapped in the body, and in no case
nearer than 18 inches to the joints of the mains, and no two taps shall be
placed in any one water main closer than 18 inches of each other.



   (K)   All service pipes shall be laid not less than five feet below
the established surface grade at all points of all streets, alleys, or public
property of the city where a surface grade is now or shall be hereafter
established, and at least five feet below the surface of the ground at all
points.



   (L)   No pipe shall be used except type K copper pipe for two inch
or smaller from the water main to the shut off, and for greater than two
inch, PVC may be used from the water main to the shut off.



   (M)   All work performed shall be done in the best and most approved
manner known for doing such work and shall be in compliance with city code
ordinance. Materials, fixtures, and appliances used in so doing shall be the
best quality for the purpose for which the same are used.



   (N)   When the owner of any real property which does not abut upon a
street in which there is laid a water main of the city wants to connect the
property with the water main, the owner shall apply to the Water and Sewer
Superintendent  for the connection. All mains shall be cement lined ductile
or C900 PVC or equivalent AWWA specification. Underground copper shall be
connected with flare or compression type fittings and all mains shall be laid
with at least five feet of cover.



   (O)   Water service lines for condominium complexes shall have
separate water service lines of at least one inch for each condominium.



   (P)   Water service lines for duplexes and apartment buildings may
have a common water service line; however, the type of building must have at
least the water service line size indicated as follows:



 


Building Type

 

Water Service Line Size



Duplex/two-unit apartment
 

1 inch service line



Tri-plex/three-unit apartment
 

1.5 inch service line



Four-plex/four-unit apartment
 

1.5 inch service line



More than four
 

2 inch service line




 



   (Q)   The common service line must be located in such a manner as to
facilitate a meter manifold and to provide easy access for the city to read
and service meters.



(Prior Code, § 6-2-6)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 53.04  CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL.



   (A)   If, in accordance with the State Plumbing Code, or in the
judgment of the Water and Sewer Superintendent, an approved backflow
prevention device is necessary for the safety of the public water supply
system, the Water and Sewer Superintendent will give notice to the water user
to install an approved device immediately.



   (B)   The water user shall, at the owner’s expense, install an
approved device at a location and in a manner in accordance with the State
Plumbing Code, State Environmental Protection Agency, and all applicable
local regulations, and shall have inspections and tests made of approved
devices as required by the State Plumbing Code and local regulations.



   (C)   No person, firm, or corporation shall establish, or permit to
be established, or maintain, or permit to be maintained, any connection
whereby a private, auxiliary, or emergency water supply other than the
city’s water supply enter the supply or distribution system, unless the
private, auxiliary, or emergency water supply and the method of connection
and use of the supply shall have been approved by the Water and Sewer
Superintendent and the State Environmental Protection Agency.



   (D)   It shall be the duty of the Chief Water Operator to cause
surveys and investigations to be made of industrial and other properties
served by the public water supply to determine whether actual or potential
hazards to the public water supply may exist. Such surveys and investigations
shall be made a matter of public record and shall be repeated at least every
two years, or as often as the Public Works Director shall deem necessary.
Records of such surveys shall be maintained and available for review for a
period of at least five years.



   (E)   The approved cross-connection control device inspector shall
have the right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a
connection to the public water supply or distribution system of the City of
Geneseo for the purpose of verifying the presence or absence of
cross-connections, and  the Chief Water Operator or his or her authorized
agent shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time any property
served by a connection to the public water supply or distribution system of
the City of Geneseo for the purpose of verifying information submitted by the
owner, lessees or occupants of any property so served. The owner, lessees or
occupants of any property so served shall furnish to the Chief Water Operator
any information which he or she may request regarding the piping system or
systems or water use on such property. The refusal of such information, when
demanded, shall, within the discretion of the Chief Water Operator, be deemed
evidence of the presence of improper connections as provided in this section.



   (F)   The Chief Water Operator of the City of Geneseo is hereby
authorized and directed to discontinue, after reasonable notice to the
occupant thereof, the water service to any property wherein any connection in
violation of the provisions of this section is known to exist, and to take
such other precautionary measures as he or she may deem necessary to
eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water supply distribution
mains. Water service to such property shall not be restored until such
conditions have been eliminated or corrected in compliance with the
provisions of this section, and until a reconnection fee of $50 is paid to
the City of Geneseo. Immediate disconnection with verbal notice can be
effected when the Chief Water Operator is assured that there is imminent
danger of harmful contamination or pollution of the public water supply,
provided that, in the reasonable opinion of the Chief Water Operator or the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, such action is required to prevent
actual or potential contamination or pollution of the public water supply.
Neither the public water supply, the Chief Water Operator, or its agents or
assigns shall be liable to any customer for any injury, damages nor lost
revenue which may result from termination of the customer’s water supply in
accordance with terms of this section, whether or not said termination was
with or without notice.



   (G)   The consumer responsible for back siphoned material or
contamination through backflow, if contamination of the potable water supply
system occurs through an illegal cross-connection or an improperly installed,
maintained or repaired device , or a device which has been bypassed, must
bear the cost of cleanup of the potable water supply system.



(Prior Code, § 6-2-7)  (Ord. O-14-112, passed 10-14-2014) Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 53.05  OWNER AND USER LIABILITY.



   (A)   The owner of property, the occupant thereof, and the user of
the service shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for the service to
the property. The service is furnished to the property by the city only upon
the condition that the owner of the property, occupant, and user of the
service are jointly and severally liable therefore to the city. Property
owners shall be responsible for maintaining and repairing water service
lines, from and including, the shut-off box to the meter.  No refunds shall
be made to customers in the event of problems, including break of the water
lines.  This shall include no refunds on the sewer portion of the utility
bill, even if the water did not go through the sanitary sewer system.



   (B)   The city shall own and maintain all water meters located on
the property. Upon the initial installation of the meter, the owner of the
property shall pay to the city an installation/service charge to be
established by the city. Only duly authorized representatives of the Water
and Sewer Department are permitted to remove meters from property.



   (C)   The owner or developer of any site shall be responsible for
the installation and maintenance of any necessary booster equipment needed to
maintain the needed pressures in the improvements located on the sites.



   (D)   The city is not responsible for insufficient water pressure.
Applications to use water from the water mains of the city shall be made with
the express understanding that the city is not responsible for providing
adequate water pressure to sites where natural conditions or the type of
improvements located on the sites creates a situation where the water
pressure is not sufficient for the needs of existing or proposed improvements.



   (E)   Any user of the city’s water system is responsible for
backsiphoned material or contamination through backflow, if contamination of
the potable water supply system occurs through an illegal cross-connection or
an improperly installed, maintained, or repaired device, or a device which
has been bypassed, and must bear the cost of clean up of the potable water
supply system.



(Prior Code, § 6-2-1)  (Ord. O-12-050, passed 7-10-2012)



§ 53.06  CITY PERMITTED TO SUPPLY OUTSIDE OF CITY LIMITS.



   (A)   Any property located outside the city limits which is
currently connected to and serviced by the city’s waterworks system shall
be allowed to continue to be so serviced, subject to the rate provisions of
Appendix A of this chapter, and subject to all other applicable city
ordinances and regulations.



   (B)   Any property contiguous to but located outside the corporate
limits of the city, which is not currently connected to and serviced by the
city’s waterworks system, shall not be allowed to receive water unless and
until the property is annexed into the city. Notwithstanding this
prohibition, the city may supply water to any property located outside the
corporate limits, and not contiguous therewith, provided that all of the
following conditions apply:



      (1)   There are water service mains currently adjacent to the
property or within the proximity that in the discretion of the Water and
Sewer Superintendent of the city, it is reasonable to connect water service
lines to the property;



      (2)   The owner requesting connection to the city’s
waterworks system obtains a permit and pays for the cost of the extension and
connection and any permit fees required by the city; and



      (3)   The owners of the property enter into an agreement to
annex to the city at the time the property does become contiguous to the
city, which agreement shall run with the land.



(Prior Code, § 6-2-2)



§ 53.07  LEAKAGE.



   (A)   Whenever a leak occurs between the shut-off box and the meter,
the leak shall be immediately reported by the property owner to the Water and
Sewer Department.



   (B)   Property owners shall be responsible for maintaining and
repairing of water service lines from, and including, shut-off box to meter.



(Prior Code, § 6-2-4)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 53.08  SPECIAL REQUIREMENT CIRCUMSTANCES.



   (A)   Any subdivision which shall use the facilities of the city for
its water supply, and, which by reason of its elevation or other natural
conditions of the site of the subdivision, does not have adequate water
pressure for the uses the property is zoned, then the plat of any subdivision
shall have affixed to it a notice stating that any improvements located in
the subdivision may require equipment to boost the water pressure for use in
the improvements. Furthermore, the notice shall state that the responsibility
and expense for the booster equipment shall be the responsibility of the
recorded owner of the property and shall not be the responsibility of the
city.



   (B)   If a meter is used in connection with a steam boiler, or under
any conditions where it is exposed to a back pressure, the same must be
protected by a dual check valve placed between the outlet of the meter and
the back pressure.



   (C)   In all cases where service pipes are abandoned, it shall be
the responsibility of the property owner to shut off and disconnect, or have
shut off and disconnected, the water at the shut-off box between the water
mains and the premises. The disconnected service is then required to be
inspected by the Water and Sewer Superintendent.



   (D)   No cross-connection with any cistern, well, or other supply
shall be allowed in the city water system.



(Prior Code, § 6-2-8)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 53.09  PUBLIC SAFETY.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Water and Sewer Superintendent to
have surveys and investigations made of commercial, industrial, and other
properties served by the public water supply to determine whether actual or
potential hazards to the public water supply may exist. The surveys and
investigations shall be made a matter of public record and shall be repeated
at least every two years, or as often as the Water and Sewer Superintendent
shall deem necessary. Records of the surveys shall be maintained and
available for review for a period of at least five years.



   (B)   The cross-connection control device inspector shall, in the
course of his or her duties and inspections, make all reasonable efforts to
obtain the consent of the owner or occupant of the premises for the
inspection. If the consent cannot be obtained and the cross-connection
control device inspector has probable cause for the necessity of the
inspection, he or she shall contact the City Attorney for the purpose of
obtaining a search warrant.



(Prior Code, § 6-2-9)



§ 53.10  WATER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   All regulations of the state statutes, State Environmental
Protection Agency, and United States Environmental Protection Agency, shall
be complied with in regard to water main construction.



   (B)   Designed to provide a minimum water pressure of 35 pounds per
square inch in the top floor of every structure or building to be constructed.



   (C)   Construction will not commence until grade is within four
inches of final grade.



   (D)   Water mains of ductile iron pipe cement lined, or of PVC SDR
18 (C900) or (C909) and non-conductive material must have a properly
installed tracer wire.



   (E)   Diameter of water mains shall not be less than six inches.



   (F)   All water mains shall be looped.



   (G)   Service lines of one-inch minimum type K copper.



   (H)   Service line extends from the water main to the lot line of
each lot.



   (I)   Service lines of each lot are clearly marked after completion
of the improvements.



   (J)   Drawings and plans for the proposed distribution system must
be approved by the Water and Sewer Superintendent prior to construction.



   (K)   All parts, components, and accessories such as pipe, valve
boxes, bolts, glands, saddles, curb boxes and the like, must be American made
and approved by the Water and Sewer Superintendent prior to construction.



(Prior Code, § 4-1-8)  (Ord. 1929, passed 1-13-2009; Ord. O-15-138, passed
8-11-2015)



§ 53.11  FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEM CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   Designed to provide minimum flow of 600 gallons/minute at each
hydrant.



   (B)   Fire hydrants to include auxiliary valves and valve boxes.



   (C)   Installed at intervals not to exceed 400 feet.



   (D)   Located not less than four feet from the edge of the
street’s or alley’s pavement.



   (E)   All hydrants shall be American made (Mueller or city approved
hydrant) of the steamer type and approved by the Water and Sewer
Superintendent prior to construction.



(Prior Code, § 4-1-9)  (Ord. O-15-138, passed 8-11-2015)



§ 53.12  BILLING RATES.



   The water and sewer rates for the city shall be set and established by
resolution adopted by the corporate authorities of the city from time to time.



(Ord. O-16-175, passed 9-27-2016)




COMMUNITY WELL PROTECTION




§ 53.20  PURPOSE.



   Pursuant to the authority conferred by ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-125-4,
ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5, §§ 14.2 and 14.3, and ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 7-4-2,
Municipal Property Outside Corporate Limits, and in the interest of securing
the public health, safety, and welfare, to preserve the quality and quantity
of groundwater and resources in order to assure a safe and adequate water
supply for present and future generations, and to preserve groundwater
resources currently in use and those aquifers having a potential for future
use as a public water supply, the provisions of this subchapter shall apply
to all properties located within the minimum setback zone established under
§ 14.2 of the Environmental Protection Act (ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5, § 14.3)
and this subchapter, and the maximum setback zone established under § 14.3
of the Act (ILCS  Ch. 415, Act 5, § 14.3) and this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 6-2-10)



§ 53.21  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Except as defined below, the definition of words or terms in this subchapter
shall be the same as those used in the Act and the State Ground Water
Protection Act (ILCS Ch. 415, Act 55, §§ 1 et seq.).



   ACT.  The Environmental Protection Act (ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5, §§ 1 et
seq.).



   AGENCY.  The State Environmental Protection Agency.



   BOARD.  The State Pollution Control Board.



   MAXIMUM SETBACK ZONE.  The area around a community water supply well
established under § 14.3 of the Act and this subchapter, and described in
Appendix B of Ordinance No. 1534.



   MINIMUM SETBACK ZONE.  The area around a community water supply well
established under § 14.2 of the Act and this subchapter, and described in
Appendix B of Ordinance No. 1534.



(Prior Code, § 6-2-10)



§ 53.22  PROHIBITED CONDUCT.



   Except as provided in §§ 53.23 and 53.24 of this subchapter, no
person shall place a new potential primary source, new potential secondary
source, or new potential route within the minimum setback zone.



(Prior Code, § 6-2-10)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 53.23  WAIVERS, EXCEPTIONS AND MINIMAL HAZARD CERTIFICATES.



   (A)   If, pursuant to § 14.2(b) of the Act, the owner of a new
potential primary source, new potential secondary source, or new potential
route is granted a waiver by the Agency, the owner shall be deemed to have a
waiver to the same extent from Section C, paragraph 1.



   (B)   If, pursuant to § 14.2(c) of the Act, the owner of a new
potential primary source (other than landfilling or land treating), new
potential secondary source, or new potential route is granted an exception by
the Board, the owner shall be deemed to have an exception to the same extent
from Section C, paragraph 1.



   (C)   If, pursuant to § 14.2(c) of the Act, the owner of a new
potential primary source (other than landfilling or land treating) is granted
an exception by the Board, the owner shall be deemed to have an exception to
the same extent from Section C, paragraph 2.



   (D)   If, pursuant to § 14.5 of the Act, the owner of a new
potential primary source, new potential secondary source, or new potential
route is issued a certificate of minimal hazard by the Agency, the owner
shall not be subject to Section C, paragraph 1 to the same extent that the
owner is not subject to § 14.2(d) of the Act.



(Prior Code, § 6-2-10)



§ 53.24  EXCLUSION.



   Section C, paragraph 1, shall not apply to new common sources of
sanitary pollution as specified pursuant to § 17 of the Act and the
regulations adopted thereunder by the Agency; however, no such common sources
may be located within the applicable minimum distance from a community water
supply well specified by the regulations.



(Prior Code, § 6-2-10)  Penalty, see § 10.99




GROUNDWATER




§ 53.35  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PERSON.  Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
limited liability company, corporation, association, joint stock company,
trust, estate, political subdivision, or any other legal entity, or their
legal representatives, agents, or assigns.



   POTABLE WATER.  Any water used for human or domestic consumption,
including, but not limited to, water used for drinking, bathing, swimming,
washing dishes, or preparing foods.



(Prior Code, § 6-2-11)



§ 53.36  USE OF GROUNDWATER AS POTABLE WATER SUPPLY.



   The use, or attempt to use, as a potable water supply, groundwater from
within the corporate limits of the city by the use, installation or drilling
of wells, or by any other method, is hereby prohibited at any property that
is within 500 feet of the city’s water supply system provided that the
water supply system may be extended to said property within public
right-of-way, city property, or easements or other property to which either
the city or the relevant property owner has the property rights necessary to
extend and install the system improvement. Every private well producing
potable water as of November 1, 2017 for properties that are within 500 feet
of the city’s water supply, and every new private well installed after
November 1, 2017, shall be considered legal until such time as said well or
wells shall no longer be potable or shall no longer produce sufficient
quantities of potable water.  At such time as said private well shall no
longer be potable or shall not produce sufficient quantities of potable
water, said well shall be capped and, provided the city water supply system
is within 500 feet of the property and either the city or the property owner
has the property rights necessary to extend and install the water supply
system to said property, said property owner shall connect said property to
the city’s water supply system. The cost to extend the city’s water
supply system to the relevant property shall be the exclusive responsibility
of the property owner; provided, however, that the city may consider
financing agreements and recapture agreements. This prohibition shall not
apply to the city, which may install or drill a public well as part of its
waterworks system pursuant to the state statutes.



(Prior Code, § 6-2-11)  (Am. Ord. O-17-32, passed 11-14-2017)  Penalty,
see § 10.99



APPENDIX A:  RATE SCHEDULE



Schedule



      I.   Outside corporate limits user rate



SCHEDULE I.  OUTSIDE CORPORATE LIMITS USER RATE.



   For each user located outside the corporate limits, the potable water
user charge per billing period shall be the amount provided for by resolution
of the corporate authorities as set forth in § 53.12, plus a surcharge equal
to 100% of the amount.



(Prior Code, § 6-3-4)  (Ord. O-12-052, passed 7-10-2012; Ord. O-12-053,
passed 7-10-2012; Ord. O-16-175, passed 9-27-2016)



CHAPTER 54:  ELECTRICITY



Section



   54.01   Definitions



   Appendix A:  Residential rate schedule



   Appendix B:  Commercial rate schedule



   Appendix C:  Non-profit rate schedule



   Appendix D:  Non-residential rate schedule



   Appendix E:  Large service rate schedule



   Appendix F:  Unmetered street lighting



   Appendix G:  Unmetered lighting



   Appendix H:  Municipal service rate schedule



§ 54.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BILLING DEMAND.  The monthly billing demand for the large commercial
service rate is the maximum 15-minute integrated kW demand for the billing
month, but not less than 75% of the previous maximum billing demand in the
previous 12 months. 



   COMMERCIAL SERVICE. The commercial service rate applies to
non-residential customers with loads of 50 kW or less for all separately
metered general service usage in one establishment, through one meter, at one
point of delivery.  This rate is not available for consumers using more than
20,000 kWh in any month or with firm loads greater than 50 kW.



   DEPOSITS, PAYMENTS AND MISCELLANEOUS ADMINISTRATIVE AND SERVICE FEES. 
City service rules shall establish deposits, payment terms and miscellaneous
administrative and service fees.



   DISCONNECTION AND RECONNECTION.  Accounts remaining delinquent are
subject to disconnection and a reconnection charge in accordance with city
service rules.



   LARGE COMMERCIAL SERVICE.  The large commercial service rate applies
to non-residential customers for all separately metered usage with a minimum
50 kW of load in one establishment, through one meter, at one point of
delivery.  Interval recording meters are required and customer will
reimburse the city for its installed cost of metering, plus monthly telemetry
costs, if any.  This rate is also applicable for consumers using more than
20,000 kWh in any month regardless of kW demand.



   LARGE NON-PROFIT SERVICE.  The large non-profit service rate applies
to all licensed non-profit entities for all separately metered usage with a
minimum 50 kW of load in one establishment, through one meter, at one point
of delivery.  Interval recording meters are required and customer will
reimburse the city for its installed cost of metering, plus monthly telemetry
costs, if any.  This rate is also applicable for non-profit consumers using
more than 20,000 kWh in any month regardless of kW demand.



   LARGE SERVICE ELECTRIC HEAT.  The large service electric heat rate
applies to large commercial service or large non-profit service customers
with all water and space heating provided by electrical means.



   MASTER METERING.  No master metering, sub-metering, joint use (for
other than multiple dwelling units) or resale of electric service is
permitted hereunder.



   MULTIPLE DWELLING UNITS.  When two or more flats, apartments, or
dwelling units are served by one meter in accordance with city service rules,
the basic service charge shall be billed at the multiple of individual units
served and kWh shall be billed on a pro-rata basis in each price step.  That
is, total kWh usage divided by the number of dwelling units, calculate the
kWh charges in each rate step and then multiply total kWh charges by the
number of dwelling units. 



   MUNICIPAL.  City and interdepartmental usage will be billed under the
price schedule for general service, large general service or street lights,
as applicable.



   NON-PROFIT SERVICE.  The non-profit service rate applies to all
licensed non-profit entities with loads of 50 kW or less for all separately
metered general service usage in one establishment, through one meter, at one
point of delivery.  This rate is not available for consumers using more than
20,000 kWh in any month or with firm loads greater than 50 kW.



   NON-RESIDENTIAL ELECTRIC HEAT SERVICE.  The non-residential electric
heat service rate applies to commercial service or non-profit service
customers with all water and space heating provided by electrical means.



   POWER FACTOR. For purposes of billing, the monthly billing demand shall
be increased by 1% for each 1% customer's power factor is measured during any
15-minute interval to be less than 95%.  Payment of the power factor penalty
shall not relieve customer of the obligation to self-correct the power factor
to 95% or greater.  The city may install power factor correction capacitors
on its primary distribution system to compensate for customer's lagging power
factor and customer shall reimburse the city for the installed cost thereof,
including all necessary labor, materials, mountings, controls and
appurtenances.



   RATES.  Every person, firm, corporation, industry or farm that is
furnished electricity by the City Municipal Electric Utility shall be charged
under the approved applicable rate schedule for each separate class of
service.



   RESIDENTIAL SERVICE.  The residential rate applies to a single-family
residence, or a multiple dwelling unit, for all domestic uses, including
water heating and space heating.  If all water heating and space heating are
done by electrical means then the home will qualify for the residential
electric heat service rate.  Where a portion of a residential dwelling is
used for commercial purposes and is not separately metered, the applicable
residential rate shall apply to all metered usage. Commercial usage at a
residence shall require a separate meter with service under the commercial
service rate when the commercial load is over 5 kW and less than 50 kW and
with service under the large commercial rate when the commercial load is over
50 kW. 



   SUMMER MONTHS.  For purposes of billing, summer months are June
through September.



   TAX ADJUSTMENT.  Sales under all rate schedules are subject to a Tax
Adjustment Factor (TAF).  Charges for all metered and un-metered services
will be adjusted by the amount of applicable sales and local option taxes and
any new or increased tax imposed and levied on gross receipts, the
production, transmission, distribution or sale of electricity by the city.



   WINTER MONTHS.  For purposes of billing, winter months are October
through May.



(Prior Code, § 6-1-1)  (Ord. 1936, passed 4-14-2009; Am. Ord. O-12-060,
passed 9-11-2012)



APPENDIX A:  RESIDENTIAL RATE SCHEDULE



Schedule



   I.   Residential rate



   II.   Residential electric heat rate



SCHEDULE I.  RESIDENTIAL RATE.



   A schedule of residential rates, copies of which are on file in the
office of the City Clerk, are adopted and incorporated as part of this code
of ordinances as fully as if set out at length herein.



(Prior Code, § 6-1-1)



SCHEDULE II.  RESIDENTIAL ELECTRIC HEAT RATE.



   A schedule of residential electric heat rates, copies of which are on
file in the office of the City Clerk, are adopted and incorporated as part of
this code of ordinances as fully as if set out at length herein.



(Prior Code, § 6-1-1)



APPENDIX B:  COMMERCIAL RATE SCHEDULE



Schedule



   I.   Commercial service rate



   II.   Large commercial service rate



SCHEDULE I.  COMMERCIAL SERVICE RATE.



   A schedule of commercial service rates, copies of which are on file in
the office of the City Clerk, are adopted and incorporated as part of this
code of ordinances as fully as if set out at length herein.



(Prior Code, § 6-1-1)



SCHEDULE II.  LARGE COMMERCIAL SERVICE RATE.



   A schedule of large commercial service rates, copies of which are on
file in the office of the City Clerk, are adopted and incorporated as part of
this code of ordinances as fully as if set out at length herein.



(Prior Code, § 6-1-1)



APPENDIX C:  NON-PROFIT RATE SCHEDULE



Schedule



   I.   Non-profit service rate



   II.   Large non-profit service rate



SCHEDULE I.  NON-PROFIT SERVICE RATE.



   A schedule of non-profit service rates, copies of which are on file in
the office of the City Clerk, are adopted and incorporated as part of this
code of ordinances as fully as if set out at length herein.



(Prior Code, § 6-1-1)



SCHEDULE II.  LARGE NON-PROFIT SERVICE RATE.



   A schedule of large non-profit service rates, copies of which are on
file in the office of the City Clerk, are adopted and incorporated as part of
this code of ordinances as fully as if set out at length herein.



(Prior Code, § 6-1-1)



APPENDIX D:  NON-RESIDENTIAL RATE SCHEDULE



Schedule



   I.   Non-residential electric heat service rate



SCHEDULE I.  NON-RESIDENTIAL ELECTRIC HEAT SERVICE RATE.



   A schedule of non-residential electric heat service rates, copies of
which are on file in the office of the City Clerk, are adopted and
incorporated as part of this code of ordinances as fully as if set out at
length herein.



(Prior Code, § 6-1-1)



APPENDIX E:  LARGE SERVICE RATE SCHEDULE



Schedule



   I.   Large service electric heat



SCHEDULE I.  LARGE SERVICE ELECTRIC HEAT.



   A schedule of large service electric heat rates, copies of which are on
file in the office of the City Clerk, are adopted and incorporated as part of
this code of ordinances as fully as if set out at length herein.



(Prior Code, § 6-1-1)



APPENDIX F:  UNMETERED STREET LIGHTING



Schedule



   I.   Unmetered street lighting rate



SCHEDULE I.  UNMETERED STREET LIGHTING RATE



   A schedule of unmetered street lighting rates, copies of which are on
file in the office of the City Clerk, are adopted and incorporated as part of
this code of ordinances as fully as if set out at length herein.



(Prior Code, § 6-1-1)



APPENDIX G:  UNMETERED LIGHTING



Schedule



   I.   Unmetered lighting rate



SCHEDULE I.  UNMETERED LIGHTING RATE.



   A schedule of unmetered lighting rates, copies of which are on file in
the office of the City Clerk, are adopted and incorporated as part of this
code of ordinances as fully as if set out at length herein.



(Prior Code, § 6-1-1)



APPENDIX H:  MUNICIPAL SERVICE RATE SCHEDULE



Schedule



   I.   Municipal demand service rate



   II.   Municipal non-demand service rate



SCHEDULE I.  MUNICIPAL DEMAND SERVICE RATE.



    A schedule of municipal demand service rate, copies of which are on
file in the office of the City Clerk, are adopted and incorporated as part of
this code of ordinances as fully as if set out at length herein.



(Ord. 1967, passed 4-13-2010)



SCHEDULE II.  MUNICIPAL NON-DEMAND SERVICE RATE.



   A schedule of municipal non-demand service rate, copies of which are on
file in the office of the City Clerk, are adopted and incorporated as part of
this code of ordinances as fully as if set out at length herein.



(Ord. 1967, passed 4-13-2010)



CHAPTER 55:  INTERCONNECTION AND NET METERING PROGRAMS



Section



   55.01   Definitions



   55.02   Interconnection requirements



   55.03   Net metering requirements and policy



   55.04   System use and regulations



   55.05   Required safety features



   55.06   Small wind energy conversion systems (SWES)



   55.07   Disconnection, termination, modification and assignment



   55.08   Terms and conditions



 



   55.99   Penalty



§ 55.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ANNUAL PERIOD.  The period of 12 consecutive monthly billing periods
ending on the last day of either the net metering customer's April monthly
billing period or its October monthly billing period, whichever was selected
by the customer in connection with its application for net metering.



   CUSTOMER. A retail customer (residential, commercial, or industrial)
that owns or operates an eligible solar or wind renewable electrical
generating facility with a rated capacity of not more than 2,000 kilowatts
that is located on the customer's premises and is intended primarily to
offset the customer's own electrical requirements.



   ELECTRICITY SUPPLIER. The alternative retail electric supplier that is
providing electric supply services; or the electric utility that is providing
electric supply services, either within or outside its service area.



   ELIGIBLE RENEWABLE ELECTRICAL GENERATING FACILITY. A generator up to
2,000 kilowatts powered by solar electric energy, wind, dedicated crops grown
for electricity generation, anaerobic digestion of livestock or food
processing waste, fuel cells or microturbines powered by renewable fuels, or
hydroelectric energy.



   INTERCONNECTION SERVICES. On-site generating facilities connected to
the city electric distribution system in a manner that will allow excess
electricity generated by the eligible renewable electrical generating
facility to be safely delivered onto the city's electric distribution system.



   NET ELECTRICITY METERING (or NET METERING). The measurement, during the
billing period applicable to an eligible customer, of the net amount of
electricity supplied by an electricity provider to the customer's premises or
provided to the electricity provider by the customer or subscriber.



   NET PURCHASER OF ELECTRICITY. The total amount of generation produced
by the customer is less than the customer's total usage during the applicable
billing period.



   NET SELLER OF ELECTRICITY. The total amount of generation produced by
the customer is greater than the customer's total usage during the applicable
billing period.



   SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM (SWES).  A wind energy conservation system
consisting of wind turbine, a tower, and associated control or conversion
electronics, which has a rated capacity of not more than 10 kW or less for
residential electric customers, or 20 kW or less for commercial or industrial
electric customers, and which is intended to primarily reduce on-site
consumption of utility power.



   UTILITY. An electric utility owned and operated by the Geneseo
Municipal Utility.



(Ord. O-18-03, passed 4-10-2018)



§ 55.02  INTERCONNECTION REQUIREMENTS.



   The utility shall make available, upon request, net metering services
to any customer taking services from the utility and who meets the
requirements set forth in this policy. Requirements for interconnection to
Geneseo Municipal Utilities shall be as follows:



   (A)   Application. Customer shall submit all net metering
application materials to the city. Upon receipt of a completed and executed
application, the utility shall, within ten business days after receipt of an
application, notify the applicant as to whether it is authorized to
participate as a net metering customer. If utility issues a denial, it shall
provide the reasons for denying the prospective net metering customer's
application based on noncompliance with this chapter.



   (B)   Final interconnection and operation. The customer may operate
the eligible renewable electrical generating facility and interconnect with
the utility's electric distribution system after all of the following have
occurred:



      (1)   Electrical inspection.  The customer shall obtain an
electrical permit and pass an electrical inspection before customer's
generating system will be connected or operated in parallel with the utility
and shall obtain all governmental authorizations and permits required for the
construction and operation of the system and interconnection facilities.



      (2)   Certificate of completion.  The customer shall provide
the utility with a copy of the certificate of completion with all relevant
and necessary information fully completed by the customer, as well as an
inspection form from the local electrical inspection authority demonstrating
that the distributed generation facility passed inspection.



      (3)   The utility, at its discretion, has completed its
witness test as per the following: Within ten business days of the
commissioning date, the utility must, upon reasonable notice and at a
mutually convenient time, conduct a witness test of the distributed
generation facility to ensure that all equipment has been appropriately
installed and that all electrical connections and metering have been made in
accordance with the applicable codes.



   (C)   Compliance. The eligible renewable electrical generating
facility shall be installed, operated and tested in accordance with the
requirements of UL 1741 and The Institute of Electrical and Electronics
Engineers, Inc. (IEEE), 3 Park Avenue New York, NY  10016-5997, Standard
1547 (2003) "Standard for Interconnecting Distributed Resources with Electric
Power Systems."  Photovoltaic installations must comply with Article 690,
Solar Photovoltaic Systems, of the National Electric Code.  All
interconnection related protective functions and associated batteries shall
be periodically tested at intervals specified by the manufacturer system
integrator, or the authority that has jurisdiction over the distributed
resources interconnection, or all tests shall be performed at a minimum of
every three years.  Periodic test reports shall be maintained and submitted
to the city's Electric Department.



   (D)   Access.  The utility shall have direct, unabated access to
the disconnect switch and metering equipment of the eligible renewable
electrical generating facility at all times. At the utility's discretion, it
may enter the customer's premises or property if a hazardous condition exists
and such immediate action is necessary to protect persons, the utility's
facilities, or property of others, from damage or interference cause by the
customer's generating facilities, or lack of properly operating protective
devices or inability to inspect the same.  The disconnect switch shall be
clearly labeled and installed within two feet of the meter.  The utility
shall provide five business days notice to the customer prior to using its
right of access except in emergencies.



   (E)   Metering.  Any required metering shall be installed at
customer expense. Any expenses incurred due to modification to the existing
utility system necessitated by the introduction of customer's renewable
electrical generating facility into the system shall be paid by the
customer.  The utility shall determine whether the customer is a net
purchaser of electricity, or a net seller of electricity during the billing
period.



   (F)   Interconnection.



      (1)   The customer shall comply with the net metering
application set forth as Exhibit B, attached to Ordinance O-18-03 and
incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein.  Customer shall also
pay for designing, installing, inspecting, operating, and maintaining the
renewable electrical generating facility in accordance with all applicable
laws and regulations.



      (2)   Once in operation, the customer shall make no changes or
modifications in the equipment, wiring, or the mode of operation, without
prior written approval of the utility.



(Ord. O-18-03, passed 4-10-2018)



§ 55.03  NET METERING REQUIREMENTS AND POLICY.



   (A)   Subject to the limitations set forth herein, utility shall
make net metering service available upon request to any residential electric
customer with an eligible renewable electrical generating facility of 10 kW
capacity or less. For commercial and industrial accounts, the limit will be
20 kW or less.



   (B)   Any generating facility greater than the limits in division
(A) above, but less than 1 MW shall be considered on a case by case basis. 
The decision with respect to such facilities shall be made by the utility.



   (C)   Notwithstanding the provisions in division (B) above, utility
reserves the authority to limit the size of a customer's renewable electrical
generating facility to a size such that the electrical output will not, as a
matter of routine operation, exceed the electric load of the structure on
which it is installed.



   (D)   Total net metered capacity for all customers interconnected
under this policy for the utility system shall not exceed 2% of the system's
peak as it existed in the prior calendar year. In the event that the system
peak is reduced such that the existing net capacity for all interconnected
customers exceeds the 2% level, those existing net metered customers shall be
allowed to continue under this policy. However, no new interconnections will
be allowed until such time as the system peak grows such that net metered
capacity for all interconnected customers is again no greater than 2% of the
system's peak.



   (E)   Energy generated by the customer-owned renewable electrical
generating facility will offset the energy required by the customer's load
during the billing period. For any energy generated by the customer in excess
of the energy required by the customer's loads for a given billing period a
credit shall be carried forward to the customer's next billing period. In no
case shall credits for excess energy be carried forward for a period greater
than 12 consecutive monthly billing periods ending on the last day of the
customer's monthly billing period. In the event of termination of an account
qualifying for net metering under this policy, any outstanding credits are
surrendered. Under no circumstances will customer credits have any cash value
for any other reason and customer credits may not be assigned, transferred,
hypothecated or encumbered by or to any third party.



   (F)   Any costs utility incurs associated with the net metering
program, including but not limited to changes in metering (to include
installation of a bi-directional meter), other physical facilities or
billing-related costs, shall be borne by the customers in the net metering
program. Any expenses incurred due to the modification to the existing
utility system necessitated by the introduction of customer's renewable
electrical generating facility into the system shall by paid by the customer.



   (G)   In addition to the cost referenced in division (F) above,
utility will charge a distribution system utilization fee which is approved
annually by the City Council via resolution to ensure all customers pay a
share of the costs of maintenance and improvements to the distribution
system. This fee is exclusive to customers who receive net metering services
under this policy and represents the non-by passable costs associated with
maintaining the distribution system that backs up net metered generation.



(Ord. O-18-03, passed 4-10-2018)



§ 55.04  SYSTEM USE AND REGULATIONS.



   Customer may participate in the net metering program pursuant to the
following regulations.



   (A)   Setback.  Customer's pole-mounted net metering facilities
shall be setback from all property lines, above-ground utility lines, and
roadways, a distance no less than 110% of the tower height.  Any application
that is a part of customer's net metering facilities including guy wires
shall be setback from all property lines no less than 30 feet. All other
renewable electrical generating facilities must comply with the applicable
setbacks for the district in which it is located.



   (B)   Yard restriction.  Customer's net metering facilities shall
not be permitted in any front yard.



   (C)   Color.  Customer's net metering facilities shall be painted a
non-reflective, non-obtrusive color or a color that conforms to the
environment and architecture of its surroundings.



   (D)   Illumination.  Customer's net metering facilities shall not
be lighted, except as required by the FAA.



   (E)   Noise level.  Audible sound from a customer's net metering
facilities shall not exceed 25 dBA in residential districts or 50 dBA in all
other districts, as measured at the exterior of any occupied building on an
adjacent or neighboring property. Methods for measuring and reporting
acoustic emissions from customer's net metering facilities shall be equal to
or exceed the minimum standards for precision described in American Wind
Energy Association Standard 2.1 - 1989 titled Procedures for the Measurement
and Reporting of Acoustic Emissions from Wind Turbine Generation Systems
Volume I:  First Tier.



   (F)   Turbine blade location.  At its lowest point, the tip of any
turbine blade comprising part of a small wind energy system shall be no less
than 15 feet above the surface of the ground.



   (G)   Installation.  Customer's renewable electrical generating
facility may not be installed until evidence has been given that all utility
companies have been informed of the customer's intent to install an
interconnected customer-owned generator.  Off-grid systems shall be exempt
from this requirement.



   (H)   Removal.  If any customer's net metering facility is not
operational for a period exceeding 12 consecutive months, the landowner may
be required to remove it at their expense.



   (I)   Signage. No commercial signage is permitted.



   (J)   Screening. No screening is required.



(Ord. O-18-03, passed 4-10-2018)



§ 55.05  REQUIRED SAFETY FEATURES.



   (A)   Customer's small wind energy system shall be designed with an
automatic over-speed control to render the system inoperable when winds are
blowing in excess of the speeds for which the machine is designed.



   (B)   Customer's net metering facilities shall have a manually
operable method to render the system inoperable in the event of a structural
or mechanical failure of any part of the system.



   (C)   Customer's net metering facilities shall be designed with an
automatic control to render the system inoperable in case of loss of utility
power to prevent the net metering facility from supplying power to a
de-energized electrical distribution system.



(Ord. O-18-03, passed 4-10-2018)



§ 55.06  SMALL WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS (SWES).



   The following uses may be allowed by a special use permit in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter. SWES shall be permitted as a special use
pursuant to the following regulations.



   (A)   Location.  SWES may be located on property of no less than
one acre.



   (B)   Tower height.  The height of a SWES shall be measured from
the ground to the blade extended at its highest point. A single-family
residential use shall have a maximum height of 35 feet with a maximum blade
length of four feet and a maximum nameplate capacity of one kW.  A
commercial and industrial use shall have a maximum height of 50 feet with a
maximum blade length of ten feet and a maximum nameplate capacity of ten kW.



   (C)   Setback.  SWES shall be setback from all property lines,
above-ground utility lines, and roadways, a distance no less than 110% of the
tower height.  Any application that is a part of SWES including guy wires,
shall be setback from all property lines no less than 30 feet.



   (D)   Restriction.  No SWES shall be permitted in any front yard.



   (E)   Color.  SWES shall be painted a non-reflective, non-obtrusive
color or a color that conforms to the environment and architecture of its
surroundings.



   (F)   Illumination.  No SWES shall be lighted, except as required
by the FAA.



   (G)   Noise level.  Audible sound from a SWES shall not exceed 25
dBA in residential districts or 50 dBA in all other districts, as measured at
the exterior of any occupied building on an adjacent or neighboring
property.  Methods for measuring and reporting acoustic emissions from SWES
shall be equal to or exceed the minimum standards for precision described in
American Wind Energy Association Standard 2.1 - 1989 titled Procedures for
the Measurement and Reporting of Acoustic Emissions from Wind Turbine
Generation Systems  Volume I:  First Tier.



   (H)   Turbine blade location.  At its lowest point, the tip of any
turbine blade shall be no less than 15 feet above the surface of the ground.



   (I)   Access.  Access to SWES shall be controlled in a manner
consistent with local building codes.



   (J)   Installation.  No SWES shall be installed until evidence has
been given that the utility company has been informed of the customer's
intent to install an interconnected customer-owned generator.  Off-grid
systems shall be exempt from this requirement.



   (K)   Removal.  If any SWES is not operational for a period
exceeding 12 consecutive months, the landowner may be required to remove the
SWES at their expense.



(Ord. 1939, passed 5-11-2009; Ord. O-18-03, passed 4-10-2018)



§ 55.07  DISCONNECTION, TERMINATION, MODIFICATION AND ASSIGNMENT.



   (A)   Disconnection.



      (1)   The utility may disconnect, interrupt, or reduce
deliveries from the eligible renewable electrical generating facility upon
any of the following conditions, but must reconnect the eligible renewable
electrical generating facility once the condition is cured:



         (a)   For scheduled outages, provided that the eligible
renewable electrical generating facility is treated in the same manner as
utility's load customers;



         (b)   For unscheduled outages or emergency conditions;



         (c)   If the eligible renewable electrical generating
facility does not operate in the manner consistent with this agreement;



         (d)   Improper installation or failure to pass the
witness test;



         (e)   If the eligible renewable electrical generating
facility is creating a safety, reliability or a power quality problem; or



         (f)   The interconnection equipment used by the eligible
renewable electrical generating facility is de-listed by the Nationally
Recognized Testing Laboratory that provided the listing at the time the
interconnection was approved.



      (2)   Should customer's net metering facilities be declared to
be unsafe by the utility, it shall be deemed to be a public nuisance and
shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal in
accordance with the procedures set forth in the city's Building Code.



   (B)   Termination.  This agreement may be terminated under the
following conditions:



      (1)   By customer. The customer may terminate any net metering
agreement by providing 30 days' prior written notice to the utility. If the
interconnection customer ceases operation of the eligible renewable
electrical generating facility, the customer must notify the utility.



      (2)   By the utility. The utility may terminate any net
metering agreement if the customer fails to remedy a violation of terms of
the agreement within 30 calendar days after notice, or such other date as may
be mutually agreed to prior to the expiration of the 30 calendar day remedy
period.  The termination date may be no less than 30 calendar days after the
customer receives notice of its violation from the utility.



   (C)   Modification of eligible renewable electrical generating
facility.  The customer must receive written authorization from the utility
before making any changes to the eligible renewable electrical generating
facility that could affect the utility's distribution system.  If the
customer makes such modifications without the utility's prior written
authorization, the utility shall have the right to disconnect the eligible
renewable electrical generating facility immediately.



   (D)   Permanent disconnection.  In the event the net metering
agreement is terminated, the utility shall have the right to disconnect its
facilities or direct the customer to disconnect its eligible renewable
electrical generating facility.



   (E)   Assignment/transfer of ownership of the eligible renewable
electrical generating facility.  A net metering agreement shall terminate
upon the transfer of ownership of the eligible renewable electrical
generating facility to a new owner unless the transferring owner assigns the
agreement to the new owner, the new owner agrees in writing to the terms of
the agreement, and the transferring owner so notifies the utility in writing
prior to the transfer of ownership.



(Ord. O-18-03, passed 4-10-2018)



§ 55.08  TERMS AND CONDITIONS.



   (A)   Governing law, regulatory authority, and rules.  The
validity, interpretation and enforcement of a net metering agreement and each
of its provisions shall be governed by the Codes and Regulations of the City
of Geneseo as well as the laws of the State of Illinois. Nothing in any
agreement is intended to affect any other agreement between the utility and
the customer.



   (B)   Survival rights.  Net metering agreements shall remain in
effect after termination to the extent necessary to allow or require either
party to fulfill rights or obligations that arose under the agreement.



   (C)   Force majeure. Neither party shall be liable to the other for,
or be considered to be in breach of or default under a net metering agreement
because of any failure or delay in performance by such party under the
agreement to the extent that such failure or delay is caused by or results
from any such cause or condition which is beyond such party's reasonable
control, or which such party is unable to prevent or overcome by exercise of
reasonable diligence, including breach of contract or failure of performance
by any person providing services to the utility.



   (D)   Entire agreement. Net metering agreements and any exhibits,
policies, and applications set forth the entire agreement of the parties and
supersede any and all prior agreements with respect to the subject matter for
the agreement. The rights and obligations of the parties under the agreement
shall be subject to and governed by this chapter.



   (E)   Independent contractors. The parties to net metering
agreements are independent contractors and shall not be deemed to be
partners, employees, franchisees, or franchisors, servants or agents of each
other for any purpose under or in connection with any agreement.



   (F)   Notice.  The parties may mutually agree to provide notices,
demands, comments, or requests in writing by electronic means such as
e-mail.  Absent agreement to electronic communication, or unless otherwise
provided in a net metering agreement, all applications and any written
notice, demand, or request required or authorized in connection with net
metering agreements shall be deemed properly given if delivered in writing,
in person, delivered by recognized national courier service, or sent by first
class mail, postage prepaid, to the person specified below:



      (1)   If to customer:  Use the contact information provided
in the customer's application. The customer is responsible for notifying the
utility of any change in the contact party information, including change of
ownership.



      (2)   If to utility:  Use the contact information provided
below. The utility is responsible for notifying the customer of any change in
the contact party information.



      Name:
_______________________________________________________________________________



      Mailing Address:
______________________________________________________________________



      City: _________________________________ State:
_____________________ Zip Code: ___________



      Telephone (Daytime): _________________________ (Evening):
________________________________



      Fax Number: ________________________________ E-Mail Address:
___________________________



(Ord. O-18-03, passed 4-10-2018)



§ 55.99  PENALTY.



   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not
less than $25 per day nor more than $500 per day.



(Ord. O-18-03, passed 4-10-2018)



TITLE VII:  TRAFFIC CODE



   Chapter



      70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      71.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS



      72.   PARKING REGULATIONS



      73.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES



      74.   PARKING SCHEDULES



CHAPTER 70:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   70.01   Definitions



§ 70.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this title, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BUSINESS DISTRICT.  The closely built up business portion of the city.



   CROSSWALK.  The portion of the roadway included within the
prolongation of the sidewalk lines at street intersections.



   DAY.  The time from 12:00 midnight to 12:00 the following midnight.



   DRIVER.  Any person who is in actual physical control of a vehicle or
street car.



   EMERGENCY VEHICLE.  Vehicles of the Police or Fire Departments,
ambulances, or any vehicle conveying a city official or employee in response
to an emergency official call.



   EXPLOSIVE.  Any chemical compound or mechanical mixture that is
commonly used or intended for the purpose of producing an explosion and which
contains any oxidizing and combustive units or other ingredients in
proportions, quantities, or packing that an ignition by fire, by friction, by
concussion, by percussion, or by detonator of any part of the compound or
mixture may cause a sudden generation of highly heated gases that the
resultant gaseous pressures are capable of producing destructible effects on
contiguous objects or of destroying life or limb.



   FARM TRACTOR.  Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily as a
farm implement for drawing plows, moving machines, and other implements of
husbandry.



   FLAMMABLE LIQUID.  Any liquid which has a flash point of 70°F or
less, as determined by the customary closed cup test device or equivalent.



   IMPROVED HIGHWAY.  A roadway of concrete, brick, asphalt, macadam, or
gravel.



   INTERSECTION.  The area embraced within the prolongation of the
property lines of two or more streets which join at an angle, whether or not
the streets cross.



   LANED HIGHWAY.  A street, the roadway of which is divided into three
or more clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic.



   LOADING ZONE.  The space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive
use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials.



   METAL TIRE.  Every tire, the surface of which in contact with the
roadway, is wholly or partly of metal or other hard, nonresilient material.



   MOTOR VEHICLE.  Every vehicle which is self-propelled, and every
vehicle which is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead wires,
but not operated upon rails.



   MOTORCYCLE.  Every motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of the
rider and designed to travel on no more than three wheels in contact with the
ground, but excluding a tractor.



   PARK.  To stand a vehicle, whether occupied or not, for a period of
time greater than is reasonably necessary for the actual loading or unloading
of persons.



   PEDESTRIAN.  Any person afoot.



   PNEUMATIC TIRE.  Every tire in which compressed air is designed to
support the load.



   PROPERTY LINE.  The line marking the boundary between any street and
the lots or property abutting thereon.



   PUBLIC BUILDINGS.  A building used by the city or by any park
district, school district, the state, or the United States government.



   RESIDENCE DISTRICT.  The closely built up residence portion of the
city.



   RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.  Any area in which 75% or more of the buildings
therein are dwelling houses, as distinguished from buildings used for
commercial or industrial purposes.



   ROAD TRACTOR.  Every motor vehicle designed and used for drawing other
vehicles and not so constructed as to carry any load thereon, either
independently or any part of the weight of a vehicle or load so drawn.



   ROADWAY.  The portion of a street designed or ordinarily used for
vehicular traffic.



   SAFETY ZONE.  The portion of a roadway reserved for the exclusive use
of pedestrians, suitably marked or elevated.



   SEMI-TRAILER.  Every vehicle without motive power designed for
carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so
constructed that some part of its weight and that of its load rests upon or
is carried by another vehicle.



   SIDEWALK.  The portion of a street between the curb line and the
adjacent property line.



   SOLID TIRE.  Every tire of rubber or other resilient material which
does not depend upon compressed air for the support of the load.



   STREET.  Every way set aside for public travel except footpaths.



   SUBURBAN DISTRICT.  The portion of the city other than the closely
built up business and residence districts.



   TRAFFIC.  All vehicles using any street for travel.



   TRAILER.  Every vehicle without motive power designed for carrying
passengers or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so
constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the towing vehicle.



   TRUCK.  Any motor vehicle used in the transportation of livestock for
hire, and includes a trailer.



   TRUCK TRACTOR.  Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for
drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a
part of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn.



   VEHICLE.  Any device by which any person or property may be
transported upon a highway, except those operated upon rails or tracks.



(Prior Code, § 8-1-1)



CHAPTER 71:  TRAFFIC REGULATIONS



Section




General Provisions




   71.001   Resurfaced streets



   71.002   Obedience to police officer or traffic-control device



   71.003   Display of unauthorized sign prohibited



   71.004   Requirement of giving information or rendering aid



   71.005   Requirement of notification of property damage after
collision



   71.006   Failure to report accident; illegally moving vehicle after
accident



   71.007   Disregarding signs prohibited



   71.008   Prohibited vehicles



   71.009   Low-speed vehicles




Driving and Passing




   71.020   Speed limits



   71.021   Two-way roads



   71.022   Drive on right side of road; exceptions



   71.023   Passing other vehicles



   71.024   No passing zones



   71.025   Driving left of center



   71.026   One-way roads; rotary traffic islands



   71.027   Driving on roads laned for traffic



   71.028   Driving on the shoulder



   71.029   Following too closely




Turning and Yielding




   71.040   Turns at intersections



   71.041   Yield at intersection



   71.042   Left turn yield



   71.043   Safe movement of stopped vehicle



   71.044   Signal required for turning or stopping; method of signaling



   71.045   Stopping at stop sign



   71.046   Yield right-of-way; prima facie evidence of failure to yield



   71.047   Pedestrian right-of-way



   71.048   Vehicles entering from private road or driveway must yield



   71.049   Yield for emergency vehicle required



   71.050   Vehicles emerging from alley must stop and yield



   71.051   Railroad crossing signals




Vehicle Operation




   71.065   Angle and parallel parking



   71.066   Unattended motor vehicles



   71.067   Improper backing



   71.068   Unsafe vehicle; interference with operation or view



   71.069   Following fire vehicles; driving over hoses



   71.070   Public littering prohibited



   71.071   Faulty brakes



   71.072   Control over vehicle required at all times



   71.073   Parking time limit; authorization to remove illegally
stopped vehicles



   71.074   Mufflers; unnecessary noise



   71.075   Reckless driving



   71.076   Engine brakes and compression brakes



 



   71.999   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Determination of liability; motor vehicle citations, § 36.11



   Driver's license suspension, § 36.14



   Enforcement of motor vehicle violations; citations, § 36.10



   Immobilization program, § 36.13



   Lessor of vehicle–liability, § 36.12




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 71.001  RESURFACED STREETS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any motor vehicle on that
portion of any street in the city to which road oil has been applied for a
period of 24 hours after the application of the road oil or until oil has
been covered with a gravel coating.



(Prior Code, § 8-2-1)  Penalty, see § 71.999



§ 71.002  OBEDIENCE TO POLICE OFFICER OR TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICE.



   (A)   No person shall willfully refuse to comply with any lawful
order or direction of any police officer invested by law with authority to
direct, control, or regulate traffic.



(Prior Code, § 8-2-2)



   (B)   No driver of a vehicle shall disobey the instructions of any
official traffic-control device, either manual or power operated, unless at
the time otherwise directed by a police officer.



(Prior Code, § 8-2-3)  Penalty, see § 71.999



§ 71.003  DISPLAY OF UNAUTHORIZED SIGN PROHIBITED.



   No person shall place, maintain, or display upon, or in view of, any
street any unauthorized sign, signal, marking, or device which purports to be
or is an imitation of or resembles an official sign whatsoever, which
attempts to direct the movement of traffic, and authorities shall have
jurisdiction over the streets and may remove or cause to be removed any sign
or signal.



(Prior Code, § 8-2-4)  Penalty, see § 71.999



§ 71.004  REQUIREMENT OF GIVING INFORMATION OR RENDERING AID.



   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident, resulting in injury
to, or death of, any person, or damage to any vehicle or personal property
which is driven or attended by any person, shall give his or her name and
address and registration number of the vehicle he or she is driving, and
shall, upon request, exhibit his or her operator’s or chauffeur’s license
to the person struck or the driver or occupant of or person attending any
vehicle collided with, and shall render to any person injured in the accident
reasonable assistance, including the carrying or the making of arrangements
for the carrying of the person to a physician, surgeon, or hospital for
medical or surgical treatment, if assistance is necessary.



(Prior Code, § 8-2-5)  Penalty, see § 71.999



§ 71.005  REQUIREMENT OF NOTIFICATION OF PROPERTY DAMAGE AFTER COLLISION.



   The driver of any vehicle which collides with any vehicle which is
unattended, or with any object, causing property damage, shall immediately
stop and shall then and there either locate and notify the owner of the
damaged vehicle or personal property of the name and address of the driver
and owner of the vehicle striking the unattended vehicle or object causing
property damage, or shall leave in a conspicuous place in the vehicle struck
or on the property damaged a written notice giving the name and address of
the driver and of the owner of the vehicle doing the striking and a statement
of the circumstances thereof.



(Prior Code, § 8-2-6)  Penalty, see § 71.999



§ 71.006  FAILURE TO REPORT ACCIDENT; ILLEGALLY MOVING VEHICLE AFTER
ACCIDENT.



   It shall be unlawful for the driver or owner of a motor vehicle which
is in any way involved in an accident within the city limits, resulting in
personal or property damage, to move or have moved the vehicle before the
accident is investigated by the Police Department, unless the position of the
vehicles involved is in a position to block or impede traffic, and then to be
moved only a distance to relieve the blocking and impeding so that traffic
may flow normally. Any person hired for money or gratis to move the vehicle
not in compliance with this section shall also be deemed guilty of violating
this section.



(Prior Code, § 8-2-7)  Penalty, see § 71.999



§ 71.007  DISREGARDING SIGNS PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to disregard any
authorized sign regulating traffic within the city limits.



(Prior Code, § 8-2-51)  Penalty, see § 71.999



§ 71.008  PROHIBITED VEHICLES.



   (A)   Prohibitions.  Any vehicle which is not specifically designed
or licensed for highway use shall not be driven or operated upon any street,
avenue, alley or other public thoroughfare within the city limits.



   (B)   Penalty.  Any person found in violation of this section shall
be subject to a fine of not less than $25 nor more than $750.



(Ord. O-11-014, passed 2-8-2011)



§ 71.009  LOW-SPEED VEHICLES.



   (A)   Definition. A LOW-SPEED VEHICLE is any four-wheeled vehicle
with a maximum speed greater than 20 miles per hour, but not greater than 25
miles per hour that conforms with the federal motor vehicle safety standards
set forth in 49 C.F.R. Part 571.500.



   (B)   Conditionally permitted. Subject to the following regulations
set forth in this section, low-speed vehicles are hereby permitted to be
operated within the city.



   (C)   Operation. Except as otherwise provided in this section, it is
lawful for any person to drive or operate a low-speed vehicle upon any street
in this state where the posted speed limit is 30 miles per hour or less.



   (D)   Intersection crossing. Low-speed vehicles may cross a street
at an intersection where the street being crossed has a posted speed limit of
not more than 45 miles per hour. Low-speed vehicles may not cross a street
with a speed limit in excess of 45 miles per hour unless the crossing is at
an intersection controlled by a traffic light or four-way stop sign.



   (E)   Public safety considerations. The Department of Transportation
or a municipality, township, county, or other unit of local government may
prohibit, by regulation, ordinance, or resolution, the operation of low-speed
vehicles on streets under its jurisdiction where the posted speed limit is 30
miles per hour or less if the Department of Transportation or unit of local
government determines that the public safety would be jeopardized.



   (F)   Signage prohibiting usage. Upon determining that low-speed
vehicles may not safely operated on a street, and upon the adoption of an
ordinance or resolution by a unit of local government, or regulation by the
Department of Transportation may prohibit the operation of low-speed vehicles
on any and all streets under its jurisdiction.  Appropriate signs shall be
posted in conformance with the State Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices adopted pursuant to ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-301.



   (G)   Streets in more than one jurisdiction. If a street is under
the jurisdiction of more than one unit of local government, or under the
jurisdiction of the Department of Transportation and one or more units of
local government, low-speed vehicles may be operated on the street unless
each unit of local government and the Department of Transportation agree and
take action to prohibit such operation as provided in this section.



   (H)   Tire and exhaust system requirements. The type of tire and
exhaust system must be in compliance with all applicable Illinois State
Statutes.



   (I)   Driver’s license required. A person may not operate a
low-speed vehicle upon any street in this city unless he or she has a valid
driver’s license issued in his or her name by the Secretary of State or a
foreign jurisdiction.



   (J)   Compliance with rules of the road. The operation of a
low-speed vehicle upon any street is subject to the provisions of Chapter 11
of the Illinois Vehicle Code (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11) concerning the
rules of the road, and applicable city ordinances.



   (K)   Insurance mandatory. Every owner of a low-speed vehicle is
subject to the mandatory insurance requirements specified in Article VI of
Chapter 7 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 7-601 et
seq.).  Also, every such vehicle shall be licensed as required by the
Illinois Vehicle Code.



   (L)   Penalty. Any person found to be in violation of any provision
of this section shall be subject to the penalty provisions of § 71.999.



(Ord. O-14-114, passed 11-11-2014)




DRIVING AND PASSING




§ 71.020  SPEED LIMITS.



   (A)   (1)   No person shall drive any vehicle upon any public
street of this city at a speed which:



         (a)   Is greater than is reasonable and proper with
regard to traffic conditions and the use of the street, or endangers the
safety of any person or property; and/or



         (b)   Is greater than the applicable maximum speed limit
established by this section or by a regulation made pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter.



      (2)   The fact that the speed of a vehicle does not exceed the
applicable maximum speed limit does not relieve the driver from the duty to
decrease speed when approaching and crossing an intersection, when traveling
upon any narrow or winding street, or when special hazard exists with respect
to pedestrians or other traffic or by reason of weather or road conditions,
and speed shall be decreased as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any
person or vehicle on or entering any street in compliance with legal
requirements and the duty of all persons to use due care.



      (3)   No person may drive a vehicle upon any street of this
city at a speed which is greater than the applicable statutory maximum speed
limit established by this section.



      (4)   Unless some other speed restriction is established under
this  chapter, the maximum speed limit (unless otherwise posted) for all
vehicles is:



         (a)   Thirty mph; and



         (b)   Fifteen mph in an alley.



      (5)   Electronic speed detecting devices may be used to detect
speed of vehicles and the evidence obtained thereby shall be admissible in
any prosecution for speeding, except when it is used within 500 feet beyond
any speed notice sign in the direction of travel of which the evidence is not
admissible.



      (6)   The maximum speed limit for all vehicles traveling on
Smith Street at any time shall be 20 mph.



(Prior Code, § 8-2-8)



      (7)   The maximum speed limit for that part of Stewart Street
from Main Street south to that point on Stewart Street that is 470 feet north
of Stone Church Lane shall be 30 mph.



   (B)   No person shall drive a motor vehicle at a speed in excess of
20 mph while passing a school zone or while traveling upon any public
thoroughfare on or across which children pass going to and from school during
school days when school children are present. This rule shall not be
applicable unless appropriate signs are posted upon streets of the city. The
signs shall give proper due warning that a school zone is being approached
and shall indicate the school zone and the maximum speed limit in effect
during school days when school children are present.



(Prior Code, § 8-2-9)



   (C)   No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as
to impede or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, except when
reduced speed is necessary for safe operation of the vehicle or in compliance
with the law.



(Prior Code, § 8-2-10)



(Ord. O-18-07, passed 6-12-2018)  Penalty, see § 71.999



§ 71.021  TWO-WAY ROADS.



   Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall give to the
other at least one-half of the main traveled portion of the roadway as nearly
as possible.



(Prior Code, § 8-2-12)



§ 71.022  DRIVE ON RIGHT SIDE OF ROAD; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   A vehicle shall be driven upon the right half of the roadway
and also to the right of that half, except when passing another vehicle, when
the right half is closed to traffic for repair, or when any order by either
an official sign designates otherwise, or at the direction of an officer.



(Prior Code, § 8-2-11)



   (B)   (1)   Upon all roadways of sufficient width, a vehicle
shall be driven upon the right half of the roadway, except as follows:



         (a)   When overtaking or passing another vehicle
proceeding in the same direction under the rules governing the movements;



         (b)   When an obstruction exists making it necessary to
drive to the left of the center of the roadway; provided, any person so doing
shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles traveling in the proper
direction upon the unobstructed portion of the roadway within a distance as
to constitute an immediate hazard;



         (c)   Upon a roadway restricted to one-way traffic; and



         (d)   Whenever there is a single-track paved road on one
side of the public highway and two vehicles meet thereon, the driver on whose
right is the wider shoulder shall give the right-of-way on the pavement to
the other vehicle.



      (2)   Upon all roadways, any vehicle proceeding at less than
the normal speed of traffic at the time and place and under the conditions
then existing shall be driven in the right hand lane available for traffic or
as close as practicable to the right hand curb or edge of the roadway, except
when overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction
or when preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private road
or driveway.



      (3)   Upon any roadway having four or more lanes for moving
traffic and providing for two-way movement of traffic, no vehicle shall be
driven to the left of the center line of the roadway, except when authorized
by official traffic-control devices designating certain lanes to the left
side of the center of the roadway for use by traffic not otherwise permitted
to use the lanes, or except as permitted under division (B)(1)(a) above.
However, division (B)(1)(a) above shall not be construed as prohibiting the
crossing of the center line in making a left turn into or from an alley,
private road, or driveway.



(Prior Code, § 8-2-13)



§ 71.023  PASSING OTHER VEHICLES.



   (A)   Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall
pass each other to the right; and upon roadways having width for not more
than one line of traffic in each direction, each driver shall give to the
other at least one-half of the main traveled portion of the roadway as nearly
as possible.



(Prior Code, § 8-2-14)



   (B)   The following rules govern the overtaking and passing of
vehicles proceeding in the same direction, subject to those limitations,
exceptions, and special rules otherwise stated in this chapter.



      (1)   The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle
proceeding in the same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe
distance, and shall not again drive to the right side of the roadway until
safely clear of the overtaken vehicle. In no event shall the movement be made
by driving off the pavement or the main traveled portion of the roadway.



      (2)   Except when overtaking and passing on the right is
permitted, the driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in
favor of the overtaking vehicle on audible signal and shall not increase the
speed of his or her vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.



      (3)   The driver of a two-wheeled vehicle may not, in passing
upon the left of any vehicle proceeding in the same direction, pass upon the
right of any vehicle proceeding in the same direction unless there is an
unobstructed lane of traffic available to permit the passing maneuver safely.



(Prior Code, § 8-2-15)



   (C)   (1)   The driver of a vehicle with three or more wheels may
overtake and pass upon the right of another vehicle only under the following
conditions:



         (a)   When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to
make a left turn;



         (b)   Upon a roadway with unobstructed pavement of
sufficient width for two or more lines of vehicles moving lawfully in the
direction being traveled by the overtaking vehicle; or



         (c)   Upon a one-way street or upon any roadway on which
traffic is restricted to one direction of movement where the roadway is free
from obstructions and of sufficient width for two or more lines of moving
vehicles.



      (2)   The driver of a two-wheeled vehicle may not pass upon
the right of any other vehicle proceeding in the same direction unless the
unobstructed pavement to the right of the vehicle being passed is of a width
of not less than eight feet.



      (3)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another
vehicle upon the right only under conditions permitting the movement in
safety. The movement shall not be made by driving off the roadway.



(Prior Code, § 8-2-16)



   (D)   No vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the center of
the roadway in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction unless authorized by the provisions of this chapter and unless the
left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient
distance ahead to permit the overtaking and passing to be completely made
without interfering with the safe operation of any vehicle approaching from
the opposite direction or any vehicle overtaken. In every event, the
overtaking vehicle must return to an authorized lane of travel as soon as
practicable and, in the event the passing movement involves the use of a lane
authorized for vehicles approaching from the opposite direction, before
coming within 200 feet of any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction.



(Prior Code, § 8-2-17)  Penalty, see § 71.999



§ 71.024  NO PASSING ZONES.



   (A)   The city is authorized to determine those portions of any
highway where overtaking and passing or driving on the left of the roadway
would be especially hazardous, and may, by appropriate signs or markings on
the roadway, indicate the beginning and end of these zones. When the signs or
markings are in place and clearly visible to an ordinarily observant person,
every driver of a vehicle shall obey the directions thereof.



   (B)   Where signs or markings are in place to define a no passing
zone as set forth above, no driver may at any time drive on the left side of
the roadway within the no passing zone, or on the left side of any pavement
striping designed to mark the no passing zone throughout its length.



   (C)   This section does not apply to the driver of a vehicle turning
left into or from an alley, private road, or driveway. The pavement striping
designed to mark the no passing zone may be crossed from the left hand lane
for the purpose of completing a pass that was begun prior to the beginning of
the zone in the driver’s direction of travel.



(Prior Code, § 8-2-19)  Penalty, see § 71.999



§ 71.025  DRIVING LEFT OF CENTER.



   (A)   No vehicle shall be driven on the left side of the roadway
under the following conditions:



      (1)   When approaching or upon the crest of a grade or a curve
in the highway where the driver’s view is obstructed within a distance as
to create a hazard in the event another vehicle might approach from the
opposite direction;



      (2)   When approaching within 100 feet of or traversing any
intersection or railroad grade crossing; or



      (3)   When the view is obstructed upon approaching within 100
feet of any bridge, viaduct, or tunnel.



   (B)   The limitations of division (A) above do not apply upon a
one-way roadway, nor upon a roadway with unobstructed pavement of sufficient
width for two or more lanes of moving traffic in each direction, nor to the
driver of a vehicle turning left into or from an alley, private road, or
driveway when the movements can be made safely.



(Prior Code, § 8-2-18)  Penalty, see § 71.999



§ 71.026  ONE-WAY ROADS; ROTARY TRAFFIC ISLANDS.



   (A)   The city may designate any highway, roadway, part of a
roadway, or specific lanes upon which vehicular traffic shall proceed in one
direction at all or at such times as shall be indicated by official
traffic-control devices.



   (B)   Upon a roadway designated for one-way traffic, a vehicle shall
be driven only in the direction designated at all or at such times as shall
be indicated by official traffic-control devices.



   (C)   A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island must be
driven only to the right of the island.



   (D)   Whenever any highway has been divided into two or more
roadways by leaving an intervening space or by a physical barrier or a
clearly indicated dividing section so constructed as to impede vehicular
traffic, every vehicle must be driven only upon the right-hand roadway unless
directed or permitted to use another roadway by official traffic-control
devices or police officers. No vehicle may be driven over, across, or within
any dividing space, barrier, or section except through an opening in the
physical barrier, or dividing section or space, or at a crossover or
intersection as established by public authority.



   (E)   The driver of a vehicle may turn left across a paved
non-curbed dividing space unless prohibited by an official traffic-control
device.



(Prior Code, § 8-2-20)  Penalty, see § 71.999



§ 71.027  DRIVING ON ROADS LANED FOR TRAFFIC.



   Whenever any roadway has been divided into two or more clearly marked
lanes for traffic, the following rules, in addition to all others consistent
herewith, shall apply.



   (A)   A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practicable entirely
within a single lane and shall not be moved from the lane until the driver
has first ascertained that the movement can be made with safety.



   (B)   Upon a roadway which is divided into three lanes and provides
for two-way movement of traffic, a vehicle shall not be driven in the center
lane except when overtaking and passing another vehicle traveling in the same
direction, when the center lane is clear of traffic within a safe distance,
or in preparation for making a left turn, or where the center lane is at the
time allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the same direction that the
vehicle is proceeding and the allocation is designated by official
traffic-control devices.



   (C)   Official traffic-control devices may be installed prohibiting
the changing of lanes on sections of roadway, and drivers of vehicles shall
obey the directions of every device.



(Prior Code, § 8-2-21)  Penalty, see § 71.999



§ 71.028  DRIVING ON THE SHOULDER.



   (A)   Vehicles shall be driven on a roadway, and shall only be
driven on the shoulder for the purpose of stopping or accelerating from a
stop while merging into traffic. It shall be a violation of this section, if
while merging into traffic and while on the shoulder, the vehicle passes any
other vehicle on the roadway adjacent to it.



   (B)   This section shall not apply to any authorized emergency
vehicle or to any service vehicle while engaged in maintenance of the highway
or related work.



(Prior Code, § 8-2-22)  Penalty, see § 71.999



§ 71.029  FOLLOWING TOO CLOSELY.



   (A)   The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle
more closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed
of vehicles and the traffic upon the condition of the highway.



   (B)   The driver of any truck or motor vehicle drawing another
vehicle when traveling upon a roadway outside of a business or residence
district, and which is following another truck or motor vehicle drawing
another vehicle shall, whenever conditions permit, leave sufficient space so
that an overtaking vehicle may enter and occupy the space without danger,
except that this shall not prevent a truck or motor vehicle drawing another
vehicle from overtaking and passing any vehicle or combination of vehicles.



   (C)   Motor vehicles being driven upon any roadway outside of a
business or residence district in a caravan or motorcade, whether or not
towing other vehicles, shall be so operated as to allow sufficient space
between each vehicle or combination of vehicles so as to enable any other
vehicle to enter and occupy the space without danger. This provision shall
not apply to funeral processions.



(Prior Code, § 8-2-23)  Penalty, see § 71.999




TURNING AND YIELDING




§ 71.040  TURNS AT INTERSECTIONS.



   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do
so as follows.



   (A)   Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be
made as close to the right hand curb or edge of the roadway.



   (B)   At any intersection where traffic is permitted to move in both
directions on each roadway entering the intersection, an approach for a left
turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest
the centerline thereof and by passing to the right of the center line where
it enters the intersection, and, after entering the intersection, the left
turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the center
line of the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable, the left turn shall
be made in that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the
intersection.



(Prior Code, § 8-2-24)  Penalty, see § 71.999



§ 71.041  YIELD AT INTERSECTION.



   When two vehicles enter an intersection from different streets at
approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall
yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right. This section applies
where no traffic signs or operating traffic light exists.



(Prior Code, § 8-2-28)  Penalty, see § 71.999



§ 71.042  LEFT TURN YIELD.



   The driver of a vehicle within an intersection intending to turn to the
left shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the
opposite direction which is within the intersection or so close thereto as to
constitute an immediate hazard.



(Prior Code, § 8-2-29)  Penalty, see § 71.999



§ 71.043  SAFE MOVEMENT OF STOPPED VEHICLE.



   No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing, or parked
unless the movement can be made with reasonable safety.



(Prior Code, § 8-2-25)  Penalty, see § 71.999



§ 71.044  SIGNAL REQUIRED FOR TURNING OR STOPPING; METHOD OF SIGNALING.



   (A)   (1)   A signal of intention to turn right or left shall be
given during not less than the last 100 feet traveled by the vehicle before
turning.



      (2)   No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a
vehicle without first giving an appropriate signal to the driver of any
vehicle immediately to the rear when there is opportunity to give the signal.



(Prior Code, § 8-2-26)



   (B)   Any stop or turn signal when required herein shall be given
either by means of the hand and arm, or by a signal lamp or lamps or
mechanical signal device.



(Prior Code, § 8-2-27)  Penalty, see § 71.999



§ 71.045  STOPPING AT STOP SIGN.



   Every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop sign shall stop before
entering the crosswalk or the near side of the intersection, or, in the event
there is no crosswalk, at a clearly marked stop line, but, if none, then at
the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of
approaching traffic on the intersecting highway before entering the
intersection, except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic
control signal.



(Prior Code, § 8-2-30)  Penalty, see § 71.999



§ 71.046  YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY; PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE OF FAILURE TO YIELD.



   (A)   The driver of a vehicle in obedience to a yield right-of-way
sign shall reduce the speed of his or her vehicle to not more than 20 mph,
and shall yield right-of-way to other vehicles which have entered the
intersection highway, either from the left or right, or which are approaching
too closely on the intersecting highway so as to constitute an immediate
hazard, but the driver having so yielded may proceed at a time as a safe
interval occurs.



(Prior Code, § 8-2-31)



   (B)   If a driver is involved in a collision at an intersection or
interferes with the movement of other vehicles after driving past a yield
right-of-way sign or after stopping at a stop sign, the collision or
interference shall be deemed prima facie evidence of the driver’s failure
to yield the right-of-way.



(Prior Code, § 8-2-32)  Penalty, see § 71.999



§ 71.047  PEDESTRIAN RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   (A)   Where stop signs or flashing red signals are in place at an
intersection or at a plainly marked crosswalk between intersections, drivers
of vehicles shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk, and pedestrians
within or entering the crosswalk at either edge of the roadway shall have the
right-of-way over vehicles so stopped. Drivers of vehicles having yielded the
right-of-way to pedestrians entering or within the nearest crosswalk at an
intersection shall also yield the right-of-way to pedestrians within any
other crosswalk at the intersection.



   (B)   Where traffic control signals or signs are not in place or in
operation, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down
or stopping if need be to yield to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within
any marked crosswalk or within any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection.



   (C)   Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk, or at
any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection, to permit a pedestrian to cross
the roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall
not overtake and pass the stopped vehicle.



(Prior Code, § 8-2-33)  Penalty, see § 71.999



§ 71.048  VEHICLES ENTERING FROM PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY MUST YIELD.



   The driver of a vehicle about to enter or cross the highway from a
private road or driveway shall yield right-of-way to all vehicles approaching
on the highways.



(Prior Code, § 8-2-34)  Penalty, see § 71.999



§ 71.049  YIELD FOR EMERGENCY VEHICLE REQUIRED.



   Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle, when
the driver is giving audible signal by siren or bell or flashing red light
visible from all directions, the driver of every other vehicle shall yield
the right-of-way and shall immediately drive to a position parallel to and as
close as possible to the right hand edge or curb of the street, clear of any
intersection, and shall stop and remain in the position until the authorized
emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a police
officer.



(Prior Code, § 8-2-35)  Penalty, see § 71.999



§ 71.050  VEHICLES EMERGING FROM ALLEY MUST STOP AND YIELD.



   The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway, or building
shall stop the vehicle immediately prior to driving onto sidewalk or into the
sidewalk area extending across any alleyway or driveway, and shall yield the
right-of-way to any pedestrian as may be necessary to avoid collision, and
upon entering the roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles
approaching on the roadway.



(Prior Code, § 8-2-37)  Penalty, see § 71.999



§ 71.051  RAILROAD CROSSING SIGNALS.



   Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad crossing
and a clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives warning of
the approach of a train, or when crossing gate is lowered or flagperson gives
signal to stop, the driver of the vehicle shall stop and remain standing and
shall not proceed until he or she can do so safely.



(Prior Code, § 8-2-36)  Penalty, see § 71.999




VEHICLE OPERATION




§ 71.065  ANGLE AND PARALLEL PARKING.



   (A)   The driver of a vehicle shall park the vehicle on the streets
only in the prescribed spaces and areas specified by this code of ordinances.



   (B)   PARALLEL PARKING shall mean that the vehicle shall be parked
in the prescribed space for parking and that the right side of the vehicle
will be parallel to the curb and not over 12 inches away from the curb line.



   (C)   ANGLE PARKING shall mean that the vehicle shall be parked in
the prescribed space for parking, and vehicles so parked shall be parallel to
each other but not parallel to the curb line, but the front of the vehicle
shall be driven toward the curb.



   (D)   No vehicle shall be parked with the rear of the vehicle to the
curb, except when the vehicle is parked for the purpose of loading and
unloading, exclusive of passengers.



(Prior Code, § 8-2-38)  Penalty, see § 71.999



§ 71.066  UNATTENDED MOTOR VEHICLES.



   No person driving, or in charge of a motor vehicle, shall permit it to
stand unattended without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition, and
removing the key, or when standing upon any perceptible grade, without
effectively setting the brake thereon and turning the front wheels to the
curb or side of the highway.



(Prior Code, § 8-2-39)  Penalty, see § 71.999



§ 71.067  IMPROPER BACKING.



   The driver of a vehicle shall not back the vehicle unless the movement
can be made with reasonable safety and without interfering with other traffic.



(Prior Code, § 8-2-40)  Penalty, see § 71.999



§ 71.068  UNSAFE VEHICLE; INTERFERENCE WITH OPERATION OR VIEW.



   (A)   (1)   No person shall drive a motor vehicle when the
driver’s view to the front or rear is so obstructed as not to have clear
vision in both directions by reason of too many passengers, ice, and snow, or
any other reason.



      (2)   No passenger in a vehicle shall interfere with the
driver’s control of the vehicle or the driving mechanism of the vehicle.



(Prior Code, § 8-2-41)



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to drive or move, or for the
owner to cause or knowingly permit to be driven or moved, on any street, any
vehicle or combination of vehicles which is in unsafe condition as to
endanger any person or property, or which does not contain those parts, or is
not at all times equipped with lamps and other equipment in proper condition
and adjustment as required by state statutes.



(Prior Code, § 8-2-44)  Penalty, see § 71.999



§ 71.069  FOLLOWING FIRE VEHICLES; DRIVING OVER HOSES.



   (A)   The driver of any vehicle, other than one on official
business, shall not follow any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire
alarm closer than 500 feet, or drive into or park the vehicle within the
block where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm.



   (B)   No vehicle shall be driven over an unprotected hose of a Fire
Department when laid down on any street or private driveway to be used at any
fire or alarm of fire without the consent of the Fire Department official in
command.



(Prior Code, § 8-2-42)  Penalty, see § 71.999



§ 71.070  PUBLIC LITTERING PROHIBITED.



   No person shall throw or deposit litter or any destructive or injurious
material in or upon any public highways, sidewalks, private ways, streets,
alleys, commons, or any public place within the city, except in public or
private trash receptacles. For the purpose of this section, PUBLIC PLACE
includes the quasi-public area in front of or adjacent to any store, shop,
restaurant, luncheonette, or other place of business and also includes
parking lots or other vacant property not owned or under the control of the
person charged with a violation of this section.



(Prior Code, § 8-2-43)  Penalty, see § 71.999



§ 71.071  FAULTY BRAKES.



   Every motor vehicle shall be equipped with brakes adequate to stop the
vehicle within distances prescribed by state statute.



(Prior Code, § 8-2-45)



§ 71.072  CONTROL OVER VEHICLE REQUIRED AT ALL TIMES.



   It shall be unlawful for any driver to operate a motor vehicle on any
street in a manner that the operator does not have full and complete control
over the vehicle at all times.



(Prior Code, § 8-2-46)  Penalty, see § 71.999



§ 71.073  PARKING TIME LIMIT; AUTHORIZATION TO REMOVE ILLEGALLY STOPPED
VEHICLES.



   (A)   (1)   Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle standing
upon a street in violation of any of the foregoing provisions of this
chapter, the officer is hereby authorized to move the vehicle or require the
driver or other person in charge of the vehicle to move the same, to a
position off the paved or improved or main traveled part of the street.



      (2)   No person other than a police officer, as provided in
this section, shall move a vehicle into any prohibited area or away from a
curb such distance as unlawful or start, or cause to be started, the motor of
any motor vehicle, or shift, change, or move the levers, brake, starting
device, gears, or other mechanism of a parked motor vehicle to a position
other than in which it was left by the owner or driver thereof, or attempt to
do so.



(Prior Code, § 8-2-47)



   (B)   (1)   Subject to the provisions of § 72.08, it is hereby
unlawful to park any vehicle on any street or highway or any public parking
area for a period of longer than 72 consecutive hours.



      (2)   Each additional 24-hour period during which any vehicle
shall remain parked in violation of this chapter shall be a separate offense.



   (C)   Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle parked in
violation of the provisions of division (B) of this section, the officer is
hereby authorized to move such vehicle to the nearest garage or other place
of safety at the owner’s expense, or to require the owner or other person
in charge of the vehicle to move it so as to remove the existing parking
violation.



(Prior Code, § 8-2-49)  (Ord. O-12-066, passed 11-13-2012; Ord. O-16-176,
passed 10-11-2016) Penalty, see § 71.999



Cross-reference:



   Immobilization program, § 36.13



§ 71.074  MUFFLERS; UNNECESSARY NOISE.



   (A)   Every driver of a motor vehicle shall at all times have the
engine muffled so as to not emit loud and annoying noises.



(Prior Code, § 8-2-48)



   (B)   (1)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle in a manner
so as to cause or allow to be emitted squealing, screeching, or other noise
from the vehicle’s tires due to rapid acceleration or excessive speed
around corners or other reason.



      (2)   This section shall not apply to the following conditions:



         (a)   An authorized emergency vehicle when responding to
an emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual suspected violator;



         (b)   The emergency operation of a motor vehicle when
avoiding imminent danger; or



         (c)   Any raceway, racing facility, or other public
event not part of a highway, sanctioned by the appropriate governmental
authority.



(Prior Code, § 8-2-50)  Penalty, see § 71.999



§ 71.075  RECKLESS DRIVING.



   All persons are hereby prohibited from driving any vehicle with a
willful or wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property within the
city limits.



(Prior Code, § 8-2-52)  Penalty, see § 71.999



§ 71.076  ENGINE BRAKES AND COMPRESSION BRAKES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to use or
operate or cause to be used or operated within the city any engine brake,
compression brake or mechanical exhaust device designed to aid in the braking
or deceleration of any vehicle that results in excessive, loud, unusual or
explosive noise from such vehicle, except in the case of a true emergency to
avoid damage to property or injury to any person.



   (B)   The usage of an engine brake, compression brake or mechanical
exhaust device designed to aid in braking or deceleration in such a manner so
as to be audible at a distance of 300 feet from the motor vehicle shall
constitute prima facie evidence of a violation of this section.



(Ord. 1956, passed 11-10-2009)  Penalty see § 71.999



§ 71.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   (1)   Any violations of the provisions of this chapter
shall be punishable by a minimum fine of $25 and a maximum fine of $750 and
further be subject to abatement of the nuisance. In the event a person
violates this chapter a second or subsequent time, the minimum fine shall be
$50.



      (2)   In the event that a person is charged with a violation
of this chapter under an ordinance violation notice as a first-time offender,
the person may satisfy the penalty by paying the $25 fine in person or by
mail within five days of being charged with the violation. All penalties
shall be paid at the Police Department.



(Prior Code, § 8-2-53)



   (B)   Any person found guilty of § 71.075 shall be fined for a
first offense a total of not less than $25 nor more than $500, and shall be
fined for any second or subsequent conviction within any ten-year period a
total of not less than $100 nor more than $500.



(Prior Code, § 8-2-52)



CHAPTER 72:  PARKING REGULATIONS



Section



   72.01   Unlawful parking prohibited



   72.02   Parking permits



   72.03   Parallel parking restrictions



   72.04   Disabled person parking



   72.05   Disabled person parking decals



   72.06   Unauthorized use of disabled person parking places prohibited



   72.07   Authorization to remove vehicles



   72.08   Truck parking prohibited; loading exceptions



   72.09   Refuse dumpster parking prohibited



 



   72.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Determination of liability; motor vehicle citations, § 36.11



   Driver's license suspension, § 36.14



   Enforcement of motor vehicle violations; citations, § 36.10



   Immobilization program, § 36.13



   Lessor of vehicle–liability, § 36.12



§ 72.01  UNLAWFUL PARKING PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit any vehicle
registered in his or her name to be unlawfully parked as set out in this
chapter. In any judicial hearing involving a prosecution for violation of
this chapter, testimony that a vehicle bearing a certain license plate was
found unlawfully parked as prohibited by this chapter, and further testimony
that the records of the Secretary of State show that the license plate was
issued to the defendant, shall be prima facie evidence that the defendant
caused or permitted the vehicle to be unlawfully parked. Testimony that the
records of the Secretary of State show that the license plate was issued to
the defendant shall be satisfied by a certified copy of the vehicle
registration to that effect.



(Prior Code, § 8-3-3)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.02  PARKING PERMITS.



   Temporary parking permits may be issued from time to time by the City
Clerk, having the validity not to exceed four days in duration. The permits
shall be issued only upon application of a group of users and shall be issued
only with the approval of the Chief of Police. The permits shall entitle
holders thereof to park in any lawful parking area for a period of time
exceeding two hours.



(Prior Code, § 8-3-5)



§ 72.03  PARALLEL PARKING RESTRICTIONS.



   No truck or other motor vehicle having an overall length exceeding 20
feet, or an overall width exceeding seven feet, shall be parked otherwise
than parallel with the curb, except while being loaded or unloaded, and then
for a period of not longer than 30 minutes.



(Prior Code, § 8-3-6)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.04  DISABLED PERSON PARKING.



   (A)   A motor vehicle bearing registration plates issued to a
disabled person or to a disabled veteran, or a motor vehicle registered in
another jurisdiction, state, district, territory, or foreign country upon
which is displayed a registration plate, special decal, or device issued by
the other jurisdiction designating the vehicle is operated by or for a
disabled person, shall be exempt from the payment of parking meter fees and
exempt from any statute or ordinance imposing time limitations on parking,
except limitations of one-half hour or less, on any street or highway zone or
any parking lot or parking place which is owned, leased, or owned and leased
by a municipality or a municipal parking utility, and shall be recognized as
a valid license plate or parking device, and shall receive the same parking
privileges as residents of this state, but the vehicle shall be subject to
the laws which prohibit parking in no stopping and no standing zones in front
of or near fire hydrants, driveways, public buildings entrances and exits,
bus stops, and loading areas, and is prohibited from parking where the motor
vehicle constitutes a traffic hazard, whereby the motor vehicle shall be
moved at the instruction and request of a law enforcement officer to a
location designated by the officer. Any motor vehicle bearing registration
plates or a special decal or device specified in this section, or a parking
device specifically authorized as evidence that the vehicle is operated by or
for a disabled person or disabled veteran, may park, in addition to any other
lawful place, in any parking place specifically reserved for the vehicles by
the posting of an official sign. Parking privileges granted by this section
are strictly limited to the person to whom the special registration plates,
special decal, or device were issued, and to qualified operators acting under
his or her express direction while the disabled person is present.



   (B)   The parking privileges granted by this section are also
extended to motor vehicles of not-for-profit organizations used for the
transportation of disabled persons when the motor vehicles display the decal
or device issued pursuant to this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 8-3-8)



§ 72.05  DISABLED PERSON PARKING DECALS.



   The Secretary of State shall provide for, by administrative rules, the
design, size, color, and placement of disability registration plates, decal
or device, and shall issue to the person with disabilities the registration
plates, decal, or device as provided for at ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 3-616.
This registration plate, decal or device shall be the property of the person
with disabilities or organization and may be used by that person or
organization to designate and identify a vehicle not owned or displaying a
registration plate to designate when the vehicle is being used to transport
the disabled person or persons, and thus is entitled to enjoy all the
privileges that would be afforded a disability-licensed vehicle.



(Prior Code, § 8-3-9)



§ 72.06  UNAUTHORIZED USE OF DISABLED PERSON PARKING PLACES PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It shall be prohibited to park any motor vehicle which is not
bearing registration plates or decals issued to a disabled person or to a
disabled veteran, as evidence that the vehicle is operated by or for a
disabled person or disabled veteran, in any parking place, including any
private or public off-street parking facility specifically reserved by the
positing of an official sign for motor vehicles bearing the registration
plates. Any motor vehicle bearing a disability license plate or a disabled
parking decal or device containing the international symbol of access issued
to disabled persons by any local authority, state, district, territory, or
foreign country shall be recognized by the city as a valid license plate or
device, and receive the same parking privileges as residents of this state.



   (B)   Any person owning or operating any public or private
off-street parking facility may, after notifying the police, remove, or cause
to be removed, to the nearest garage or other place of safety any vehicle
parked within a stall or space reserved for use by the disabled which does
not display disabled registration plates or a special decal or device as
required under this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 8-3-10)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.07  AUTHORIZATION TO REMOVE VEHICLES.



   (A)   Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle in violation of
any of the provisions of § 72.06, the officer is hereby authorized to move
the vehicle or require the driver or other person in charge of the vehicle to
move the same to a position off the roadway.



   (B)   Any police officer is hereby authorized to remove, or cause to
be removed, to a place of safety any unattended vehicle illegally left
standing upon any highway, bridge, causeway, or in a tunnel, in a position or
under circumstances as to obstruct the normal movement of traffic.



   (C)   Any police officer is hereby authorized to remove, or cause to
be removed, to the nearest garage or other place of safety, any vehicle found
upon a highway when:



      (1)   Report has been made that the vehicle has been stolen or
taken without the consent of its owner;



      (2)   The person or persons in charge of the vehicle are
unable to provide for its custody or removal; or



      (3)   The person driving or in control of the vehicle is
arrested for an alleged offense for which the officer is required by law to
take the person arrested before a proper magistrate without unnecessary delay.



(Prior Code, § 8-3-11)



Cross-reference:



   Immobilization program, § 36.13



§ 72.08  TRUCK PARKING PROHIBITED; LOADING EXCEPTIONS.



   Any vehicle required, because of greater size or weight, for the driver
to have a license other than a Class C license under the laws of the state,
that being any motor vehicle with a GVWR of more than 16,000 pounds,
excluding any vehicle designed to carry 16 or more passengers, including the
driver, is prohibited from parking on the streets in the city. However, these
vehicles may park for the purpose of loading or unloading only, and the
loading shall be restricted to the hours of 5:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.



(Prior Code, § 8-3-13)



§ 72.09  REFUSE DUMPSTER PARKING PROHIBITED.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      REFUSE CONTAINER.  Any metal, wood, or plastic container used to
hold refuse, being of a size and/or design that it requires the use of a
truck specially equipped with a self-compactor, lift, or an industrial
roll-off hoist when transported.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to
place, or cause to be placed, a refuse container within the limits of the
public right-of-way:



      (1)   If ample space for placement of the refuse container is
available on the adjacent private property;



      (2)   If flashing barricades have not been properly placed so
as to warn motorists;



      (3)   If the refuse container does not have properly placed
reflective markers; and



      (4)   If the person, firm, or corporation has not received
written permission from the Public Service Superintendent and the Chief of
Police.



(Prior Code, § 8-3-14)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   The minimum fine for any violation of this chapter shall be
$10 if paid within 15 days of the date of the violation. In the event that
the fine is not paid within 15 days, the minimum fine shall become $20, and
the maximum fine shall be $500.



(Prior Code, § 8-3-15)



   (B)   Any person who violates division (A) of § 72.06 shall be
fined $250.



(Prior Code, § 8-3-10)



CHAPTER 73:  RECREATIONAL VEHICLES



Section




Bicycles




   73.001   Application of chapter



   73.002   Traffic laws applied



   73.003   Proper riding position; use of hands



   73.004   Clinging to vehicle prohibited



   73.005   Riding near edge of roadway; exceptions



   73.006   Riding side by side



   73.007   Lamps; reflectors; equipment



   73.008   Lamps required on motorized pedal cycle



   73.009   Identification number required



   73.010   Bicycle inspection



   73.011   Left turn requirements; turn and stop signals



   73.012   Parking



   73.013   Bicycle racing; trick riding



   73.014   Riding or parking on sidewalk prohibited




Snowmobiles




   73.025   Definitions



   73.026   Prohibitions on operation



   73.027   Exceptions



   73.028   Required equipment



   73.029   Unattended vehicles



   73.030   Traffic regulations applied



   73.031   Declaration of snow emergency




Electric Scooters




   73.045   Application of rules and regulations to scooters



   73.046   Single driver; no passenger allowed



   73.047   Operation restricted to sidewalks and bike path



   73.048   Bicycle safety provisions apply



   73.049   Maximum speed; minimum age




Non-Highway Vehicles




   73.060   Purpose



   73.061   Definitions



   73.062   Prohibitions and limitations on operation



 



   73.999   Penalty




BICYCLES




§ 73.001  APPLICATION OF CHAPTER.



   It is unlawful for any person to do any act forbidden, or fail to
perform any act required, in this chapter. The parent of any child, and the
guardian of any ward, shall not authorize or knowingly permit any child or
ward to violate any of the provisions of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 8-4-1)  Penalty, see § 73.999



§ 73.002  TRAFFIC LAWS APPLIED.



   Every person riding a bicycle upon a highway shall be granted all of
the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver
of a vehicle by this chapter, except as to those provisions of this chapter
which by their nature can have no application.



(Prior Code, § 8-4-2)



§ 73.003  PROPER RIDING POSITION; USE OF HANDS.



   (A)   (1)   A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other
than upon or astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto.



      (2)   No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one
time than the number for which it is designed and equipped, except that an
adult rider may carry a child securely attached to his or her person in a
backpack or sling.



(Prior Code, § 8-4-3) 



   (B)   No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle,
or article which prevents the use of both hands in the control and operation
of the bicycle.  A person operating a bicycle shall keep at least one hand
on the handlebars at all times.



(Prior Code, § 8-4-7)  Penalty, see § 73.999



§ 73.004  CLINGING TO VEHICLE PROHIBITED.



   No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled, or toy
vehicle shall attach the same or themselves to any vehicle upon a roadway.



(Prior Code, § 8-4-4)  Penalty, see § 73.999



§ 73.005  RIDING NEAR EDGE OF ROADWAY; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   Any person operating a bicycle or motorized pedal cycle upon a
roadway at less than the normal speed of traffic at the time and place and
under the conditions then existing, shall ride as close as practicable to the
right hand curb or edge of the roadway, except under the following situations:



      (1)   When passing another bicycle, motorized pedal cycle, or
vehicle proceeding in the same direction;



      (2)   When preparing for a left turn at an intersection or
into a private road or driveway; or



      (3)   When reasonably necessary to avoid conditions including,
but not limited to, fixed or moving objects, parked or moving vehicles,
bicycles, motorized pedal cycles, pedestrians, animals, surface hazards, or
substandard width lanes that make it unsafe to continue along the right hand
curb or edge. For purposes of this division, SUBSTANDARD WIDTH LANE means a
lane that is too narrow for a bicycle or motorized pedal cycle and a vehicle
to travel safely side by side within the lane.



   (B)   Any person operating a bicycle or motorized pedal cycle upon a
one-way highway with two or more marked traffic lanes may ride as near the
left hand curb or edge of the roadway as practicable.



(Prior Code, § 8-4-5)



§ 73.006  RIDING SIDE BY SIDE.



   Persons riding bicycles or motorized pedal cycles upon a roadway shall
not ride more than two abreast, except on paths or parts of roadways set
aside for their exclusive use. Persons riding two abreast shall not impede
the normal and reasonable movement of traffic and, on a laned roadway, shall
ride within a single lane, subject to the provisions of § 73.005.



(Prior Code, § 8-4-6)  Penalty, see § 73.999



§ 73.007  LAMPS; REFLECTORS; EQUIPMENT.



   (A)   Every bicycle, when in use at nighttime, shall be equipped
with a lamp on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a
distance of at least 500 feet to the front, and with a red reflector on the
rear, of a type approved by the city, which shall be visible from all
distances from 100 to 600 feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful
lower beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light
visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear may be used in addition to
the red reflector.



   (B)   A bicycle shall not be equipped with, nor shall any person use
upon a bicycle, any siren.



   (C)   Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will
adequately control movement of and stop and hold the bicycle.



   (D)   No person shall sell a new bicycle, or a pedal for use on a
bicycle, that is not equipped with a reflex reflector on each pedal,
conforming to specifications prescribed by the Department and visible from
the front and rear of the bicycle during darkness from a distance of 200 feet.



   (E)   No person shall sell or offer for sale a new bicycle that is
not equipped with side reflectors. The reflectors shall be visible from each
side of the bicycle from a distance of 500 feet and shall be essentially
colorless or red to the rear of the center of the bicycle and essentially
colorless or amber to the front of the center of the bicycle provided. The
requirements of this division may be met by reflective materials which shall
be at least three-sixteenths of an inch wide on each side of each tire or rim
to indicate as clearly as possible the continuous circular shape and size of
the tires or rims of the bicycle and which reflective materials may be of the
same color on both the front and rear tire or rim. The reflectors shall
conform to specifications prescribed by the city.



   (F)   No person shall sell or offer for sale a new bicycle that is
not equipped with an essentially colorless front-facing reflector.



(Prior Code, § 8-4-8)  Penalty, see § 73.999



§ 73.008  LAMPS REQUIRED ON MOTORIZED PEDAL CYCLE.



   Every motorized pedal cycle, when in use at nighttime, shall be
equipped with a lamp on the front which shall emit a white light visible from
a distance of at least 500 feet to the front, and with a red reflector on the
rear, of a type approved by the city, which shall be visible from a distance
from 100 feet to 600 feet to the rear when in front of lawful, low-powered
beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light visible
from a distance of 500 feet to the rear may be used in addition to the red
reflector.



(Prior Code, § 8-4-9)  Penalty, see § 73.999



§ 73.009  IDENTIFICATION NUMBER REQUIRED.



   A person engaged in the business of selling bicycles at retail shall
not sell any bicycle unless the bicycle has an identifying number permanently
stamped or cast on its frame.



(Prior Code, § 8-4-10)  Penalty, see § 73.999



§ 73.010  BICYCLE INSPECTION.



   A uniformed police officer may at any time, upon reasonable cause to
believe that a bicycle is unsafe or not equipped as required by law, or that
its equipment is not in proper adjustment or repair, require the person
riding the bicycle to stop and submit the bicycle to an inspection and test
with reference thereto, as may be appropriate.



(Prior Code, § 8-4-11)



§ 73.011  LEFT TURN REQUIREMENTS; TURN AND STOP SIGNALS.



   (A)   (1)   A person riding a bicycle or motorized pedal cycle
intending to turn left shall follow a course described in division (A)(2) of
this section.



      (2)   A person riding a bicycle or motorized pedal cycle,
intending to turn left, shall approach the turn as close as practicable to
the right curb or edge of the roadway. After proceeding across the
intersection roadway to the far corner of the curb or intersection of the
roadway edges, the bicyclist or motorized pedal cycle driver shall stop, as
much as practicable, out of the way of traffic. After stopping, the person
shall yield to any traffic proceeding in either direction along the roadway
the person had been using. After yielding, the bicycle or motorized pedal
cycle driver shall comply with any official traffic-control device or police
officer regulating traffic on the highway along which he or she intends to
proceed, and the bicyclist or motorized pedal cycle driver may proceed in the
new direction.



      (3)   Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, the city may
cause official traffic-control devices to be placed and, thereby, require and
direct that a specific course be traveled by turning bicycles and motorized
pedal cycles, and, when devices are so placed, no person shall turn a bicycle
or motorized pedal cycle other than as directed and required by the devices.



(Prior Code, § 8-4-12)



   (B)   A signal of intention to turn right or left, when required,
shall be given during not less than the last 100 feet traveled by the bicycle
before turning, and shall be given while the bicycle is stopped waiting to
turn. A signal by hand and arm need not be given continuously, if the hand is
needed in the control or operation of the bicycle.



(Prior Code, § 8-4-13)  Penalty, see § 73.999



§ 73.012  PARKING.



   (A)   A person may park a bicycle on a sidewalk, unless prohibited
or restricted by an official traffic-control device.



   (B)   A bicycle parked on a sidewalk shall not impede the normal and
reasonable movement of pedestrian or other traffic.



   (C)   A bicycle may be parked on the roadway at any angle to the
curb or edge of the roadway at any location where parking is allowed.



   (D)   A bicycle may be parked on the roadway abreast of another
bicycle or bicycles near the side of the roadway at any location where
parking is allowed.



   (E)   A person shall not park a bicycle on a roadway in such a
manner as to obstruct the movement of a legally parked motor vehicle.



   (F)   In all other respects, bicycles parked anywhere on a highway
shall conform with the provisions of this title regulating the parking of
vehicles.



(Prior Code, § 8-4-14)  Penalty, see § 73.999



§ 73.013  BICYCLE RACING; TRICK RIDING.



   (A)   (1)   Bicycle racing on a highway shall not be unlawful
when a racing event has been approved by the city on any highway under their
respective jurisdictions. Approval of bicycle highway racing events shall be
granted only under conditions which assure reasonable safety for all race
participants, spectators, and other highway users, and which prevent
unreasonable interference with traffic flow which would seriously
inconvenience other highway users.



      (2)   By agreement with the city, participants in an approved
bicycle highway racing event may be exempted from compliance with any traffic
laws otherwise applicable thereto, provided that traffic control is adequate
to assure the safety of all highway users.



(Prior Code, § 8-4-15)



   (B)   No rider of a bicycle shall remove both hands from the
handlebars, or feet from the pedals, or practice any acrobatic or fancy
riding on any street, nor shall any person operating a bicycle upon a public
highway participate in any race for speed or endurance contest with any other
vehicles except under permit from and under the supervision of the Chief of
Police.



(Prior Code, § 8-4-16)  Penalty, see § 73.999



§ 73.014  RIDING OR PARKING ON SIDEWALK PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or operate any
form of bicycle, tricycle, skateboard, roller skates, push scooter, or
similar vehicle upon the sidewalks located in the city, except sidewalks
which are in the residential districts of the city. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT, as
used herein, shall mean that portion of the city which is so defined and
limited in the zoning provisions of the city. Parents or guardians who push
or pull strollers or wagons to convey their young children are specifically
excepted from the prohibition of this section.



(Prior Code, § 8-4-17)



   (B)   Bicycles which are parked in business districts shall be
parked in designated bicycle parking areas. They shall not be parked on the
sidewalks.



(Prior Code, § 8-4-18)  Penalty, see § 73.999




SNOWMOBILES




§ 73.025  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   OPERATE.  To control the operation of a snowmobile.



   OPERATOR.  A person who operates or is in actual control of a
snowmobile.



   SNOWMOBILE.  A self-propelled vehicle designed for travel on snow or
ice, in natural terrain, steered by wheels, skis, or runners.



(Prior Code, § 8-5-1)



§ 73.026  PROHIBITIONS ON OPERATION.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile under the
following circumstances:



   (A)   On private property of another without the express permission
to do so by the owner or occupant of the property;



   (B)   On public school grounds, park property, playgrounds, and
recreational areas without express provision or permission to do so by the
proper public authority;



   (C)   In a manner so as to create loud, unnecessary, or unusual
noise so as to disturb or interfere with the peace and quiet of other persons;



   (D)   In a careless, reckless, or negligent manner so as to endanger
the safety of any person or the property of any other person;



   (E)   Without having the snowmobile registered as provided for by
statute, except that this provision shall not apply to the operation of a
snowmobile on the private property of the owner by the owner or a member of
his or her immediate family; or



   (F)   Within the right-of-way of any public street.



(Prior Code, § 8-5-2)  Penalty, see § 73.999



§ 73.027  EXCEPTIONS.



   Notwithstanding the prohibitions of this subchapter, the Park Board
shall have the authority to supervise and regulate events or programs in
connection with events conducted by the Park Department in which snowmobiles
are used. The Park Board shall have the authority to designate city park
areas that it shall deem available for the use of snowmobiles.



(Prior Code, § 8-5-3)



§ 73.028  REQUIRED EQUIPMENT.



   All snowmobiles operated within the city shall have the following
equipment:



   (A)   Mufflers which are properly attached and which reduce the
noise of operation of the vehicle to the minimum noise necessary for
operating the vehicle, and no person shall use a muffler cut-out, by-pass, or
similar device on the vehicle;



   (B)   Adequate brakes in good working condition, and at least one
headlight and one taillight; and



   (C)   A safety or so called dead man throttle in operating
condition. SAFETY or DEAD MAN THROTTLE is a device which, when pressure is
removed from the accelerator or throttle, causes the motor to be disengaged
from the driving track.



(Prior Code, § 8-5-4)  Penalty, see § 73.999



§ 73.029  UNATTENDED VEHICLES.



   It is unlawful for the owner or operator to leave or allow a snowmobile
to be or remain unattended on public property while the motor is running, or
with the keys for starting the vehicle left in the ignition.



(Prior Code, § 8-5-5)  Penalty, see § 73.999



§ 73.030  TRAFFIC REGULATIONS APPLIED.



   Each person operating a snowmobile shall strictly observe all traffic
signs and signals and all other traffic rules and regulations applicable
thereto, and shall obey the orders and directions of any police officer of
the city authorized to direct or regulate traffic.



(Prior Code, § 8-5-6)  Penalty, see § 73.999



§ 73.031  DECLARATION OF SNOW EMERGENCY.



   The Mayor of the city shall have the power to declare a snow emergency
and suspend the provisions of § 73.026(F) for a period of time to be
specified by the Mayor in his or her declaration of the snow emergency.
During the suspension period of the section, a snowmobile may be operated
within the right-of-way of any public street within the city, but only if the
operator shall have a valid driver’s license or is accompanied by a
licensed driver who is actually occupying a seat in the vehicle.



(Prior Code, § 8-5-7)




ELECTRIC SCOOTERS




§ 73.045  APPLICATION OF RULES AND REGULATIONS TO SCOOTERS.



   All electric scooters shall be operated and maintained in a manner so
as to comply with all laws of this state and regulations of this city
governing the operation of motor vehicles, except as otherwise provided
herein.



(Prior Code, § 8-8-1)



§ 73.046  SINGLE DRIVER; NO PASSENGER ALLOWED.



   No person other than the driver shall operate an electric scooter. No
passenger shall be allowed to ride with a driver on an electric scooter.



(Prior Code, § 8-8-2)  Penalty, see § 73.999



§ 73.047  OPERATION RESTRICTED TO SIDEWALKS AND BIKE PATH.



   No electric scooter shall be allowed to travel on the streets, alleys,
or public ways within the city except as provided herein. Electric scooters
shall only be allowed to operate on the sidewalks in the city and shall be
allowed to operate on the bike trail route. This section shall supercede the
definition of motor vehicle and the restriction prohibiting a motor vehicle
to operate on sidewalks and the bike trail route. Notwithstanding anything to
the contrary, an electric scooter may operate on a crosswalk in the city if
the operator of the electric scooter is 16 years of age or older, and no
electric scooter shall be allowed to operate on sidewalks or crosswalks in
the business district or any other location in the city where the operation
of bicycles is prohibited.



(Prior Code, § 8-8-3)  Penalty, see § 73.999



§ 73.048  BICYCLE SAFETY PROVISIONS APPLY.



   The operator of an electric scooter shall be required to comply with
all the safety rules and regulations as may be provided by the city for
bicycle operators in the city.



(Prior Code, § 8-8-4)



§ 73.049  MAXIMUM SPEED; MINIMUM AGE.



   (A)   No electric scooter shall be operated at a speed greater than
12 mph at any time or at any location within the city.



(Prior Code, § 8-8-5)



   (B)   No one under the age of eight years shall be allowed to
operate an electric scooter.



(Prior Code, § 8-8-6)  Penalty, see § 73.999



NON-HIGHWAY VEHICLES



§ 73.060  PURPOSE.



   Whereas, the city, after considering volume, speed, and character of
traffic on streets with the city, finds that non-highway vehicles, as defined
herein, may not safely travel on and across the streets within the city, and
that the public safety will not be jeopardized by operation of such vehicles,
except as hereinafter permitted in this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 8-9-1)  (Ord. 1983, passed 12-14-2010; Ord. O-13-077, passed
3-12-2013)



§ 73.061  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   NON-HIGHWAY VEHICLE. A motor vehicle not specifically designated to be
used on a public highway, including:



      (1)   An all-terrain vehicle, as defined by ILCS Ch. 625, Act
5, § 1-101.8 of the Illinois Vehicle Code;



      (2)    A golf cart, as defined by ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §
1-123.9;



      (3)   A neighborhood vehicle, as defined by ILCS Ch. 625, Act
5, § 1-148.3m;



      (4)   An off-highway motorcycle, as defined by ILCS Ch. 625,
Act 5, § 1-153.1;



      (5)   A recreational off highway vehicle, as defined by ILCS
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-168.8; and



      (6)   A low-speed vehicle, as defined by ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5,
§ 1-140.7.



(Prior Code, § 8-9-2)  (Ord. 1983, passed 12-14-2010; Ord. O-13-077, passed
3-12-2013)



§ 73.062  PROHIBITIONS AND LIMITATIONS ON OPERATION.



   (A)   Except as expressly permitted in this subchapter, it shall be
unlawful for any person to operate a non-highway vehicle on any street within
the city.



(Prior Code, § 8-9-3)



   (B)   (1)   A not for profit organization, or a person
participating in an authorized public parade may operate a non-highway
vehicle in conformance with the remaining terms of this subchapter, pursuant
to a permit issued by the Chief of Police in writing after application is
made for that purpose. The permit shall set forth the times and location of
the use of the non-highway vehicle.



      (2)   A non-highway vehicle may be operated pursuant to a
permit as set forth in division (B)(1) above as long as at a minimum it and
its driver comply with the following requirements:



         (a)   Brakes;



         (b)   A steering apparatus;



         (c)   Tires;



         (d)   A rearview mirror;



         (e)   Red reflector warning devices in the front and
rear;



         (f)   A slow moving emblem (as required of other
vehicles in § 12-709 of the Illinois Vehicle Code) on the rear of the
neighborhood vehicle;



         (g)   A headlight that emits a white light visible from
a distance of 500 feet to the front;



         (h)   A tail lamp that emits a red light visible from at
least 100 feet from the rear;



         (i)   Brake light; and



         (j)   Turn signals.



      (3)   When operated on a roadway, a non-highway vehicle shall
have its headlight and tail lamps lighted as required by § 12-201 of the
Illinois Vehicle Code. If approved, the operation of non-highway vehicles is
subject to the following requirements:



         (a)   The operator of the vehicle must hold a valid
driver's license issued by this or any other state.



         (b)   The vehicle is insured;



         (c)   The operator of the vehicle complies with the
applicable requirements of the Illinois Vehicle Code.



(Prior Code, § 8-9-4)  (Ord. 1983, passed 12-14-2010; Ord. O-13-077, passed
3-12-2013)   Penalty, see § 73.999



§ 73.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99



   (B)   Every person convicted of violation of §§ 73.001 through
73.014 of this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not less than $5 nor
more than $25, or shall have his or her bicycle impounded by the Chief of
Police for a period of not less than one week, nor more than four weeks, or
both fine and impounding.



(Prior Code, § 8-4-19)



   (C)   Any person found in violation of §§ 73.025 through 73.031 of
this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less than $25, nor more than
$750.



(Prior Code, § 8-5-8)



   (D)   Every person convicted of violation of §§ 73.045 through
73.049 of this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not less than $5, nor
more than $25, or shall have his or her electric scooter impounded by the
Chief of Police for a period of not less than one week, nor more than four
weeks, or both fine and impounding.



(Prior Code, § 8-8-7)



   (E)   Any person found in violation of §§ 73.060 through 73.062 of
this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less than $25, nor more than
$750.



(Ord. 1983, passed 12-14-2010)



CHAPTER 74:  PARKING SCHEDULES



Schedule



      I.   Downtown parking zones



      II.   Designated parking spaces



      III.   Time restrictions



      IV.   Parking prohibited



      V.   Private property parking - Wells Fargo Bank



      VI.   Stopping, standing, loading, unloading prohibited



SCHEDULE I.  DOWNTOWN PARKING ZONES.



   (A)   The following described streets in the city are hereby
designated and established as downtown parking zones, to-wit:



      (1)   State Street from the north line of North Street to the
south line of Park Street;



      (2)   Second Street from the west line of State Street to the
east line of Center Street;



      (3)   First Street from the west line of Oakwood Avenue to the
east line of the north and south alley running through the middle of blocks 2
and 3 of Munson’s Second Addition to the city;



      (4)   Exchange Street from the west line of Oakwood Avenue to
the east line of Center Street;



      (5)   Orange Street from the east line of State Street to the
east line of Oakwood Avenue;



      (6)   Sommers Avenue from the north line of Exchange Street to
the south line of Park Street;



      (7)   The portion of the west side of Center Street from the
south line of First Street to the north line of the alley running east and
west from Center Street through a portion of block 2 of Munson’s Addition
to the city; and



      (8)   Off-street parking in block 1 of Humphrey and Turner’s
First Addition.



   (B)   Also included are the north and south side of East Second
Street proceeding east from the intersection of State Street and Second
Street to the west edge of the alley dividing the block, and the east side of
South State Street proceeding south 50 feet from the south edge of North
Street.



(Prior Code, § 8-3-1)



SCHEDULE II.  DESIGNATED PARKING SPACES.



   (A)   The Street Department of the city shall, in the downtown
parking zone, designate and mark on those streets, spaces for vehicles to be
parked parallel to the curb of the streets.



   (B)   Angle parking is hereby permitted on the north side only of
Exchange Street from the west line of Oakwood Avenue to the east line of
State Street.



(Prior Code, § 8-3-2)



SCHEDULE III.  TIME RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   No vehicle shall be continuously parked in a designated
parking space in a downtown parking zone longer than two hours. Hours during
which parking limitations are in effect are from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.,
Monday through Saturday. On Sundays and holidays, there shall be no parking
limitation.



   (B)   Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section,
those designated parking spaces situated on the north side of First Street
and which are adjacent to the property occupied by the United States post
office shall have a legal parking limit of 15 minutes, and no vehicle shall
be continuously parked in those parking spaces for a period longer than 15
minutes. Furthermore, the east side of the 200 block of South State Street
which borders and is adjacent to the public library shall, in all designated
parking spaces situated in that portion of South State Street, be limited to
a legal parking limit of one hour, and no vehicle shall be continuously
parked in those parking spaces longer than one hour.



   (C)   No vehicle shall be parked during the hours of 1:00 a.m. to
5:00 a.m. on the following streets:



      (1)   The west side of South Center Street from the south line
of West First Street to the private drive running east and west;



      (2)   The east side of South Center Street from the south line
of West Second Street to the north line of West North Street;



      (3)   Along either side of State Street from the south line of
Brown Street to the north line of Pearl Street;



      (4)   Along either side of Sommers Avenue from the south line
of East Park Street to the north line of East Exchange Street;



      (5)   Along either side of Exchange Street from the east line
of North Center Street to the west line of North Oakwood Avenue;



      (6)   Along either side of First Street from the east line of
the alley between College Avenue (Illinois Route 82) and Center Street to the
west line of Oakwood Avenue;



      (7)   Along either side of Second Street from the east line of
South Center Street to the west line of South State Street, and the north
side of Second Street from the east line of South State Street to the west
line of Oakwood Avenue, and the south side of Second Street from the east
line of South State Street to the alley running north and south; and



      (8)   Along either side of Orange Street from the east line of
North State Street to the west line of Sommers Street and the north side of
Orange Street from the east line of Sommers Street to the west line of North
Oakwood Avenue.



   (D)   No vehicle shall be parked along the north side of Ogden
Avenue between State and Center Streets for more than two hours between 7:00
a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on days when Geneseo High School is in session.



(Prior Code, § 8-3-4)  (Ord. O-17-22, passed 9-12-2017)



SCHEDULE IV.  PARKING PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person shall park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police
officer or traffic-control device, in any of the following places:



      (1)   On a sidewalk;



      (2)   In front of a public or private driveway;



      (3)   Within an intersection;



      (4)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;



      (5)   On a crosswalk;



      (6)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;



      (7)   Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon,
stop sign, or traffic controlled signal located at the side of the roadway;



      (8)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb, or within
20 feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the end of a safety zone;



      (9)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad grade
crossing;



      (10)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire
station, and on the entrance when properly sign-posted;



      (11)   On the roadway side of any vehicle parked at the edge
or curb of a street, commonly known as double parking;



      (12)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or
obstruction when parking would obstruct traffic;



      (13)   Upon any bridge or within a tunnel or subway;



      (14)   Between the curb line and the sidewalk, except with the
permission of the owner or occupant of the adjacent premises;



      (15)   At any place where official signs prohibit parking;



      (16)   At the following specific locations:



         (a)   Along either side of College Avenue between Elk
Street and North Street, and on North Street from College Avenue to Henry
Street, and on Henry Street from North Street to Main Street, all of which is
marked as Illinois Route 82 within the corporate limits of the city;



         (b)   Along either side of College Avenue between Elk
Street and Smith Street;



         (c)   Along either side of Main Street and Oakwood
Avenue (marked Illinois Route 82 and U.S. Route 6) between the west corporate
limit and the southeast corporate limit within the corporate limits of the
city, with the exception of:



            1.   A parking lane along the south side of Main
Street located west of State Street approximately 117 feet in length
providing for two parking spaces;



            2.   A parking lane along the south side of Main
Street located east of State Street approximately 91 feet in length and
providing for three parking spaces; and



            3.   Diagonal parking in the parking area north of
Main Street between Center Street and State Street.



         (d)   Along either side of Oakwood Avenue (marked
Illinois Route 82) between Route 6 and Interstate 80;



         (e)   Along the south side of Smith Street between the
west right-of-way line of North State Street and the east right-of-way line
of North College Avenue, which is otherwise known as Illinois Route 82;



         (f)   Along the east side of South Chicago Street
between the south right-of-way line of Prospect Street and the north
right-of-way line of the public highway known as U.S. Route 6;



         (g)   On both sides of North Street within the limits of
the improvement, with the exception that parking will be permitted on the
north side of North Street from 30 feet east of State Street to 30 feet west
of Oakwood Avenue. Parking shall be prohibited 30 feet in advance of stop
signs with North Street;



         (h)   Along either side of Pearl Street between State
Street and Center Street, along either side of Center Street between Pearl
Street and Main Street, along either side of Main Street between Center
Street and State Street, and along either side of State Street between Main
Street and Pearl Street between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.;



         (i)   Along the north side of Dilenbeck Drive going east
from the intersection of Neptune Street and Dilenbeck Drive to where
Dilenbeck Drive turns north;



         (j)   Along the north side of East North Street from the
east drive of the Community Center to the east right-of-way line of Spring
Street;



         (k)   Along the west side of North State Street between
Ogden Avenue to the south and the intersection of North State Street with
Smith Street to the north, parking shall be prohibited between the hours of
7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on days when J. D. Darnall Senior High School is in
session; and along the east side of North State Street from Ogden Avenue to
Wells Street without limitation as to time;



         (l)   Along the north side of Smith Street for its
entire length, parking shall be prohibited between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and
4:00 p.m. on days when J. D. Darnall Senior High School is in session;



         (m)   Along the south side of Smith Street;



         (n)   Along either side of Main Street, U.S. Route 6,
between the most westerly corporate limits of the city and Geneseo Street.
Parking will not be permitted within the limits of intersections as
determined by the state from intersection studies;



         (o)   Along either side of College Avenue between Elk
Street and North Street, and on North Street from College Avenue to Henry
Street, and on Henry Street from North Street to Main Street, all of which is
marked as Illinois Route 82 within the corporate limits of the city;



         (p)   Along the east side of Oakwood Avenue from East
Exchange Street to East Park Street;



         (q)   Along either side of North Center Street from the
south line of West Exchange Street to the north line of West First Street;



         (r)   Along either side of South Center Street from the
south line of West First Street to the north line of West Second Street,
except the west side of South Center Street from the south line of West First
Street to the alley running east and west;



         (s)   The west side of South Center Street from the
south line of West Second Street to the north line of North Street;



         (t)   Along the north side of West North Street east
from the east right-of-way line of South Vail Street to a point at which a
line extending north from the west curb line of South Henry Street intersects
with the north curb line of West North Street;



         (u)   Along the east side of Stewart Street from
Exchange Street to Pearl Street;



         (v)   Along the south side of Park Street from Oakwood
Avenue to Pearl Street;



         (w)   Along the east side of Congress Street between the
entry drives to Millikin School from 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on days when
school is in session;



         (x)   Along the east side of North Aldrich Street from
Ogden Avenue to Wells Street;



         (y)   Along the east side of North Russell Avenue from
Ogden Avenue to Wells Street; and



         (z)   Along the east side of North Russell Avenue from
Wells Street to Palace Row from 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on days when Northside
Elementary School is in session.



         (aa)   Along the east side of Center Street between the
driveway entrance to Southwest School and Frank Street from 2:00 p.m. to 4:00
p.m. on days when Southwest School is in session.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to park, or to operate, any motor vehicle
on any private property without the prior consent of the owner, lawful agent
of the owner, or lawful occupant of the property.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle upon any street for
the purpose of displaying it for sale or to park any vehicle upon any
business street from which vehicle merchandise is peddled.



(Prior Code, § 8-3-7)  (Ord. O-17-22, passed 9-12-2017)



SCHEDULE V.  PRIVATE PROPERTY PARKING - WELLS FARGO BANK.



   (A)   No person, firm, or corporation shall park a motor vehicle on
the private property owned by Wells Fargo Bank for a period of time longer
than two consecutive hours during the bank’s business hours.



   (B)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, no person, firm, or corporation
shall park a motor vehicle for any length of time on those areas of the
private property owned by Wells Fargo Bank designated for employee parking,
except for authorized employees of Wells Fargo Bank.



   (C)   No person, firm, or corporation shall park a motor vehicle for
any length of time on those areas of private property owned by Wells Fargo
Bank designated for disabled parking, except for a motor vehicle bearing
registered plates or decals issued to a physically disabled person.



   (D)   Wells Fargo Bank shall post signs giving notice that to park a
motor vehicle for a longer period of time than two consecutive hours during
the bank’s business hours is a violation of a city ordinance, and that the
violator shall be subject to the fines provided in§ 72.99. The signs shall
be approved by the Police Department prior to installation.



   (E)   The city and the Police Department are granted all rights to
enter upon the property for the purpose of enforcing these provisions. All
fines collected in the enforcement shall belong to the city.



   (F)   The property which is the subject of this division is
comprised of two separate hard-surfaced parking lots owned by the Wells Fargo
Bank, and described as follows.



      (1)   Lot 1.



         (a)   A tract of land in the Northwest Quarter of
Section 21, Township 17 North, Range 3 East, in the City of Geneseo, County
of Henry, State of Illinois, described as follows:  Beginning at the point
of intersection of the west line of State Street with the southerly line of
the Chicago, Rock Island, and Pacific Railroad Company’s station grounds;
thence westerly along said southerly line 310 feet, more or less, to a point
on the east line of Center Street; thence north along the extension of last
east line 38 feet, more or less, to a point of intersection with a line 15
feet southerly from and parallel with the centerline of the railroad
company’s southerly main track (eastbound main); thence southeasterly along
parallel line 310 feet, more or less, to a point on the extension of west
line of State Street; thence south along the last extension 38 feet, more or
less, to the point of beginning.



         (b)   Lots 2 and 3, all being and lying in Block One of
Munson’s Second Addition to the Town, now City, of Geneseo, Henry County,
Illinois.



      (2)   Lot 2.  That part of Lots 7 and 8 of Block Two of
Munson’s Second Addition to the town, now City of Geneseo, described as
follows:  Beginning at the southeast corner of said Lot Seven, running
thence west along the south line of Lot Seven 70 feet, thence north in a line
parallel with the east line of Block Two 115 feet, running thence east on a
line parallel with the south line of Lot Seven 43 feet, running thence south
in a line parallel with the east line of Block Two 15 feet, running thence
east in a line parallel with the south line of Lot Seven 27 feet to the east
line of Block Two, running thence south along the east line of Block Two 100
feet to the place of beginning; situated in Henry County, Illinois.



(Prior Code, § 8-3-12)



SCHEDULE VI.  STOPPING, STANDING, LOADING, UNLOADING PROHIBITED.



   On days when school is in session, no person shall park, stop, stand,
load or unload a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid a hazard or to
comply with the directions of a police officer or traffic- control device, in
any of the following places between 7:45 a.m. and 8:30 a.m. or between 2:30
p.m. and 3:30 p.m.:



   (A)   West side of Russell Avenue for the 100 feet north of Wells
Street;



   (B)   South side of Wells Street for the 175 feet east of Russell
Avenue;



   (C)   West side of Congress Street from Prospect to the south
driveway to Millikin School.



(Ord. O-17-22, passed 9-12-2017)



TITLE IX:  GENERAL REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      90.   ANIMALS



      91.   ABANDONED VEHICLES



      92.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



      93.   HEALTH AND SANITATION



      94.   CITY PARKS



      95.   CITY CEMETERIES



      96.   AIRCRAFT



CHAPTER 90:  ANIMALS



Section




Cats




   90.01   Definition



   90.02   Running at large prohibited



   90.03   Rabies vaccination required



   90.04   Impounding fees




Dogs




   90.15   Definitions



   90.16   Determination and notice of dangerous dogs



   90.17   Control of dangerous dogs



   90.18   Vicious dogs prohibited



   90.19   Determination, notice, and impoundment of vicious dogs



   90.20   Duty upon dog bite occurrence



   90.21   City parks and other public areas



   90.22   Nuisance declared



   90.23   Running at large prohibited



   90.24   Impoundment procedure; treatment; fees



   90.25   Unauthorized abandonment prohibited



   90.26   Rabies vaccination required



General Provisions



   90.40   Cruelty to animals



 



   90.99   Penalty




CATS




§ 90.01  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   RUNNING AT LARGE.  The running or traveling of a cat or other feline
animal on or across any property other than that belonging to the owner or
keeper of the animal while the animal is not attached to a leash and held by
a person.



(Prior Code, § 7-2-1)



§ 90.02  RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any vicious, ferocious, or dangerous cat or
other feline, or any such animal with or liable to communicate any contagious
or infectious disease, or any such animal which shall bite any person or
injure any person, or any such animal without a rabies vaccination tag
attached to its collar or harness, to run at large. The running at large of
any cat or other feline animal within the corporate limits is hereby declared
to be a nuisance. It shall be the duty of the Police Department, and of other
officers and persons as the Mayor may from time to time designate, to abate
the nuisance and to destroy, kill, or remove all cats or other feline animals.



(Prior Code, § 7-2-2)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.03  RABIES VACCINATION REQUIRED.



   Each calendar year, every owner of a cat or other feline animal, four
months or more of age, shall cause the animal to be inoculated against rabies
by a licensed veterinarian. Evidence of the inoculation shall consist of a
rabies inoculation certificate signed by the person administering the
vaccine, and one copy of the certificate shall be given to the owner and
retained in his or her possession at all times. The licensed veterinarian who
inoculates the animals against rabies shall provide serially numbered rabies
inoculation tags, one to be issued with each rabies inoculation certificate.
The tag shall at all times be attached to a collar or harness worn by the
animal for which the certificate and tag have been issued.



(Prior Code, § 7-2-3)



§ 90.04  IMPOUNDING FEES.



   (A)   A pickup fee of $30 shall be assessed the owner or keeper of
the cat or other feline animal(s) at the time the cat is claimed by its owner
or keeper. A fee of $10 per day, or fraction thereof, shall also be assessed
for every day the cat is so impounded.



   (B)   The impounding fees as set forth in this section are separate
and distinct from the penalties hereinafter imposed for violation of this
subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 7-2-5)




DOGS




§ 90.15  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DANGEROUS DOG.  Any individual dog which, when either unmuzzled,
unleashed, or unattended by its owner or a member of its owner’s family, in
a vicious or terrorizing manner, approaches any person in an apparent
attitude of attack upon streets, sidewalks, or any public grounds or places,
or any private property within the city.



   DOG.  All animals, male and female, of the canine species.



   OWNER/KEEPER.  Any person who shall harbor, or suffer, or permit any
dog to remain on any premises within the city under his or her charge or
control.



   STRAY DOG.  Any dog which is either not registered, or which cannot be
identified by a county license tag.



   VICIOUS DOG.



      (1)   Any individual dog that, when unprovoked, inflicts bites
or attacks a human being or other animal either on public or private property.



      (2)   Any individual dog with known propensity, tendency, or
disposition to attack without provocation, to cause injury, or to otherwise
endanger the safety of human beings or other animals.



      (3)   Any individual dog which has been found to be a
dangerous dog upon more than one occasion.



      (4)   Any dog defined as a vicious dog under the State Animal
Control Act, ILCS Ch. 510, Act 5.



      (5)   No dog shall be deemed vicious if it bites, attacks or
menaces a trespasser on the property of its owner, or harms or menaces anyone
who has tormented or abused it, or is a professionally trained dog for law
enforcement.



      (6)   Vicious dogs shall not be classified in a manner that is
specific as to breed, unless permitted by the State Animal Control Act.



(Prior Code, § 7-3-1)



§ 90.16  DETERMINATION AND NOTICE OF DANGEROUS DOGS.



   (A)   The County Animal Administrator, or his or her duly authorized
representative, or a law enforcement officer of the city, shall make the
determination that a dog is a dangerous dog, after an investigation has been
conducted.



   (B)   The finding will be made in writing, and shall be hand
delivered to the owner or person keeping the dog, or delivered by both
certified mail and by first class mail to his or her last known address
through the United States postal service. Delivery by certified mail shall be
considered properly delivered if the certified mail is returned to the city
with a notification that delivery was refused or unclaimed.



(Prior Code, § 7-3-2)



§ 90.17  CONTROL OF DANGEROUS DOGS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any dangerous dog to
leave the premises of its owner when the dog is not securely muzzled and
restrained with a leash having a tensile strength of no less than 300 pounds
and not exceeding three feet in length, and under the direct control and
supervision of the owner or keeper of the dog.



(Prior Code, § 7-3-3)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.18  VICIOUS DOGS PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any dog which
has been found to be a vicious dog anywhere within the corporate limits of
the city, regardless of the conditions of the animal’s enclosure, restraint
or controllability.



(Prior Code, § 7-3-4)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.19  DETERMINATION, NOTICE, AND IMPOUNDMENT OF VICIOUS DOGS.



   (A)   The County Animal Control Administrator, or his or her duly
sworn representative, or a law enforcement officer of the city, shall make
the determination that a dog is a vicious dog as defined in this subchapter,
after an investigation has been conducted.



   (B)   The finding will be made in writing, and shall be hand
delivered to the owner or person keeping the dog, or delivered by both
certified mail and by first class mail to his, her or their last known
address through the United States postal service. Delivery by certified mail
shall be considered properly delivered if the certified mail is returned to
the city with a notification that delivery was refused or unclaimed. At the
same time, an impoundment order will be delivered to the owner or keeper of
the dog. IMPOUNDMENT means taken into custody of the pound, which is operated
by the county.



   (C)   The owner of any dog in the city which has been found to be
vicious shall surrender the animal to the pound by order of the County Animal
Control Administrator, or his or her duly authorized representative, or the
Chief of Police, or his or her duly authorized representative.



   (D)   If the owner of the vicious dog has not appealed the
impoundment order by filing an appropriate pleading with the Circuit Court of
the county within seven working days, the dog shall be humanely dispatched.



(Prior Code, § 7-3-5)



§ 90.20  DUTY UPON DOG BITE OCCURRENCE.



   (A)   If at any time a person is bitten by a dog, it shall be
reported to the Police Department immediately, who, in turn, shall notify the
Rabies Warden of the county, and the case shall then be under the
jurisdiction of the Rabies Warden. Any and all expenses incurred by the
procedure and any and all medical expenses incurred from the bite shall be
borne by the owner or keeper of the dog.



(Prior Code, § 7-3-6)



   (B)   It shall be the duty of the owner or keeper of any dog which
bites any human being to keep the dog locked up in an enclosure until the
Rabies Warden can investigate the circumstances.



(Prior Code, § 7-3-7)



§ 90.21  CITY PARKS AND OTHER PUBLIC AREAS.



   (A)   The owner or keeper of a dog shall keep the same on a leash at
all times when the dog is in a city park or other public area of the city.
The leash shall be of a reasonable length, not to exceed ten  feet, and the
dog shall be under the immediate control of the owner or keeper while on the
leash. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, the owner or keeper of a dog
may exercise the same without a leash in Richmond Hill City Park in those
areas specifically designated by signs for the purpose.



   (B)   The owner or keeper of a dog which is in a city park or other
public area shall not permit any solid waste excreted by the dog to remain in
or upon the city park or other public area grounds.



   (C)   The owner or keeper of a dog who violates either division (A)
or (B) above shall be subject to the penalties imposed below in § 90.99.



(Prior Code, § 7-3-8)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.22  NUISANCE DECLARED.



   (A)   Any dog, or animal of the dog kind, which by loud or unusual
barking or howling disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood, or
causes the occupants of adjacent premises to be disturbed in any way, shall
be declared a nuisance.



   (B)   The owner or keeper of the nuisance on, in, or about his or
her premises, or premises under his or her control, shall be in violation of
this section, and subject to the penalties imposed below in § 90.99.



(Prior Code, § 7-3-9)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.23  RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED.



   Any dog that is not attached to a leash and held by a person who is on
any property other than that belonging to the owner or keeper of the dog
shall be termed running at large. The owner or keeper of a dog running at
large shall be in violation of this subchapter and subject to the penalties
imposed below in § 90.99.



(Prior Code, § 7-3-10)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.24  IMPOUNDMENT PROCEDURE; TREATMENT; FEES.



   (A)   (1)   Any dog running at large, or any dog without a rabies
vaccination tag attached to its collar or harness, shall be taken by the City
Dog Catcher, or any police officer, and impounded in the City Dog Pound for a
period of not less than three days. At the end of this time, if the dog is
not claimed by its owner or keeper by paying the required fees, the dog shall
be disposed of at the discretion of the Chief of Police.



      (2)   Any person identifying an impounded dog as belonging to
him or her shall be served a notice to appear in court for violation of the
ordinance.



      (3)   Any owner or keeper not redeeming any dog impounded
within three days shall be deemed to have lost all property rights in the dog.



(Prior Code, § 7-3-11)



   (B)   Animals which are kept in the City Pound shall be humanely
treated, sheltered, and watered; the pound shall be under the charge of the
Pound Master, who shall be responsible for the care and custody of the
animals, but in no case will the city, Pound Master, or the Chief of Police
be responsible for the dog if it should die while being impounded in the
pound, providing the aforementioned care is adequately provided.



(Prior Code, § 7-3-12)



   (C)   (1)   A pickup fee of $30 shall be assessed the owner or
keeper of the dog at the time the dog is claimed by its owner or keeper. A
fee of $10 per day, or fraction thereof, shall also be assessed for every day
the dog is so impounded.



      (2)   The impounding fees as set forth in this section are
separate and distinct from the penalties hereinafter imposed for violation of
this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 7-3-13)



§ 90.25  UNAUTHORIZED ABANDONMENT PROHIBITED.



   No person shall leave, or cause any animal to be left, in or upon the
City Pound area without the express permission and authorization of the
proper representative of the Police Department or Humane Society.



(Prior Code, § 7-3-14)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.26  RABIES VACCINATION REQUIRED.



   Each calendar year every owner of a dog, four months or more of age,
shall cause the animal to be inoculated against rabies by a licensed
veterinarian. Evidence of the inoculation shall consist of a rabies
inoculation certificate signed by the person administering the vaccine, and
one copy of the certificate shall be given to the owner and retained in his
or her possession at all times. The licensed veterinarian who inoculates the
animals against rabies shall provide serially numbered rabies inoculation
tags, one to be issued with each rabies inoculation certificate. The tag
shall at all times be attached to a collar or harness worn by the animal for
which the certificate and tag have been issued. Failure of the owner of a dog
to have the same inoculated as herein provided shall be in violation of this
subchapter and subject to the penalties imposed below in § 90.99.



(Prior Code, § 7-3-15)  Penalty, see § 90.99



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 90.40  CRUELTY TO ANIMALS.



   If a community service officer or peace officer has probable cause to
believe that an animal has been subjected to cruelty as defined in ILCS Ch.
510, Act 70, §§ 1 et seq. and that the animal's life, safety or health is
in danger, the community service officer or peace officer may seize and
impound the animal, may give the animal veterinary or other care at the owner
or keeper's expense, and may process the misdemeanor charges laws as outlined
in ILCS Ch. 510, Act 70, §§ 1 et seq.  The city adopts in its entirety
ILCS Ch. 510, Act 70, §§ 1 et seq., with the exception of prosecution as a
felony.  Any violation of ILCS Ch. 510, Act 70, §§ 1 et seq. at a felony
level will be processed through the criminal courts.



(Ord. 1957, passed 11-10-2009)



§ 90.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99



   (B)   Any owners or keepers of a cat or other feline animal who
shall suffer, or permit the same to run at large, in violation of the
provisions of §§ 90.01 through 90.04 of this chapter, shall be subject to a
fine and penalty of not less than $25 nor more than $100.



(Prior Code, § 7-2-4)



   (C)   (1)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the
provisions of §§ 90.15 through 90.24, and the provisions of § 90.26 of
this chapter, shall be fined not less than $5 nor more than $25 for the first
offense; not less than $15 nor more than $100 for the second offense; not
less than $50 nor more than $200 for the third offense; and a separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.



      (2)   In addition to the foregoing penalties, any dog which
has been subject to two prior running at large counts, or any vicious or
dangerous dog that has been the subject of one prior running at large count
may, at the discretion of the city, be turned over to a licensed veterinarian
for destruction by lethal injection.



(Prior Code, § 7-3-16)



   (D)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of §
90.25 shall be fined not less than $50 for the first offense; not less than
$100 for the second offense; not less than $200 for the third offense; and a
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.



(Prior Code, § 7-3-14)



CHAPTER 91:  ABANDONED VEHICLES



Section



   91.01   Definitions



   91.02   Exempted vehicles



   91.03   Prohibited acts



   91.04   Removal of abandoned or inoperable vehicle



   91.05   Impoundment of abandoned or inoperable vehicle



   91.06   Record search



   91.07   Reclaimed vehicles; expenses



   91.08   Disposal of unclaimed vehicle



   91.09   Police report after vehicle reclaimed or disposed



   91.10   Disposition of unclaimed vehicle sale proceeds



   91.11   Administrative fees



   91.12   Limitation of liability



 



   91.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Determination of liability; motor vehicle citations, § 36.11



   Driver's license suspension, § 36.14



   Enforcement of motor vehicle violations; citations, § 36.10



   Immobilization program, § 36.13



   Lessor of vehicle–liability, § 36.12



§ 91.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABANDONMENT, ABANDONING, and ABANDONED AUTO.  Any motor vehicle or
part thereof which a reasonable person would consider dumped, discarded, or
abandoned on private or public property in view of the general public under
the circumstances.



   ANTIQUE VEHICLE.  A motor vehicle that is more than 25 years of age,
or a bona fide replica thereof, and which is driven on the highways only
going to and returning from an antique auto show or an exhibition, or for
servicing or demonstration, or a fire-fighting vehicle more than 20 years old
which is not used as fire-fighting equipment but is used only for the purpose
of exhibition or demonstration. The mechanical and physical condition of the
vehicle, including brakes, lights, glass, and appearance, must be the same or
as safe as originally equipped. An antique vehicle may be a BONA FIDE
REPLICA, which is an exact copy of the original in design, frame, and
mechanical operation. FACSIMILES are close, but not exact, reproductions of
the original, and do not qualify for antique vehicle plates.



   INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE.  Any vehicle from which, for a period of
seven or more days, the engine, wheels, doors, windows, or other parts have
been removed, or on which the engine, wheels, doors, windows, or other parts
have been altered, damaged, or otherwise so treated, that the vehicle is
incapable of being driven under its own power, or is incapable of being moved
by another vehicle designed to move it, including vehicles that are propped
up so that the wheels cannot be used to move the vehicle, or due to legal
prohibitions including, but not limited to, want of licenses, defective
parts, absence of required parts and the like. The obtaining and installation
of an antique vehicle license shall not be a defense against the enforcement
of this chapter for an inoperable motor vehicle, as defined herein.



   LAWFULLY OCCUPIED.  Premises occupied under a lease, contract,
license, or other consent.



   MOTOR VEHICLE.  An auto, car, motorcycle, truck, truck trailer, auto
trailer, camper, agricultural tractor, or implement, or any other vehicle for
use on the streets or highways or off highways, as well as any constituent
part thereof.



(Prior Code, § 8-7-1)



§ 91.02  EXEMPTED VEHICLES.



   The requirements of this chapter shall not apply to vehicles
specifically exempt from local licensing pursuant to the laws of the United
States or the state, or vehicles owned or operated by the city, provided that
the vehicles are so designated and lawfully registered.



(Prior Code, § 8-7-2)



§ 91.03  PROHIBITED ACTS.



   No person shall engage in any of the following acts:



   (A)   The abandonment of any motor vehicle on any street, highway,
tollway, expressway, alley, or other public way within the city;



   (B)   The abandonment of any motor vehicle on any public property or
on any private property within the city;



   (C)   The parking of any inoperable motor vehicle on any street,
highway, tollway, expressway, alley, or other public way within the city
where the same constitutes a hazard or dangerous condition for persons and
property lawfully using the highway;



   (D)   The parking of any inoperable motor vehicle on any street,
highway, tollway, expressway, alley, or other public way within the city for
more than ten hours;



   (E)   The parking of any inoperable motor vehicle on any private
property, except property owned or lawfully occupied or on public property,
without the consent of the owner or lawful occupant for more than 24 hours;
and/or



   (F)   The parking of any inoperable motor vehicle on private,
residentially or commercially zoned property and allowing the motor vehicle
to remain there for more than seven days, if the vehicle is open to the view
of the public and not stored within a permanent structure.



(Prior Code, § 8-7-3)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.04  REMOVAL OF ABANDONED OR INOPERABLE VEHICLE.



   (A)   Whenever any act prohibited by this chapter is perpetrated,
the Police Department shall have the right of authorized removal of the auto
concerned by towing at the time the prohibited act becomes violative of this
chapter.



   (B)   Whenever any citizen is the victim of an act done in violation
of this chapter, he or she shall have the right to request the police to
remove vehicle as if they had initiated the removal.



   (C)   In lieu of making the determination themselves, the police may
apply to the Circuit Court for a determination that a vehicle has been
abandoned or is inoperative.



      (1)   The proceeding held pursuant to this division shall be
an in rem proceeding against the vehicle.



      (2)   No hearing shall be held on an application under this
division until 24 hours’ notice has been given. Notice shall be given by
securely fastening to the vehicle a notice, or by notice in writing, stating
that a proceeding has begun by the city in a named branch of the Circuit
Court, the hour set for the hearing, and the relief requested from the court.



      (3)   The application to the court shall be verified and shall
state facts sufficient to allow the court to make a determination that there
is probable cause to consider the vehicle abandoned or inoperative, and that
the vehicle is parked in violation of this chapter.



      (4)   In the proceedings under this division, the sole
questions before the court shall be:



         (a)   Is there probable cause to believe the vehicle is
abandoned or inoperable; and



         (b)   Is it parked in violation of this chapter.



      (5)   If the court enters an order finding that there is
probable cause to believe the vehicle is abandoned or inoperable, and that
this chapter is being violated, the police shall thereafter proceed in
accordance with this chapter as regards to towing.



(Prior Code, § 8-7-4)



§ 91.05  IMPOUNDMENT OF ABANDONED OR INOPERABLE VEHICLE.



   (A)   The person who abandons the vehicle or parks an inoperative
vehicle in violation of this chapter shall be responsible for all towing,
storage, advertising, disposal, and related costs. In the event the person
cannot be found, the bill shall be paid by the city.



   (B)   After impounding a motor vehicle, the police shall deal with
the towed vehicle as follows:



      (1)   Within 96 hours of having a vehicle towed pursuant to
this chapter, the officer initiating the tow shall cause a complaint to be
filed charging the registered owner thereof with a violation of this chapter,
and the registered owner shall be responsible for the violation in all cases
except when, and only when, a stolen auto report has been filed, prior to the
tow occurring, with an authorized law enforcement agency; and



      (2)   When a motor vehicle or other vehicle is authorized to
be towed away pursuant to this chapter, the Police Department shall keep and
maintain a record of the vehicle towed, listing the color, the year of
manufacture, the manufacturer’s trade name, the manufacturer’s series
name, the body style, the vehicle identification number, and the license
plate year and number displayed on the vehicle. The record shall also include
the date and hour of the tow, the location towed from, the location towed to,
the reason for the towing, and the name of the officer authorizing the tow.



(Prior Code, § 8-7-5)



§ 91.06  RECORD SEARCH.



   (A)   When the Police Department does not know the identity of the
registered owner or other legally entitled person, it will cause the motor
vehicle registration records of the state to be searched, and direct
communication to the Secretary of State for the purpose of obtaining the
required ownership information.



   (B)   The Police Department will cause the stolen motor vehicle
files of the State Police to be searched, and direct communication to the
State Police for stolen or wanted information on the vehicle. When the State
Police files are searched with negative results, the information contained in
the National Crime Information Center (NCIC) files will be searched by the
State Police. The information determined from these record searches will be
used by the Police Department in sending a notification by certified mail to
the owner or legally entitled person, advising where the vehicle is held,
requesting a disposition be made, and setting forth public sale information.



   (C)   When the registered owner, or other person legally entitled to
the possession of a motor vehicle, or other vehicle impounded pursuant to
this chapter, cannot be identified from the registration files of this state
or from the registration files of a foreign state, if applicable, the Police
Department shall notify the State Police for the purpose of identifying the
vehicle’s owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of the
vehicle. The information obtained by the State Police will be immediately
forwarded to the law enforcement agency having custody of the vehicle for
notification of the owner.



(Prior Code, § 8-7-6)



§ 91.07  RECLAIMED VEHICLES; EXPENSES.



   Any time before a motor vehicle or other vehicle is sold at public sale
or disposed of as provided in this chapter, the owner, or other person
legally entitled to its possession, may reclaim the vehicle by presenting to
the Police Department proof of ownership or proof of the right to possession
of the vehicle.  No vehicle shall be released to the owner or other person
under this chapter until all towing and storage charges have been paid.



(Prior Code, § 8-7-7)



§ 91.08  DISPOSAL OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLE.



   (A)   (1)   Whenever an abandoned, lost, stolen, or unclaimed
motor vehicle, or other vehicle seven years of age or newer, remains
unclaimed by the registered owner, or other person legally entitled to its
possession, for a period of 30 days after notice has been given as provided
in this chapter, the Police Department having possession of the vehicle shall
cause it to be sold at public sale to the highest bidder. Notice of the time
and place of the sale shall be posted in a conspicuous place for at least ten
days prior to the sale on the premises where the vehicle has been impounded.
At least ten days prior to the sale, the Police Department shall cause a
notice of the time and place of the sale to be sent by certified mail to the
registered owner, or other person known by the Police Department or towing
service to be legally entitled to the possession of the vehicle. The notice
shall contain a complete description of the vehicle to be sold and what steps
must be taken by any legally entitled person to reclaim the vehicle.



      (2)   When an abandoned vehicle of more than seven years of
age is impounded as specified by this chapter, it will be kept in custody for
a minimum of ten days for the purpose of determining ownership, the
contacting of the registered owner by United States mail, public service, or
in person, for a determination of disposition, and, an examination of the
State Police stolen motor vehicle files for theft and wanted information. At
the expiration of the ten-day period, without the benefit of disposition
information being received from the registered owner, the Chief of Police
will authorize the disposal of the vehicle as junk only.



      (3)   In those instances where the certified notification
specified herein has been returned by the postal authorities to the Police
Department due to the addressee having moved or being unknown at the address
obtained from the registration records of this state, the sending of a second
certified notice will not be required.



(Prior Code, § 8-7-8)



   (B)   When the identity of the registered owner or other person
legally entitled to the possession of an abandoned, lost, or unclaimed
vehicle of seven years of age or newer cannot be determined by any means
provided for in this chapter, the vehicle may be sold as provided herein, or
disposed of in the manner authorized by this division without notice to the
registered owner, or other person legally entitled to the possession of the
vehicle.



(Prior Code, § 8-7-9)



§ 91.09  POLICE REPORT AFTER VEHICLE RECLAIMED OR DISPOSED.



   When a motor vehicle in the custody of the Police Department is
reclaimed by the registered owner, or other legally entitled person, or when
the vehicle is sold at public sale or otherwise disposed of as provided in
this chapter, a report of the transaction will be maintained by the Police
Department for a period of one year from the date of the sale or disposal.



(Prior Code, § 8-7-10)



§ 91.10  DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLE SALE PROCEEDS.



   When a vehicle located within the corporate limits of the city is
authorized to be towed away by the Chief of Police and disposed of as set
forth in this chapter, the proceeds of the public sale or disposition, after
the deduction of towing, storage, and processing charges, shall be deposited
in the city treasury.



(Prior Code, § 8-7-11)



§ 91.11  ADMINISTRATIVE FEES.



   When towing companies, junk yard, salvage company or similar business
entity requests that the Police Department or Community Service Officer (CSO)
complete junk title or salvage paperwork on the company's behalf, all
reasonable administrative fees shall be paid to the city. Paperwork includes
certificate of purchase, for the transferring of ownership of abandoned,
lost, stolen, or unclaimed vehicles pursuant to Illinois Compiled Statutes,
owner and lien holder notifications. Acceptable administrative fees shall be
for cost of postage, for certified letters or regular postage rates for
letters mailed.  The current postage rate at the time of the mailing shall
be used to determine the amount paid to the city, for services rendered.



(Ord. 1934, passed 4-14-2009)  (Ord. 1934, passed 4-14-2009)



§ 91.12  LIMITATION OF LIABILITY.



   Any police officer, towing service owner, operator, or employee shall
not be held to answer, or be liable for damages, in any action brought by the
registered owner, former registered owner, or his or her legal
representative, or other person legally entitled to the possession of a motor
vehicle or other vehicle, when the vehicle was processed, sold, or disposed
of as provided by this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 8-7-12)



§ 91.99  PENALTY.



   Any person or business convicted of any offense under this chapter
shall be punished by a fine of not less than $25 nor more than $750. A person
shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any
portion of which any offense occurs.



(Prior Code, § 8-7-13)



CHAPTER 92:  STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



Section




Wards and Numbering




   92.01   City divided into wards



   92.02   Numbers required for all lots and buildings



   92.03   Designation of direction



   92.04   Numbering system



   92.05   Application for number



   92.06   Size and location of numbers




Encroachments




   92.20   Definitions



   92.21   Encroachment prohibited; validity




Right-of-Way Opening Permit




   92.35   Permit required



   92.36   Permit exemption



   92.37   Permit application



   92.38   Permit, repair and restoration fees



   92.39   Permit suspension; revocation; extension



   92.40   Permit expiration



   92.41   Inspection of work area; safety and clean-up requirements



Telecommunications Facilities



   92.45   Standards and regulations for telecommunications facilities



   92.46   Variances



   92.47   Permits and application fees and procedures



   92.48   Conflict of laws




Snow




   92.55   Duty to clear sidewalk



   92.56   Placement of cleared snow



   92.57   Parking restrictions due to snowfall



   92.58   Removal of vehicle; charge



 



   92.99   Penalty



   Appendix A:  Encroachment rights-of-way



   Appendix B:  Street number application form




WARDS AND NUMBERING




§ 92.01  CITY DIVIDED INTO WARDS.



   The city shall be divided into four wards, described as follows:



   (A)   First Ward.  All that part of the city which lies south of
the center line of North Street starting at Oakwood Avenue, extended to the
east to the city limit line, and all that part of the city that lies east of
the center line of Oakwood Avenue starting at North Street, extended to the
south to north of the center line of South Street, extending east to east of
the center line of Spring Street, extended south to south of the center line
of Chestnut Street, extended to the west to east of the center line of
Oakwood Avenue,  extended to U.S. Route 6 to the south; further, all that
part of the city which lies east of the center line of Highway Route 82
running south from its intersection with Highway Route 6;



   (B)   Second Ward.  All that part of the city which lies west of
the center line of Russell Avenue starting at Second Street extended to the
north to north of the center line of Wells Street extended east to west of
the center line of Meadow Street, extending north to north of the center line
of Ogden Avenue, extending east to the west of the center line of Chicago
Street, extending north on Chicago Street to the city limit line; further,
all that part of the city which lies north of the center line of Second
Street extended from west of the center line of Russell Avenue, extending
west to the city limit lines; further all that part of the city which lies
north of the center line of Ogden Avenue and west of the center lines of
Chicago Street/Grange Road;



   (C)   Third Ward.  All that part of the city which lies east of the
center line of Russell Avenue extended to the north from North Street to
south of the center line of Wells Street, extended to the east to east of the
center line of Meadow Street extending to the north to south of the center
line of Ogden Avenue, extending east to east of the center line of Chicago
Street extended north to the city limit line, and north of the center line of
North Street extended to the east from east of the center line of Russell
Avenue to the city limit line; further all that part of the city that lies
east of the center line of Chicago Street, north of Ford Road; and



   (D)   Fourth Ward.  All that part of the city which lies south of
the center line of Second Street starting at Russell Avenue extended west to
the western city limit line; further, all that part of the city which lies
south of the center line of Second Street and west of the center line of
Russell Avenue, extended to the south to north of the center line of North
Street, extended west to west of the center line of Oakwood Avenue, extending
south to south of the center line of South Street, extending east to west of
the center line of Spring Street, extending south to north of the center line
of Chestnut Street, extending west to west of the center line of Oakwood
Avenue; further, all that part of the city which lies west of the center line
of Oakwood Avenue from its intersection with Chestnut Street to its
intersection, as extended, with U.S. Route 6; further, all that part of the
city which lies west of the center line of Highway Route 82 running south
from its intersection with U.S. Route 6; further all that part of the city
which lies west of Hanford Street extending north to the city limit line at N
2100th Avenue.



(Prior Code, § 1-6-1) (Ord. O-18-13, passed 8-14-2018)



§ 92.02  NUMBERS REQUIRED FOR ALL LOTS AND BUILDINGS.



   All lots and parts of lots and buildings lying within the corporate
limits of the city shall be designated by street numbers in the manner
prescribed in this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 1-7-1)



§ 92.03  DESIGNATION OF DIRECTION.



   (A)   All those portions of streets running north and south, or
having their principal direction north and south, lying north of First
Street, or lying north of that part of Exchange Street east of Russell
Avenue, shall be designated by the word “North” prefixed to the name of
the street.



   (B)   All portions of streets running north and south, or having
their principal directions north and south, lying south of First Street, or
lying south of that part of Exchange Street east of Russell Avenue, shall be
designated by the word “South” prefixed to the name of the street.



   (C)   All portions of streets running east and west, or having their
principal directions east and west, lying east of State Street shall be
designated by the word “East” prefixed to the name of the street.



   (D)   All portions of streets running east and west, or having their
principal directions east and west, lying west of State Street shall be
designated by the word “West” prefixed to the name of the street.



(Prior Code, § 1-7-2)



§ 92.04  NUMBERING SYSTEM.



   Streets shall be numbered on the plan of 100 numbers to each block, and
one number for each 25 feet as far as practicable, numbering from First
Street, Exchange Street, or State Street as base lines, beginning with the
number 100 at each base line, north, south, east, or west, as the case may
be. Even numbers shall be assigned to the east and south sides of each block,
and odd numbers to the west and north sides of each block. All streets that
neither touch nor cross either of the base streets shall be numbered in the
same manner as though they crossed the base streets. As far as practicable,
corresponding numbers shall be assigned to all buildings and lots situated on
parallel streets and the same relative distance from their respective base
streets.



(Prior Code, § 1-7-3)



§ 92.05  APPLICATION FOR NUMBER.



   Any owner or occupant of any lot or building desiring to place upon it
the number thereof shall make application to the Public Service
Superintendent, who shall designate the number appropriate to the lot or
building in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and, upon request,
the Public Service Superintendent shall furnish without charge under his or
her hand a certificate as to the number.



(Prior Code, § 1-7-4)



§ 92.06  SIZE AND LOCATION OF NUMBERS.



   All numbers placed upon buildings or lots in this city shall consist of
figures not less than three inches in height, and shall be displayed in a
conspicuous place or manner in front of the building for which they are
designated.



(Prior Code, § 1-7-5)




ENCROACHMENTS




§ 92.20  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALTERNATIVE ANTENNA STRUCTURE. An existing pole or other structure
within the public right-of-way that can be used to support an antenna and is
not a utility pole or a city-owned infrastructure.



   ANTENNA. Communications equipment that transmits or receives
electromagnetic radio signals used in the provision of any type of wireless
communications services.



   CITY-OWNED INFRASTRUCTURE. Infrastructure in public right-of-way within
the boundaries of the city, including, but not limited to, streetlights,
traffic signals, towers, structures, or buildings owned, operated or
maintained by the city, other than city-owned electric utility facilities.



   ENCROACHMENT.  Any building, fence, sign, or any other structure or
object of any kind, with the exception of utilities and public road signs,
which is placed, located, or maintained in, on, under, or over any portion of
the roadway right-of-way.



   MONOPOLE. A structure composed of a single spire, pole or tower
designed and used to support antennas or related equipment and that is not a
utility pole, an alternative antenna structure, or city-owned infrastructure.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY.  Those areas existing or acquired by dedication or by
fee simple for highway purposes; also, the areas acquired by temporary
easement during the time the easement is in effect.



   TELECOMMUNICATION EQUIPMENT. Equipment, exclusive of an antenna, that
is part of a telecommunications facility.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY. An antenna, equipment, and related
improvements used, or designed to be used, to provide wireless transmission
of voice, data video streams, images, or other information including, but not
limited to, cellular phone service, personal communication service, paging,
and wi-fi antenna service.



   TOWER. Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the
purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice
towers, guy towers, or monopole towers, and that is not a utility pole, an
alternative antenna structure, or a city-owned infrastructure. Except as
otherwise provided for by this chapter, the requirements for a tower and
associated antenna facilities shall be those required in this chapter.



   UTILITY POLE. An upright pole designed and used to support electric
cables, telephone cables, telecommunication cables, cable service cables,
which are used to provide lighting, traffic control, signage, or a similar
function.



   VARIANCE or VARIATION. A grant of relief by the City Administrator or
his/her designee.



(Prior Code, § 1-8-1) (Ord. O-17-13, passed 4-11-2017)



§ 92.21  ENCROACHMENT PROHIBITED; VALIDITY.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to
erect or cause to be erected, to retain or cause to be retained, an
encroachment within the limits of the roadway right-of-way. The foregoing
prohibition shall not apply to free standing signs no larger than four square
feet in area advertising garage sales or similar neighborhood events, which
shall be allowed in the right-of-way areas for no longer than 72 hours.



(Prior Code, § 1-8-2)



      (1)   All signs permitted within the right-of-way under
division (A) above must comply with all federal, state and local rules and
regulations regarding underground utilities, to include JULIE at 811.



      (2)   No signs permitted within the right-of-way under
division (A) above shall be attached to or otherwise placed on utility poles
located within such right-of-way.



   (B)   This section is intended to and shall be in addition to all
other sections, rules, and regulations concerning encroachment, and shall not
be construed as repealing or rescinding any other section or part of any
section unless it is in direct conflict therewith.



(Prior Code, § 1-8-4) (Ord. O-14-108, passed 8-12-2014)



Penalty, see § 92.99



RIGHT-OF-WAY OPENING PERMIT



§ 92.35  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   Except as specified in § 92.36 of this chapter, no city street, alley,
sidewalk, or property shall be disturbed, hollowed, pitted, tunneled, or
excavated for the purpose of installing, constructing, enlarging, altering,
repairing, abandoning, removing, or improving underground utilities unless a
separate permit for each excavation has first been obtained from the city.
The property owner or contractor shall be responsible for the cost of the
street backfilling and surface repair as set forth in the repair and
restoration fee schedule below.  The excavation permit fee shall be set by
Council resolution.  The permit fee is separate from the costs to replace
the right-of-way surface and sub base.



(Prior Code, § 4-7-1)  (Ord. O-15-142, passed 5-12-2015)  Penalty, see §
92.99



§ 92.36  PERMIT EXEMPTION.



   (A)   A right-of-way opening permit shall not be required for the
following work:



      (1)   City departments working on city-owned utilities;
however, § 92.41 of this chapter pertaining to notice and inspections is
applicable; and



      (2)   Emergency repairs to underground utilities; however, a
permit, if required, shall be obtained the next working day, and backfilling
and surface repair shall be subject to the conditions set forth in § 92.38
of this chapter.



   (B)   Exemption from the permit requirements of this subchapter
shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any
manner in violation of the provisions of adopted codes or ordinances of the
city.



(Prior Code, § 4-7-2)  (Ord. O-15-142, passed 5-12-2015)



§ 92.37  PERMIT APPLICATION.



   (A)   To obtain a permit, the property owner, or, if the work is
performed by a contractor, the contractor, shall first file an application in
writing at the office of the Director of Public Works.  The application
shall include:



      (1)   Purpose of work;



      (2)   Location of work;



      (3)   Measurements of area and estimate of the cubic yardage
to be excavated;



      (4)   Type of surface that will be removed;



      (5)   Starting and ending dates of the work;



      (6)   A sketch of the work location;



      (7)   Certificate of insurance in the amount of $1,000,000, or
as specified by City Council; and



      (8)   Signed hold harmless agreement.



   (B)   The application and supporting documents filed by an applicant
for a permit shall be reviewed by the Director of Public Works. If the
Director of Public Works finds that the work described in the application for
a permit and supporting documents conform to the requirements of the city and
the applicant has no outstanding bill from a previous street excavation
permit, or is currently not in violation of this subchapter, then the
Director of Public Works shall issue permit and authorize commencement of
work.



(Prior Code, § 4-7-3)  (Ord. O-15-142, passed 5-12-2015)



§ 92.38  PERMIT FEES.



   (A)   Permit fees shall be established by City Council resolution.



   (B)   Repair and restoration fee shall include the cost of
right-of-way surface and sub base repair and restoration costs. All repair
and restoration work will be done to city specified standards and specs. 
The contractor may have the repairs and restoration completed by a city
licensed contractor or opt for the city to complete the work.  If the city
completes or hires the work to be done, the permit holder will be responsible
for all costs incurred by the city.  If a licensed contractor does not
complete the work to the city's standards, the city shall order the repairs
to be brought to city specs and all charges will be incurred by the permit
holder.



   (C)   Whenever any work for which a permit is required by this
chapter has been commenced without first obtaining a permit, except as
provided in § 92.36, the fee for the permit shall be double the regular
fee.  All contractors that install utilities underground shall provide the
city with drawings and asbuilts with exact locations and depths of any
installations.



   (D)   Fee for excavations made by or for the city is hereby waived.



(Prior Code, § 4-7-6)  (Ord. O-15-142, passed 5-12-2015)



§ 92.39  PERMIT SUSPENSION; REVOCATION; EXTENSION.



   The Public Service Superintendent may extend the permit at the
Superintendent’s discretion. The Public Service Superintendent may, in
writing, suspend or revoke a permit issued whenever the permit is issued in
error, or on the basis of incorrect information submitted, or in violation of
any section or regulation of any city ordinance or adopted code.



(Prior Code, § 4-7-5)



§ 92.40  PERMIT EXPIRATION.



   (A)   Permits issued by the city shall expire by limitation and
become void if the work authorized by the permit is not commenced within
seven days from the date of the permit.



   (B)   Permits issued by the city shall expire when the work
authorized by the permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after the work
is commenced for a period of seven days, and the Public Service Department
shall backfill the excavation and repair the surface of the street.



   (C)   Whenever a permit has expired as provided in this section, and
as provided in § 92.39, and has not been renewed, the permit applicant is in
violation of the city code and subject to the penalty stated in § 92.99.



(Prior Code, § 4-7-4)



§ 92.41  INSPECTION OF WORK AREA; SAFETY AND CLEAN-UP REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   All work shall remain accessible and exposed for inspection
purposes until approved by the Public Service Superintendent or assignee, and
City Plumbing Inspector as applicable.



   (B)   The permit applicant shall notify the Public Service
Superintendent that the work is ready for inspection. The request may be in
writing or by telephone and must be requested at least one working day before
the inspection is desired.



   (C)   Neither the Public Service Superintendent, nor the city, shall
be liable for expenses entailed in the removal or replacement of material
required to allow inspection.



   (D)   The permit applicant shall place warning devices in accordance
with requirements of the State Department of Transportation and the city.
Flagpersons may be required at the discretion of the Public Service
Superintendent. The permit applicant shall secure the work area whenever the
area is unsupervised or workers are not present.



   (E)   The permit applicant shall remove all debris from the
excavation.



(Prior Code, § 4-7-7)



TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES



§ 92.45  STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS FOR TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES.



   Telecommunication facilities will be permitted to be placed in
right-of-way within the jurisdiction of the city as attachments to existing
utility poles, alternative antenna structures, or city-owned infrastructure
subject to the following regulations:



   (A)   Number limitation and co-location. The City Administrator or
his/her designee may regulate the number of telecommunications facilities
allowed on each utility pole or city-owned infrastructure based on the height
of the utility pole or city-owned infrastructure, the additional height added
by the telecommunications facility, the ability for the utility pole or
city-owned infrastructure to safely support the telecommunications facility
and the aesthetic impact of the proposed telecommunications facility.  This
subchapter does not preclude or prohibit co-location of telecommunication
facilities on towers or monopoles that meet the requirements as set forth
elsewhere in this section or as required by federal law.



   (B)   Separation and clearance requirements. Telecommunication
facilities may be attached to a utility pole, alternative antenna structure,
monopole, or city-owned infrastructure only where such pole, structure or
infrastructure is located no closer than a distance equal to 100% of the
height of such facility to any residential building. A separation or lesser
clearance may be allowed by the City Administrator or his/her designee as an
administrative variance to this subchapter when the applicant establishes
that the lesser separation or clearance is necessary to close a significant
coverage or capacity gap in the applicant's services, and the proposed
antenna or facility is the least intrusive means to do so within the
right-of-way.



   (C)   Order of preference. In addition to the other regulations
described in this subchapter, telecommunications facilities shall be located
in the right-of-way in accordance with the following order of preference:



      (1)   Existing city-owned infrastructure;



      (2)   Existing utility poles, subject to the approval of the
City Administrator. The City Administrator shall approve, and may not
disapprove, an existing utility pole unless the Director of Electrical
Operations recommends not to approve a specific utility pole for reasons
designed to protect the safety and reliability of the city's electric utility
service;



      (3)   Replacement city-owned infrastructure or utility pole;



      (4)   Alternative antenna structure; and



      (5)   A new tower.



   (D)   City-owned infrastructure. Telecommunication facilities can
only be mounted to utility poles or city-owned infrastructure including, but
not limited to, streetlights, traffic signals, towers or buildings, if
authorized by a license or other agreement between the applicant and the
owner of the utility pole or the city. 



   (E)   New or replacement towers. No new monopole or other tower to
support telecommunication facilities is permitted to be installed on
right-of-way within the jurisdiction of the city unless the City Council
finds, based on clear and convincing evidence provided by the applicant, that
locating the telecommunications facilities on a new tower or monopole in the
right-of-way is necessary to close a significant coverage or capacity gap in
the applicant's services, and the proposed new monopole or other tower within
the right-of-way is the least intrusive means to do so. The height of any new
or replacement monopole or other tower may not exceed the average height of
existing utility poles or city-owned infrastructure located within 300 feet
of the proposed location by greater than ten feet or 10% of the average,
whichever is greater.



   (F)   Attachment limitations. No antenna or telecommunications
facility within the right-of-way will be attached to a utility pole,
alternative antenna structure, tower, or city-owned infrastructure unless all
of the following conditions are satisfied:



      (1)   Volume of antenna.  The antenna, including antenna
panels, whip antennas or dish-shaped antennas, cannot have a volume of more
than seven cubic feet in volume.



      (2)   Size of above-ground telecommunication facility. The
total combined volume of all above-ground equipment and appurtenances
comprising a telecommunication facility, exclusive of the antenna itself,
cannot exceed 32 cubic feet.



      (3)   Telecommunication equipment. The operator of a
telecommunication facility must, whenever possible, locate the base of the
equipment or appurtenances at a height of no lower than eight  feet above
grade.



      (4)   Telecommunication equipment mounted at grade. In the
event that the operator of a telecommunication facility proposes to install a
facility where equipment or appurtenances are to be installed at grade,
screening must be installed to minimize the visibility of the facility.
Screening must be installed at least three feet from the equipment installed
at-grade and eight feet from a roadway.



      (5)   Height. The top of the highest point of the antenna
cannot extend more than ten feet, or 10% of the existing height, whichever is
greater, above the highest point of the utility pole, alternative antenna
support structure, tower or city-owned infrastructure. If necessary, the
replacement or new utility pole, alternative support structure or city-owned
infrastructure located within the public right-of-way may be no more than ten
feet or 10% of the average, whichever is greater, higher than the average
height of existing utility poles or city-owned infrastructure located within
300 feet of the proposed location.



      (6)   Color. A telecommunication facility, including all
related equipment and appurtenances, must be a color that blends with the
surroundings of the pole, structure tower or infrastructure on which it is
mounted and use non-reflective materials which blend with the materials and
colors of the surrounding area and structures. Any wiring must be covered
with an appropriate cover.



      (7)   Antenna panel covering. An antenna may include a radome,
cap or other antenna panel covering or shield, to the extent such covering
would not result in a larger or more noticeable facility and, if proposed,
such covering must be of a color that blends with the color of the pole,
structure, tower or infrastructure on which it is mounted.



      (8)   Wiring and cabling. Wires and cables connecting the
antenna to the remainder of the facility must be installed in accordance with
the electrical code currently in effect. No wiring and cabling serving the
facility will be allowed to interfere with any wiring or cabling installed by
a cable television or video service operator, electric utility or telephone
utility.



      (9)   Grounding. The telecommunication facility must be
grounded in accordance with the requirements of the electrical code currently
in effect in the city.



      (10)   Guy wires. No guy or other support wires will be used
in connection with a telecommunication facility unless the facility is to be
attached to an existing utility pole, alternative antenna support structure,
tower or city-owned infrastructure that incorporated guy wires prior to the
date that an applicant has applied for a permit.



      (11)   Pole extensions. Extensions to utility poles,
alternative support structures, towers and city-owned infrastructure utilized
for the purpose of connecting an antenna and its related telecommunications
equipment must have a degree of strength capable of supporting the antenna
and any related appurtenances and cabling and capable of withstanding wind
forces and ice loads in accordance with the applicable structural integrity
standards. An extension must be securely bound to the utility pole,
alternative antenna structure, tower or city-owned infrastructure in
accordance with applicable engineering standards for the design and
attachment of such extensions.



      (12)   Structural integrity. The telecommunication facility,
including the antenna, pole extension and all related equipment must be
designed to withstand a wind force and ice loads in accordance with
applicable standards. For any facility attached to city-owned infrastructure
or, in the discretion of the city, for a utility pole, tower, or alternative
antenna structure, the operator of the facility must provide the city with a
structural evaluation of each specific location containing a certification
that the proposed installation passes the applicable standards. The
evaluation must be prepared by a professional structural engineer licensed in
the State of Illinois.



   (G)   Signage. Other than signs required by federal law or
regulations or identification and location markings, installation of signs on
a telecommunication facility is prohibited.



   (H)   Screening. If screening is required under division (F)(4)
above, it must be natural landscaping material or a fence subject to the
approval of the city and must comply with all regulations of the city.
Appropriate landscaping must be located and maintained and must provide the
maximum achievable screening, as determined by the city, from view of
adjoining properties and public or private streets. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, no such screening is required to extend more than one foot higher
than the top of any ground mounted equipment. Landscape screening when
permitted in the right-of-way must be provided with a clearance of three feet
in all directions from the facility. The color of housing for ground-mounted
equipment must blend with the surroundings. For a covered structure, the
maximum reasonably achievable screening must be provided between such
facility and the view from adjoining properties and public or private streets.



   (I)   Permission to use utility pole or alterative antenna
structure. The operator of a telecommunication facility must submit to the
city written copies of the approval from the owner of a utility pole,
monopole, or an alternative antenna structure, to mount the telecommunication
facility on that specific pole, tower, or structure, prior to issuance of the
city permit.



   (J)   Licenses and permits. The operator of a telecommunication
facility must verify to the city that all concurrent licenses and permits
required by other agencies and governments with jurisdiction over the design,
construction, location and operation of said facility have been obtained and
will be maintained within the corporate limits of the city.



   (K)   Abandonment and removal. Any telecommunication facility
located within the corporate limits of the city that is not operated for a
continuous period of 12 months, shall be considered abandoned and the owner
of the facility must remove same within 90 days of receipt of written notice
from the city notifying the owner of such abandonment. Such notice shall be
sent by certified or registered mail, return-receipt-requested, by the city
to such owner at the last known address of such owner. In the case of
telecommunication facilities attached to city-owned infrastructure, if such
facility is not removed within 90 days of such notice, the city may remove or
cause the removal of such facility through the terms of the applicable
license agreement or through whatever actions are provided by law for removal
and cost recovery.



(Ord. O-17-13, passed 4-11-2017)



§ 92.46  VARIANCES.



   (A)   Each location of a telecommunication facility within a
right-of-way must meet all of the requirements described in § 92.45, unless
a variance has been obtained in accordance with the following procedures set
forth in this section.



   (B)   Request for variance. An applicant requesting a variance from
one or more of the provisions of this subchapter must do so in writing to the
City Administrator as a part of the permit application. The request shall
identify each provision of this subchapter from which a variance is requested
and the reasons why a variance should be granted.



   (C)   Authority to grant variances. The City Administrator shall
decide whether a variance is authorized for each provision of this subchapter
identified in the variance request on an individual basis.



   (D)   Conditions for granting of variance. The City Administrator
may authorize a variance only if the applicant requesting the variance has
demonstrated that:



      (1)    One or more conditions not under the control of the
applicant (such as terrain features or an irregular right-of-way line) create
a special hardship that would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable,
given the public purposes to be achieved by the provision; or



      (2)   The degree of variance requested is the least intrusive
means necessary to close a significant coverage or capacity gap in the
applicant's services; and



      (3)   All other designs, methods, materials, locations or
facilities that would conform with the provision from which a variance is
requested are impracticable in relation to the requested approach.



   (E)   Additional conditions for granting of a variance. As a
condition for authorizing a variance, the City Administrator may require the
applicant requesting the variance to meet reasonable standards and conditions
that may or may not be expressly contained within this subchapter, but which
carry out the purposes of this subchapter.



   (F)   Right to appeal. Any applicant aggrieved by any order,
requirement, decision or determination, including denial of a variance, made
by the City Administrator under the provisions of this subchapter shall have
the right to appeal to the City Council, or such other board or commission as
it may designate. The application for appeal shall be submitted in writing to
the City Clerk within 30 days after the date of such order, requirement,
decision or determination. The City Council shall commence its consideration
of the appeal at the Council's next regularly scheduled meeting occurring at
least seven  days after the filing of the appeal. The City Council shall
timely decide the appeal.



(Ord. O-17-13, passed 4-11-2017)



§ 92.47  PERMITS AND APPLICATION FEES AND PROCEDURES.



   Permits for placement of telecommunication facilities in right-of-way
within the city are required. Any application must demonstrate compliance
with the requirements of this subchapter. Unless otherwise provided by
franchise, license, or similar agreement, or federal, state or local law, all
applications for permits pursuant to this section must be accompanied by a
fee in the amount of no less than $500. The application fee will reimburse
the city for regulatory and administrative costs with respect to the work
being performed.



(Ord. O-17-13, passed 4-11-2017)



§ 92.48  CONFLICT OF LAWS.



   Where the conditions imposed by any provisions of this subchapter
regarding the siting and installation of telecommunication facilities are
more restrictive than comparable conditions imposed elsewhere in any other
local law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation, the regulations of this
subchapter will govern.



(Ord. O-17-13, passed 4-11-2017)




SNOW




§ 92.55  DUTY TO CLEAR SIDEWALK.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the owner and the occupant of all
premises abutting any sidewalk in the city to keep the sidewalk, in front of
or along the same, free from snow or other obstruction. Sidewalks shall be
cleared within  24 hours of the accumulation of one inch of snow or other
deposits on the sidewalk and within 24 hours of the conclusion of  a snow
event. With regard to the owners and occupants of corner lots which abut
sidewalks which include ramps to the street, it shall be the duty of the
owner and occupant to keep the ramps free from snow or other obstruction
within the same time frame as well. This duty shall include all owners and
occupants of business premises, regardless of hours of operation. In the
event that the person or persons responsible for the snow removal pursuant to
this section fails to do so, such person or persons shall be subject to the
penalties set forth in § 92.99(E).  In addition, the city may in its
discretion give notice to the property owner by mail or signage posted on the
property, cause the snow to be cleared by its employees or outside
contractors and charge a fee for such service to the owner of the property
abutting the sidewalk.  The city may also choose to clear, without charge,
those sidewalks where the City Council determines such clearing to be useful
or necessary and in the interest of commerce or transportation.  The
determination of City Council shall be resolution identifying the adjoining
parcels by their PIN numbers.  Where a charge is imposed by the city, the
charge by the city for clearing snow from a sidewalk or ramp shall be the
actual cost incurred for clearing the snow, whether that is by city employees
or contracted by another party, plus $125 administrative fee.  Each day that
snow or other obstruction shall remain on the sidewalk after the initial
24-hour period shall constitute a separate offense.



   (B)   Lien for failure to pay snow removal charge.  If snow is
removed off the sidewalk by the city, or by someone directed by the city, and
a charge is imposed by the city for such service, the charges shall be
itemized on an invoice and mailed to the owner of the relevant property. 
The invoice shall be paid within ten days of the date of mailing. If the
charges are not paid to the city within ten days after the date on which the
invoice was mailed, then the city shall serve, by mail, a notice of lien for
the invoiced amount upon the property owner and the city may record the lien
in the office of the Recorder of Deeds. The notice or lien shall be filed
within 60 days after the cost and expense is incurred, and shall consist of a
sworn statement setting out:



      (1)   The legal description of the real estate sufficient for
identification thereof;



      (2)   The amount of money representing the cost and expense
incurred or payable for the service; and



      (3)   The date or dates when the cost and expense were
incurred by the city.



   (C)   Upon payment of the cost and expense after notice of lien has
been filed, the city shall release the lien and the release shall be filed of
record in the same manner as filing notice of the lien. The City
Administrator or the Director of Public Works is each authorized to execute
the release of lien on behalf of the city without further action of the City
Council.



(Prior Code, § 7-5-1) (Ord. O-14-101, passed 3-11-2014; Ord. O-15-151,
passed 11-10-2015; Ord. O-16-187, passed 12-13-2016)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.56  PLACEMENT OF CLEARED SNOW.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any premises
to cause snow from that premises to be placed onto any city street, alley, or
other right-of-way which has been plowed.



   (B)   This section does not apply to snow removed from sidewalks in
front of commercial properties in the downtown business district on State
Street, from Second Street to Brown Street, on Second Street, from Oakwood
Avenue to Center Street, on First Street, from Oakwood Avenue to College
Avenue, on Exchange Street, from Oakwood Avenue to Center Street, and on
Orange Street, from Oakwood Avenue to State Street.



(Prior Code, § 7-5-2)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.57  PARKING RESTRICTIONS DUE TO SNOWFALL.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on any public street
in the city at any time within 12 hours after a snowfall of three inches or
more has occurred, unless the snow has been plowed off or otherwise removed
from the street.



   (B)   Whenever the Mayor, City Administrator or Chief of Police
perceives an emergency to exist in the city, or in any section(s) thereof,
because of snow, freezing rain, sleet, ice, drifting snow, or other
precipitation or natural phenomena which create hazardous conditions or
impede the free movement of fire, police, ambulance, emergency or other
vehicular traffic or otherwise endanger the safety and welfare of the public,
the Mayor, City Administrator or Chief of Police may declare an emergency to
exist and the period during which said emergency shall exist.  If no
duration is expressly stated, the duration of the emergency shall be twenty
four hours from the time of the declaration.



   (C)   Primary notification will be made by sending notice of such
emergency and duration thereof to the local media with a request to broadcast
the emergency declaration.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place or permit to
stand any vehicle for a period of more than ten minutes for the loading or
unloading of passengers or materials on any public street or right of way
within the city during an emergency as declared pursuant to division (B)
above.



(Prior Code, § 7-5-3) (Am. Ord. O-15-152, passed 12-8-15)  Penalty, see §
92.99



§ 92.58  REMOVAL OF VEHICLE; CHARGE.



   The police officers of the city are hereby required and empowered to
remove from any streets, any vehicle found standing thereon in violation of
any provision of this chapter where the position in which the vehicle is
standing blocks or materially inconveniences the removal of snow therefrom,
or the movement of traffic or pedestrians thereon. In the event any vehicle
is so removed, the reasonable expense of the removal shall be taxed as part
of the costs, in addition to any penalty either voluntarily paid or assessed
by the court as provided by law.



(Prior Code, § 7-5-4)  (Am. Ord. O-15-152, passed 12-8-15)



§ 92.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   Any person placing a number, or permitting a number to remain
upon any building, other than the number designated in accordance with the
provisions of §§ 92.01 through 92.06 or in any other manner than as herein
provided, shall be required to remove the number, and shall be subject to a
fine of not less than $10 nor more than $750 for each offense, and a separate
offense shall be deemed to be committed for each and every day during which a
violation continues or exists.



(Prior Code, § 1-7-6)



   (C)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating § 92.21 of this
chapter shall be fined not less than $25 nor more than $750 for each offense,
and a separate offense shall be deemed committed for each and every day
during which a violation continues or exists.



(Prior Code, § 1-8-5)



   (D)   (1)   Any person, firm, or corporation who has commenced
work prior to the issuance of a permit as required in § 92.35 of this
chapter shall be in violation, and justly cause the Public Service
Superintendent to issue a stop order. Prior to the removal of the stop order,
a permit must be issued in accordance to the provisions of this chapter.



      (2)   Any person, firm, or corporation who has completed the
work required by this chapter without being issued a permit shall be in
violation, and shall be fined not less than $25 nor more than $500 for each
day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.



      (3)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision
of §§ 92.35 through 92.41 of this chapter shall be fined not less than $25
nor more than $750 for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed upon each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.



(Prior Code, § 4-7-8)



   (E)   (1)   Any violations of the provisions of § 92.55 shall be
punishable by a minimum fine of $25 and a maximum fine of $750, and further
be subject to abatement of the nuisance as therein provided.



      (2)    In the event that a person is charged with a violation
of § 92.55 under an ordinance violation notice as a first-time offender, the
person may satisfy the penalty by paying the $25 fine in person or by mail
within five days of being charged with the violation.  All penalties shall
be paid at the Police Department.



(Prior Code, § 7-5-5) (Ord. O-14-101, passed 3-11-2014)



APPENDIX A:  ENCROACHMENT RIGHTS-OF-WAY



   Roadway right-of-way lines have been established at the following
locations:



   (A)   Along both sides of Main Street, 25 feet from the center line
of the proposed improvement from Oakwood Avenue to Stewart Street;



   (B)   Along both sides of Oakwood Avenue, 25 feet from the center
line of the proposed improvement from Main Street to Hillcrest Drive;



   (C)   Along Main Street between Dilenbeck Drive and Geneseo Street,
including replacement of the structure over Geneseo Creek (U.S. Route 6, FAU
Route 5671, State Section (4B-1) RS-1;



   (D)   Along College Avenue, North Street, and Henry Street, marked
Illinois Route 82, FA Route 638, State Section (12-S-CS) RS-1, from Elk
Street to Main Street;



   (E)   Along College Avenue, marked Illinois Route 82, FA Route 638,
State Section (12W & RS-2) from Smith Street located near the north corporate
limits of the city to Elk Street;



   (F)   Along U.S. Route 6 East, FA Route 5674, State Section 4M & TS,
city section 03-00058-00-TL, all located within the turning lane and
intersection improvements to the intersection of U.S. Route 6 East and South
Chicago Street; and



   (G)   Along that portion of Illinois Highway 82 South, FA Route 638,
State Section 136R, city section 04-00059-00-SW, from approximately 266 feet
north of Hillcrest Drive to Geneseo Creek, approximately 1,430 feet south of
the Interstate Route 80 eastbound ramps.



(Prior Code, § 1-8-3)



APPENDIX B:  STREET NUMBER APPLICATION FORM



   City of Geneseo



   STREET NUMBER APPLICATION



Applicant’s Name
______________________________________________________________



Location of lot to be numbered



_______________________________________________________________________________
____
_______________________________________________________________________________
____



Date ______________________   _________________________________________



               Signature



-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------



Number issued _________________________



Street name
___________________________________________________________________



Date
______________________   _______________________________________________



               Public Service Superintendent



CHAPTER 93:  HEALTH AND SANITATION



Section




Nuisances




   93.01   Declaration of nuisances



   93.02   Burning



   93.03   Animals in cemeteries prohibited



   93.04   Notice to abate nuisance



Weeds and Grass



   93.15   Definitions



   93.16   Cutting of weeds and grass required



   93.17   Notice to cut weeds and grass



   93.18   Charge for weed and grass cutting by city



   93.19   Lien for failure to pay cutting charge



   93.20   Prohibiting grass and weed clippings on public right-of-ways



 



   93.99   Penalty




NUISANCES




§ 93.01  DECLARATION OF NUISANCES.



   The following shall be declared as public nuisances:



   (A)   To cause or suffer the carcass of any animal or any offal,
filth, or noisome substance to be collected, deposited, or to remain in any
public place to the prejudice of others;



   (B)   To throw or deposit any offal or other offensive matter or the
carcass of any dead animal in any public place, common sewer, street, or
public highway;



   (C)   To obstruct access to, or encroach upon, public highways,
sidewalks, private ways, streets, alleys, commons, or any public place, or to
plant any tree upon the public right-of-way without written permission from
the Public Service Superintendent. For the purpose of this section, OBSTRUCT
encompasses, but shall not necessarily be limited to, one or more of the
following:



      (1)   Obstruction of the free unhampered passage of
pedestrians or vehicles;



      (2)   Obstruction, molesting, or interfering with any person
lawfully upon any public highways, sidewalks, private ways, streets, alleys,
commons, or any public place;



      (3)   Obstructing or otherwise interfering with the free
passage of persons entering or occupying buildings or premises;



      (4)   Engaging in any activity which tends to provoke a breach
of peace; and/or



      (5)   Refusing to move on when so requested by a peace
officer, provided that the peace officer has exercised his or her discretion
reasonably under the circumstances in order to preserve or promote public
peace and order. For the purpose of this section, PUBLIC PLACE includes the
quasi-public area in front of or adjacent to any store, shop, restaurant,
luncheonette, or other place of business, and also includes parking lots or
other vacant property not owned or under the control of the person charged
with a violation of this section.



   (D)   To erect, construct, or maintain poles, wires, conduits,
cables, gas, water pipes or mains, or any other obstruction for the
transmission of electric current, natural or artificial gas in, upon, along,
or under any of the streets, alleys, avenues, or other public places without
a license from the city for such purpose;



   (E)   To permit to remain in, upon, along, or under the streets,
alleys, avenues, or other public places any poles, wires, conduits, cables,
gas, water pipes or mains after the expiration of any license granted for
such purpose and after ten day’s notice from the city to remove any poles,
wires, conduits, cables, gas, or water pipes or mains;



   (F)   To construct, erect, repair, or maintain any poles, wires,
conduits, cables, gas, or water pipes or mains without a written permit from
the city;



   (G)   To obstruct or injure, or cause to be obstructed or injured,
any street, alley, sidewalk, crosswalk, bridge, or causeway or continue an
obstruction so as to render the same inconvenient or dangerous to pass, or to
pollute or obstruct any water course or common sewer or continue the
obstruction or pollution so as to render the same offensive or unwholesome,
or to maintain or carry on any establishment for steaming or rendering lard,
tallow, offal, and other substances as may be rendered, or to maintain and
carry on any slaughtering establishment without first having obtained a
permit from the City Council to carry on a slaughtering establishment in an
offensive or unwholesome manner, or to erect or establish any offensive,
nauseous, or unwholesome trade or manufacture or business or continue the
same after it has been erected or established, within the corporate limits of
the city or within one mile of the corporate limits;



   (H)   To make or maintain any connection of roof downspouts,
foundation drains, driveway drains, garage drains, sump pumps or other
sources of surface water, ground water, storm water, roof runoff or
subsurface drainage to a building sewer or lateral sewer which is connected
directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer;



   (I)   To direct or redirect water as described in division (H)
above, so that it shall routinely pond or freeze on sidewalks, streets, or
alleys in such a manner as will cause a public safety hazard;



   (J)   To discharge sump pump discharge water in such a manner as to
cause accumulation of water or ice to remain on sidewalks, streets, or
alleys. If the accumulation is determined to be a public safety hazard by the
city, the property owner and tenant, if different from the owner, shall be
given notice that the sump pump discharge is in apparent violation of this
section. The property owner and tenant shall thereafter have 60 days to
either redirect the water flow or to connect the sump pump discharge to the
city’s storm sewer system when the city has placed a storm sewer or sump
pump collection system adjacent to the property. Connection to the city’s
storm sewer or sump pump collection system shall be done to the
specifications and standards for the connection as set forth by the city’s
Public Service Superintendent;



   (K)   To shoot any air gun, air rifle, BB gun, air pump gun, BB pump
gun, paint ball gun, or any other similar device, or any sling shot, upon the
streets, alleys, parks, or other public places, or if so shooting such
implements that the missiles propelled thereby will or may pass over or onto
any street, alley, park, or public place;



   (L)   To burn trash, garbage, refuse or materials other than
combustible yard waste. The owner of any engine, whether locomotive or
stationary, and the person employed as engineer or otherwise in the operation
of the engine, and the proprietor, lessee, and occupant of any building who
shall permit dense smoke to issue or be emitted from the smoke stack of any
engine or the chimney or smoke stack of a building, shall be deemed and held
guilty of creating a public nuisance;



   (M)   To feed, house, or keep hogs in any pen, enclosure, or place
which is less than 350 feet from any residence. Any feeding or keeping of a
hog or hogs in any such place is hereby declared to be a nuisance; and



   (N)   To cause or permit the accumulation of any amount of junk
within any property in any district of the city other than
“agriculture”.  JUNK shall include waste paper, rags, scrap metal or
other discarded material, unused furniture, appliances or machinery (or parts
thereof) not in operating condition.



(Prior Code, § 7-1-1) (Am. Ord. 1970, passed 5-11-2010; Am. Ord. O-13-088,
passed 6-11-2013)   Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.02  BURNING.



   (A)   Prohibition and definition.



      (1)   Burning of fallen leaves, cut weeds, grass clippings is
prohibited within the city limits at any given time or location.



      (2)   Other fires are permitted subject to the following terms
and conditions:



         (a)   The dimensions of the pit or fire container shall
not exceed three feet in diameter and two feet in height.



         (b)   No fire shall be conducted within 25 feet of a
structure or combustible materials.



         (c)   The length of time any fire shall be permitted to
burn shall not exceed four hours total in any 24-hour time period.



         (d)   All fires must be attended at all times with a
means of extinguishment readily available.



         (e)   No fire shall cause excessive or unreasonable
smoke or odor to carry over onto the property of other persons so as to
create a nuisance.



      (3)   (a)   Owners of real estate zoned Agriculture (A)
Districts within the city limits may request an exemption from the burn
prohibitions of this section.  In order to obtain such an exemption, the
owners shall apply in writing to the city, which shall cause an inspection of
the property to be made by the Zoning Officer and a report made to the Zoning
Board of Appeals.  This report shall include all relevant factors, including
but not limited to:



            1.   The size and area of the property.



            2.   The location of the property in relation to
residential or business properties which could be affected by burning thereon.



            3.   The area set aside on the property for
burning.



         (b)   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hold a public
hearing on the application. Notice of the hearing shall be sent to all owners
of real estate within 250 feet not less than 15 nor more than 30 days of the
hearing. At the hearing, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall consider the
report of the Zoning Officer and all other relevant evidence, and shall
recommend approval or denial of the application to the City Council at its
next meeting scheduled after the public hearing.



         (c)   In the case of newly annexed agriculture-zoned
property, an exemption from the prohibitions of this section may be contained
in the terms of an annexation agreement, and shall be subject to hearing and
approval in the manner set forth in ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-15.1, and as
that statute may be thereafter amended.



         (d)   All permits shall contain provisions regarding the
location on the real estate where burning may occur, size of the burning
area, type of container (if any) to be used and number of fires per month
(from one to unlimited). These provisions shall be established by the Zoning
Board of Appeals upon approval of the permit.



         (e)   Any permit issued pursuant to this subsection
shall run with the land for which it is issued. Such permit may be subject to
review, modification, suspension or termination in the event that any of the
circumstances upon which it was issued had changed. Before any modification,
suspension or termination of a permit takes place, the issue shall be set for
hearing before the Zoning Board of Appeals. Notice of the hearing date shall
be sent to the owners of the real estate subject to the permit and the owners
of all real estate within 250 feet, not less than 15 days nor more than 30
days. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall consider all relevant evidence and
testimony at such hearing and render a decision on this issue.



   (B)   Police enforcement.



      (1)   Police officers are hereby authorized to cause a fire to
be extinguished whenever they may determine the burning of fallen leaves, cut
weeds, grass clippings leaves or use of bonfires or recreational fires in
violation of this section.



      (2)   The foregoing immediate action of the police shall not
in any manner restrict or prohibit the prosecution of an ordinance violation
complaint in any such case.



      (3)   Police officers are hereby authorized to cause fires
which are in violation of these provisions to be extinguished.  In assessing
whether a fire is a nuisance pursuant to division (A)(2)(e) above, the police
may consider any applicable factor, including weather conditions, wind, time
of day, etc.



(Prior Code, § 7-1-4)  (Ord. 1932, passed 3-10-2009; Ord. 1962, passed
2-9-2010; Ord. O-12-032, passed 3-13-2012)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.03  ANIMALS IN CEMETERIES PROHIBITED.



   Any cemetery located within the city limits is hereby held to be a
place of reverence and respect for the deceased persons buried therein, and
the persons who visit their grave sites.  It is therefore declared to be a
public nuisance to permit any dog, cat, or other domestic animal, owned by or
under the control of any person, to be on any portion of the cemetery
grounds. This provision shall apply regardless of whether the animal shall be
restrained by a leash or any other method.



(Prior Code, § 7-1-5)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.04  NOTICE TO ABATE NUISANCE.



   Notice shall be given ten days before the abatement or commencement of
any action of any nuisance, and may be given in writing to any person
maintaining any nuisance, by the Mayor, City Clerk, or Public Service
Superintendent.



(Prior Code, § 7-1-6)



WEEDS AND GRASS



§ 93.15  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   GRASS. Any plant having jointed stems and blade-like leaves of the type
generally cultivated for lawns.



   WEEDS.  Any plant that is useless, injurious, or unsightly, or
established in an area that impedes normal visual needs for pedestrian and
vehicle traffic, including the following: blue vervain, burdock, cockelbur,
common mile weed, curled dock, horseweed, jimpson weed, lambs quarter,
milkweed (common), nettles, poison hemlock, poison ivy, poison oak, ragweed
(common), ragweed (giant), rough pigweed, smart weeds (all varieties),
thistle, wild carrot, wild hemp, wild lettuce, and wild mustard.



(Prior Code, § 7-4-1)  (Ord. O-13-075, passed 3-12-2013)



§ 93.16  CUTTING OF WEEDS AND GRASS REQUIRED.



   It is declared to be illegal for the owner of real estate to refuse or
neglect to cut weeds and grass when such plants have reached a height in
excess of eight inches. Every owner of real estate within the city shall cut
weeds and grass on his or her property at all times as may be necessary so
that such plants shall not exceed eight inches in height, and, if the owner
neglects or refuses to cut weeds and grass so that they do not exceed eight
inches in height, the city may cut the weeds or grass or authorize some
person to cut them on behalf of the city.



(Prior Code, § 7-4-2)  (Ord. O-13-075, passed 3-12-2013; Ord. O-15-145,
passed 6-9-2015) Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.17  NOTICE TO CUT WEEDS AND GRASS.



   The city shall give notice in writing to at least one of the owners of
real estate before cutting the weeds and grass thereon. The notice shall
state the date on or after which the city will cut the weeds and grass if not
cut by the owner and the potential penalties for non-compliance. The notice
shall be acceptable if a door hangar is hung on the front door of the
property and a letter sent via regular mail.  The owner or his or her
designee will have 72 hours from the time the door hangar was hung to have
the weeds and grass cut.



(Prior Code, § 7-4-3)  (Ord. O-13-075, passed 3-12-2013; Ord. O-15-145,
passed 6-9-2015)



§ 93.18  CHARGE FOR WEED AND GRASS CUTTING BY CITY.



   The charge by the city for cutting weeds shall be the actual cost
incurred for mowing property, whether that be by city employees or contracted
by another party, plus $125 administrative fee. In addition, the owners of
the real estate may be fined as provided in § 93.99.



(Prior Code, § 7-4-4)  (Ord. O-13-075, passed 3-12-2013)



§ 93.19  LIEN FOR FAILURE TO PAY CUTTING CHARGE.



   (A)   If weeds and grass are cut by the city, or by someone directed
to cut them on behalf of the city, and if the charge therefore is not paid to
the city within ten days after the completion of the work, a notice of lien
of the cost and expense thereof incurred by the city shall be recorded by the
city, or the person performing the service by authority of the city, in its
or his or her own name, in the office of the Recorder of Deeds in the county.
The notice of lien shall be filed within 60 days after the cost and expense
is incurred, and shall consist of a sworn statement setting out:



      (1)   The description of the real estate sufficient for
identification thereof;



      (2)   The amount of money representing the cost and expense
incurred or payable for the service; and



      (3)   The date or dates when the cost and expense were
incurred by the city.



   (B)   Upon payment of the cost and expense after notice of lien has
been filed, the lien shall be released by the city or person in whose name
the lien has been filed, and the release shall be filed of record in the same
manner as filing notice of the lien.



(Prior Code, § 7-4-5)  (Ord. O-13-075, passed 3-12-2013)



§ 93.20  PROHIBITING GRASS AND WEED CLIPPINGS ON PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAYS.



   It is declared illegal for an owner or occupant of any real estate in
the city to cause or allow cut grass and weed clippings to be deposited and
remain for any period of time upon any street, roadway or sidewalk within the
city.



(Ord. O-13-075, passed 3-12-2013)



§ 93.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   (1)   Any violations of the provisions of § 93.01 shall be
punishable by a minimum fine of $25 and a maximum fine of $750, and further
be subject to abatement of the nuisance. In the event a person violates §§
93.01 through 93.04 a second or subsequent time, the minimum fine shall be
$50.



      (2)   In the event that a person is charged with a violation
of § 93.01 under an ordinance violation notice as a first-time offender, the
person may satisfy the penalty by paying the $25 fine in person or by mail
within five days of being charged with the violation. All penalties shall be
paid at the Police Department.



(Prior Code, § 7-1-1)



   (B)   (1)   Any person who violates the provisions of § 93.02
shall be subject to a fine not less than $25 nor more than $750, and further
be subject to abatement of the nuisance. In the event a person violates this
section a second or subsequent time, the minimum fine shall be $50.



      (2)  In the event that a person is charged with a violation of
§ 93.02 under an ordinance violation notice as a first-time offender, the
person may satisfy the penalty by paying the $25 fine in person or by mail
within five days of being charged with the violation. All penalties shall be
paid at the Police Department.



(Prior Code, § 7-1-4)



   (C)   Any public nuisance as set forth above in § 93.03 is hereby
prohibited. Any violations of the provisions of § 93.03 shall be punishable
by a minimum fine of $25 and a maximum fine of $750. In the event of a second
or subsequent violation, the minimum fine shall be $50. A first time offender
may satisfy the penalty by paying the $25 fine in person or by mail within
five days of being charged with the violation, at the Police Department.



(Prior Code, § 7-1-5)



   (D)   Any person who violates the provisions of §§ 93.15 through
93.19 shall be subject to a fine of not less than $25 and not more than $750.



(Prior Code, § 7-4-6)



(Ord. 1932, passed 3-10-2009)



CHAPTER 94:  CITY PARKS



Section



   94.01   Hours of operation



   94.02   Unlawful conduct



   94.03   Exceptions



 



   94.99   Penalty



§ 94.01  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   All city parks, being those areas which are now, or which hereafter may
be, owned and operated by the city for public park purposes, shall be open to
the public only in accordance with the following schedule:  Monday, Tuesday,
Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, Saturday, and Sunday  -  Hours: Sunrise until
10:00 p.m.



(Prior Code, § 6-8-1)



§ 94.02  UNLAWFUL CONDUCT.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to occupy or be
present in any city park at any time during which the park is not open to the
public, except as provided hereafter in § 94.03.



(Prior Code, § 6-8-2)



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to operate any
motor vehicle, minibike, or motorcycle in any city park at any time, except
as provided hereafter in § 94.03.



(Prior Code, § 6-8-3)



Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.03  EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   It is not hereby made unlawful for any person to walk through
any city park at any time in an otherwise lawful manner on public sidewalks
there provided.



   (B)   It is not hereby made unlawful for any person to be present in
any park during hours when the park is not open to the public, if the person
is attending or participating in any party, entertainment, theatrical
performance, picnic, dance, or similar event being conducted by an
organization, association, or family group, provided the event has been
scheduled in advance on the list maintained for that purpose in the office of
the City Clerk.



   (C)   It is not hereby made unlawful for any person who is employed
by the city to perform police or custodial functions to be present in any
city park or cemetery at any time.



   (D)   It is not hereby made unlawful for any person authorized by
the Public Service Superintendent to operate an authorized motor vehicle in
any city park at any time in a lawful manner.



(Prior Code, § 6-8-4)



§ 94.99  PENALTY.



   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not
less than $25 nor more than $750.



(Prior Code, § 6-8-5)



CHAPTER 95:  CITY CEMETERIES



Section



   95.01   Rates and hours of operation



   95.02   Unlawful conduct



 



   95.99   Penalty



§ 95.01  RATES AND HOURS OF OPERATION.



   (A)   The city cemeteries, known as North Cemetery and Oakwood
Cemetery, shall be open to the public only between the time of sunrise and
the time of sunset each day of the week.



      (1)   Grave openings:



         (a)   Regular size:



            1.   Monday through Friday: $850.



            2.   Saturday until noon: $1,050.



            3.   Saturday afternoon: $1,250.



            4.   Sunday: $1,500.



         (b)   Small (less than two feet by two feet):



            1.   Monday through Friday: $400.



            2.   Saturday until noon: $500.



            3.   Saturday afternoon: $600.



            4.   Sunday: $850.



      (2)   Disinterment: $850.



      (3)   Lots: $400.



   (C)   Oakwood Cemetery rates shall be:



      (1)   Grave openings:



         (a)   Regular size:



            1.   Monday through Friday: $850.



            2.   Saturday until noon: $1,050.



            3.   Saturday afternoon: $1.250.



            4.   Sunday: $1,500.



         (b)   Small (less than two feet by two feet):



            1.   Monday through Friday: $400.



            2.   Saturday until noon: $500.



            3.   Saturday afternoon: $600.



            4.   Sunday: $850.



      (2)   Disinterment: $850.



      (3)   Lots: $500.



   (D)   No funerals shall be held or scheduled for holidays.



   (E)   Grave side services or funeral services in either North
Cemetery or Oakwood Cemetery which commence after 3:00 p.m. will be assessed
a minimum one-half hour surcharge of $50, and $50 per each additional
one-half hour subsequently exceeding the aforementioned times until the
conclusion of the service.



 



   (F)   A $50 fee will be charged to transfer deeds of plot.



(Prior Code, § 6-9-1)  (Ord. 1931, passed 2-10-2009; Ord. 1980, passed
12-14-2010)



§ 95.02  UNLAWFUL CONDUCT.



   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to occupy or be present
in any city cemetery at any time during which the cemetery is not open to the
public.



(Prior Code, § 6-9-2)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.99  PENALTY.



   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not
less than $25 nor more than $750.



(Prior Code, § 6-9-3)



CHAPTER 96:  AIRCRAFT



Section



   96.01   Definitions



   96.02   Unlawful operation



 



   96.99   Penalty



§ 96.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AIRCRAFT.  Any contrivance now known or hereafter invented or designed
for navigation of or flight in the air.



   LAND.  Real property and all improvements thereto, and water forming a
part of any real property.



   OPERATOR.  Any person who controls the flight, including landing and
takeoffs, of an aircraft, including the pilot and/or navigator thereof.



(Prior Code, § 8-6-1)



§ 96.02  UNLAWFUL OPERATION.



   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any aircraft to land or take
off the aircraft from any land within the city limits, except a landing as
had been authorized for landings and takeoffs in compliance with the City
Zoning Ordinance and any regulations imposed thereunder.



(Prior Code, § 8-6-2)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who violates § 96.02 of this chapter shall be subject to a
fine of not less than $100, nor greater than $750 for each violation.



(Prior Code, § 8-6-3)



TITLE XI:  BUSINESS REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      110.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



      111.   TAXIS



      112.   CONTRACTOR LICENSES



      113.   SOLICITORS, HAWKERS, AND PEDDLERS



      114.   TOBACCO REGULATIONS



      115.   AMUSEMENTS



      116.   TRAILER CAMPS



      117.   ALARM BUSINESSES AND SYSTEMS



      118.   FINANCIAL INCENTIVES FOR NEW OR EXPANDING RETAIL
BUSINESSES



      119.   FOOD TRUCKS



      120.   ANNUAL BUSINESS REGISTRATION



      121.   CABLE AND VIDEO REGULATIONS



CHAPTER 110:  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



General Provisions



   110.01   Definitions



   110.02   License required



   110.03   Public meetings; notice



Issuance of License



   110.15   Application for license



   110.16   Applicant required to maintain sanitary facilities



   110.17   Restrictions on eligible licensees



   110.18   Term; new fee schedule effective date



   110.19   License classification; fee



   110.20   Number of licenses restricted



   110.21   Payment and disposition of fee



   110.22   License list maintained



   110.23   Transfer of license



   110.24   Change of location



Licensee Operations



   110.35   Consumption on premises



   110.36   Sanitary conditions required



   110.37   Location restrictions



   110.38   Closing hours



   110.39   Package goods sale hours



   110.40   New Year’s Eve; Thanksgiving Eve



   110.41   Unobstructed interior view required



   110.42   Gambling in licensed establishment prohibited



   110.43   Restrictions based upon age



   110.44   Entertainment license



 



   110.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 110.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR.  All spirits, wine, beer, ale, or other liquid
containing more than 0.5% of alcohol by volume, which is fit for beverage
purposes.



   BARTENDER.  Any person who attends a bar and/or draws, pours, or mixes
any alcoholic liquor in any licensed premises.



   CONVENIENCE STORE.  Any retail establishment offering for sale food
products, household items, commercial products associated with minor auto
servicing, and other goods commonly associated with the same, including the
retail dispensing of vehicular fuels.



   FIRST-TIME APPLICANT.  An applicant for a license who is not a current
holder of any type of liquor license within the city. In the case of a change
of identity of a business entity which holds a current license and is
reapplying due to the change of identity only, it will be the decision of the
Liquor Commissioner whether the change is significant enough to consider the
applicant to be a FIRST-TIME APPLICANT.



   LIQUOR COMMISSIONER.  The Mayor of the city, who shall have those
powers as set forth in ILCS Chapter 235.



   MANAGER or AGENT.  An individual person, not a corporation,
partnership or other business entity, who is designated on the license
application and who is the representative of the license holder authorized to
receive notice of any actions taken under this chapter. A person shall be
limited to acting as a MANAGER or AGENT for one license holder only.



   PACKAGE STORE.  Any establishment or separated partition thereof which
is intended primarily for the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption off
the premises and there is no alcoholic liquor sold for consumption on the
premises.



   RESIDENCY.  A location where the license holder lives and uses as a
home, with all the necessary furniture, equipment, and fixtures normally
needed for that purpose.



   RESTAURANT.  Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised, and
held out to the public as a place where meals are actually and regularly
served, without sleeping accommodations, the space



being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment
and capacity and having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of
employees to prepare, cook, and serve suitable food for its guests.  Gross
receipts of sales shall be at least 50% for food and non-alcoholic sales to
qualify as a restaurant.



   RETAIL SALE.  The sale for consumption, and not for resale.



   SPECIAL EVENTS AND SPECIAL USE.  One-, two-, or three- consecutive day
events in the nature of public celebrations, commemorations, or gathering to
observe particular holiday or similar activities.



(Prior Code, § 5-1-1)  (Ord. O-15-140, passed 5-12-2015; Ord. O-16-165,
passed 6-14-2016)



§ 110.02  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to sell, or offer for sale at retail, any
alcoholic liquor:



      (1)   Without having a retail liquor dealer’s license;



      (2)   If in violation of the terms of the license; or



      (3)   If in violation of any provision contained in this
subchapter.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to permit the consumption of alcoholic
liquor on the premises of a business establishment or organization without
having a retail liquor dealer’s license, except as permitted by state law.



(Prior Code, § 5-1-2) (Ord. O-15-140, passed 5-12-2015; Ord. O-16-165,
passed 6-14-2016)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.03  PUBLIC MEETINGS; NOTICE.



   (A)   Notice of public meetings which involve any proposed change in
the number, kind, and/or classification of liquor licenses shall be given in
accordance with the following provisions:



      (1)   At least one week prior to the public meeting, general
notice shall be published in the Geneseo Republic; and



      (2)   At least one week prior to the public meeting, notice
shall be mailed to all persons owning property and all residents residing
within 250 feet of the property for which the liquor license is sought.



   (B)   The notice required by division (A) above shall contain the
following information:



      (1)   The name of the board, committee, or other city body
which is holding the public meeting;



      (2)   The date, time, and location of the public meeting;



      (3)   The name, address, and telephone number of the
Chairperson of the board, committee, or other city body which is holding the
public meeting; and



      (4)   A brief summary of the party making the request, the
location of the property for which the license is sought, and the nature of
the license sought.



   (C)   Public meetings which involve any proposed change in the
number, kind, and/or classification of liquor licenses shall include all
meetings of the  City Council, or other city body subject to the provisions
of the State Open Meetings Act currently in effect and as hereafter amended.



   (D)   Any applicant whose request for a new license or a license
change requires a public hearing as set forth in this section shall pay, in
addition to all other fees and costs set forth in this subchapter, a hearing
fee will be set by City Council resolution and shall be submitted to the
office of the City Clerk at the time the request is made.



(Prior Code, § 5-1-27) (Ord. O-11-009, passed 6-22-11); Ord. O-15-140,
passed 5-12-2015; Ord. O-16-165, passed 6-14-2016)



ISSUANCE OF LICENSE



§ 110.15  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.



   (A)   Application for the license shall be made to the Mayor in
writing, signed by the applicant(s) if an individual or co-partnership, or by
a duly authorized agent thereof, if a club or corporation, verified by oath
or affidavit. The application shall contain the following information and
statements:



      (1)   (a)   In the case of an individual, the name, age,
and address of the applicant;



         (b)   In the case of a co-partnership, the persons
entitled to share in the profits thereof; and



         (c)   In the case of a for profit corporation or a club,
the date of incorporation, the objects for which it was organized, the names
and addresses of the officers and directors, and, if a majority in interest
of the stock of the corporation is owned by one person or his or her
nominees, the name and address of the person.



      (2)   A corporate applicant must submit valid articles of
incorporation showing approval by the Secretary of State or a valid
certificate of authority to do business within the state, also approved by
the Secretary of State. In the event that any applicant is doing business
under a different name, the applicant must show written proof that the State
Assumed Business Name Act, ILCS Ch. 805, Act 405, §§ 0.01 et seq., has been
satisfied;



      (3)   The citizenship of the applicant, his or her place of
birth, and, if a naturalized citizen, the date and place of his or her
naturalization;



      (4)   The character of business of the applicant and, in the
case of a corporation, the objects for which it was formed;



      (5)   The length of time that the applicant has been in
business of that character or, in the case of a corporation, the date of
which its charter was issued;



      (6)   Written proof of the applicant’s ownership, lease, or
other right to occupy and use the premises which is to be operated under the
license. This proof shall include the deed of ownership, written lease, or
such other documentation satisfactory to the city on this issue. No sub-
lessee shall be eligible for issuance of a liquor license;



      (7)   The location and description of the premises or place of
business which is to be operated under the license. Blueprints or an accurate
sketch diagram designating all physical locations where alcoholic liquor will
be dispensed, sold, or consumed shall accompany the application;



      (8)   A statement whether the applicant has made similar
application for a similar other license for a premises other than described
in this application and the disposition of the application;



      (9)   A statement that applicant has never been convicted of a
felony and is not disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter
or thing contained in this subchapter or the laws of this state;



      (10)   Whether a previous license by any state or subdivision
thereof or by the federal government has been revoked and, if so, the reasons
therefore; and



      (11)   A statement that the applicant will not violate any of
the laws of the state or of the United States or any provision of this
subchapter in the conduct of his or her place of business.



      (12)   A detailed site plan of the licensed establishment
submitted annually, indicating the areas that alcohol will be served and
consumed, storage areas, food preparation areas and any other details as
required.



   (B)   In the event that any of the information supplied on the
original application should change for any reason during the effective period
of the license, the license holder shall, within seven days of the change,
complete and submit to the city an amended application containing the changed
information. The amended application shall conform in all respects to the
terms and provisions of this section and the subchapter in general.



   (C)   First-time applicants shall be required to pay, by separate
payment, an administrative processing fee, which shall be set by City Council
resolution , which shall be in addition to the license fee set forth in §
110.19. This administrative processing fee shall be nonrefundable,
notwithstanding the provisions of § 110.21 of this subchapter. This fee
shall not be charged to Class F Special Events and Class H Special Use
applicants.



   (D)  In order to be considered for issuance, an application for a
Class F Special Events or Class H Special Use license must be filed within 21
days of the start of the special event for which the license is sought.



(Prior Code, § 5-1-3)  (Ord. O-15-140, passed 5-12-2015; Ord. O-16-165,
passed 6-14-2016)



§ 110.16  APPLICANT REQUIRED TO MAINTAIN SANITARY FACILITIES.



   Applicants shall be required to have adequate and separate toilet and
sanitary facilities for both men and women in the proposed establishment or
in any existing establishment. The facilities must be maintained in a
sanitary and healthful condition and shall be subject to inspection by the
duly appointed municipal authorities.



(Prior Code, § 5-1-4)  (Ord. O-15-140, passed 5-12-2015; Ord. O-16-165,
passed 6-14-2016)



§ 110.17  RESTRICTIONS ON ELIGIBLE LICENSEES.



   No license shall be issued to:



   (A)   A person who has not submitted to a city background check to
determine compliance with eligibility requirements of § 110.17 prior to the
initial issuance of any license to an applicant.  A new background check
will only be required if the owners, sole proprietor or resident manager
changes.  The applicant shall, in addition to the license fee thereinafter
set forth, reimburse the city for actual cost of the background check. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, background checks will not be required for
applicants for Class F Special Events or Class H Special Use licenses.



   (B)   (1)   A person who is not a resident of the city for a
period of six months prior to the filing of the application unless the person
appoints a manager or agent as set forth in division (L) below. Residency
shall be required to be proven by written evidence. A valid driver’s
license, voter’s registration card, or other documentation satisfactory to
the Liquor Commissioner showing residency shall be sufficient to establish
this requirement. The city shall have the right to conduct periodic
inspections of the stated residence of the license holder to show that the
residency continues to exist as submitted.



      (2)   For purposes of this subchapter and, in the case of an
applicant which is a corporation or partnership,  a person who lives within
20 statute miles of the intersection of State and First Streets shall be
considered a resident.



      (3)   The Liquor Commissioner shall have the right to grant
variances of the distance requirement set forth in division (B)(2) above. In
order to be eligible for a variance, an applicant or license holder must file
a written request setting forth the reasons the variance is requested. The
Liquor Commissioner shall consider the reasons set forth in the written
request and any other relevant factors, and the decision to grant or deny the
variance shall be at the Liquor Commissioner’s discretion. The variance
shall be for the period of time and upon the conditions as the Liquor
Commissioner shall require. No variance shall be allowed for a period
exceeding 12 months beyond the date of issuance of the license, or that would
extend the distance set forth in this subchapter beyond 30 statute miles of
the intersection of State and First Streets.



   (C)   A person who is not of good character and reputation in the
community in which he or she resides;



   (D)   A person who is not a citizen of the United States;



   (E)   A person who has been convicted of a felony, unless the Liquor
Commissioner determines that the person has been sufficiently rehabilitated
to warrant the public trust after considering matters set forth in that
person’s application and the Commissioner’s investigation. The burden of
proof of sufficient rehabilitation shall be on the applicant;



   (F)   A person who has been convicted of being the keeper or is
keeping a house of ill fame;



   (G)   A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or
misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality;



   (H)   A person whose license issued under the provisions of this
subchapter has been revoked for cause. This condition shall not be applicable
after the passage of one year from the date of the revocation in the
discretion of the Liquor Commissioner;



   (I)   A person who at the time of application for renewal of any
license issued hereunder would not be eligible for the license upon a first
application;



   (J)   A co-partnership unless all of the members of the
co-partnership shall be qualified to obtain a license;



   (K)   A corporation, if any officer or director thereof, or any
stockholder or stockholders owning in aggregate more than 5% of the stock of
the corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for any
reason other than citizenship or residency within the political subdivision.
However, the corporation must have a manager or agent who is legally
authorized to accept notices, summons, and other legal documents and who
complies with the requirements of division (L) below;



   (L)   (1)   A person whose place of business is conducted by a
manager or agent, unless the manager or agent satisfies all of the
qualifications set forth in this subchapter, including citizenship and
residency, and for whose acts and omissions the license holder is legally
responsible. It shall be the responsibility of the manager or agent to submit
written proof of residency in the same manner as set forth in division (B) of
this section; and



      (2)   A manager or agent under this section must be an
individual person, not a corporation, partnership, or other business entity.
A person shall be limited to acting as a manager or agent for one liquor
license holder.



   (M)   A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal
or state law concerning the manufacture, possession, or sale of alcoholic
liquor, or shall have forfeited his or her bond to appear in court to answer
charges for any violation;



   (N)   A person who does not own the premises for which a license is
sought or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for which the
license is to be issued;



   (O)   Any law enforcing public official, any mayor, any alderperson,
any member of the council or commission, any president of a village board of
trustees, any member of a village board of trustees, or any president or
member of a county board, and no official shall be interested in any way,
either directly or indirectly, in the manufacture, sale, or distribution of
alcoholic liquor; and/or



   (P)   Any person, association, or corporation not eligible for a
state retail liquor dealer’s license.



   (Q)   Any person, association or corporation or other entity who has
falsified or omitted information on the application for license under §
110.15.



   (R)  An applicant for any liquor license who has not provided evidence
of the following: evidence to the Commissioner that all employees who will be
engaged in mixing, preparing or delivering alcoholic liquor to customers,
guests, or patrons, have successfully completed a Beverage Alcohol Sellers
and Services Education and Training ("BASSET") Program conducted by an agency
licensed by the Illinois Department of Alcohol and Substance Abuse or
training provided by the insurance company providing coverage to a license
holder. Each new such employee hired by the licensee after issuance of the
license shall complete a BASSET program at the next available training
session or within 60 days of actually beginning work, whichever comes first.
A copy of the certificate of completion of such BASSET program for each such
employee shall be filed with the Commissioner. Each certification shall be
renewed every three years from the date of issue.  Organizations that are
issued a Class F Special Event, license shall not be required to have their
servers trained as set forth above. Organizers of a Class F Special Event
shall meet with designated city officials to go over standard protocol for
serving alcoholic beverages prior to the event. 



(Prior Code, § 5-1-5)  (Ord. O-15-140, passed 5-12-2015; Ord. O-16-165,
passed 6-14-2016)



§ 110.18  TERM; NEW FEE SCHEDULE EFFECTIVE DATE.



   (A)   Each license shall terminate on April 30 next following its
issuance period, except for special events licenses (Class F and Class H),
which shall terminate on the date shown on the license. In no event shall a
Class F or Class H license be issued for a period longer than three days.



   (B)   Any change in the fee schedule for liquor licenses in the city
shall become effective immediately upon their adoption by the City Council.
Upon the adoption of any new fee schedule, all current liquor licenses of the
city shall be subject to the following:



      (1)   If the fee paid for a particular class of license is
subsequently increased later in the same year, the liquor licensee shall pay
to the city the additional fee due under the new fee schedule for the
particular class of license he or she holds; and



      (2)   If the fee to be paid for a particular license is
subsequently decreased later in the same year, each liquor licensee shall be
refunded any excess fee he or she may have previously paid.



   (C)   Hereafter, in all cases in which the holder or holders of a
license granted by the city shall voluntarily discontinue the business for
which the license was granted before the expiration of the license, the
following terms shall apply:



      (1)   If the license was granted before November 1 and the
applicant paid the full license fee:



         (a)   The holder or holders shall be entitled to a
refund of one-half of the license fee if the discontinuation of the business
for which the license was granted occurred before November 1; and



         (b)   The holder or holders shall not be entitled to any
refund of the license fee if the discontinuation of the business for which
the license was granted occurred after November 1.



      (2)   If the license was granted before November 1 and the
applicant paid only the first installment of the fee, pursuant to § 110.21,
the holder or holders shall not be entitled to any refund of the license fee,
but will not be charged for the second installment of the fee if the
discontinuation of the business for which the license was granted occurred
before November 1.



      (3)   If the license was granted after November 1, the holder
or holders shall not be entitled to any refund of the license fee.



(Prior Code, § 5-1-6)  (Ord. O-15-140, passed 5-12-2015; Ord. O-16-165,
passed 6-14-2016)



§ 110.19  LICENSE CLASSIFICATION; FEE.



   Licenses shall be and are hereby divided into seven classes.



   (A)   Class A (General) license.



      (1)   Class A (General) license, which shall authorize the
retail sale, within the premises described in the license, of alcoholic
liquor for consumption on the premises specified, as well as other retail
sales of liquor as set forth in the following division (A)(2).  The annual
fee for the license shall be set by City Council resolution.



      (2)   If a Class A license holder engages in the retail sale
of alcoholic liquor other than the sale of liquor for consumption on the
premises, the license holder shall sell alcoholic liquor in its original
container or containers or package with the seal unbroken only from the bar
(if any) in the license holder’s establishment and/or from an alcoholic
display case, either refrigerated or non- refrigerated. The license holder
shall pay a supplemental retail liquor sale fee in the amount set by City
Council resolution together with the original license fee set by City Council
resolution if he or she engages in the retail sale of alcoholic liquor other
than the sale of liquor for consumption on the premises.



   (B)   Class B (Package Store) license.



      (1)   Class B (Package Store) license, which shall authorize
the retail sale of alcoholic liquor not for consumption on the premises where
sold.  The annual fee for such license shall be set by City Council
resolution.



      (2)   This license classification shall exclude convenience
stores as defined in § 110.01.



      (3)   If a Class B License holder engages in the retail sale
of alcohol liquor for consumption on the premises, the following conditions
shall apply:



         (a)   There shall be a limit of 12 such events/days per
license year.



         (b)   The license holder shall notify the city at least
ten days in advance of the sales event/day.



         (c)   The license holder shall pay a supplemental retail
liquor sale fee in addition to the original license fee in an amount to be
established by a City Council resolution.  This supplemental fee shall be
due in full when the original license fee is payable and shall not be
prorated or reduced if the license holder engages in less than 12 such sales
events/days. 



         (d)   The area in which such sales events are to be held
shall be clearly defined and submitted to the city as part of the
notification set forth in division (3)(b) above. 



   (C)   Class C (Restaurant, Beer and Wine On Premises Only) license.



      (1)   Class C (Restaurant, Beer and Wine On Premises Only)
license, which shall authorize the retail sale in restaurants of beer and
wine for consumption on the premises specified only.  The annual fee for the
license shall be set by City Council resolution.



      (2)   If a Class C license holder engages in the retail sale
of wine and beer other than the sale of wine and beer for consumption on the
premises, the license holder shall sell wine and beer in its original
container or containers or package with the seal unbroken only from the
restaurant (if any) in the license holder's establishment and/or from an
alcoholic display case, either refrigerated or non-refrigerated. The license
holder shall pay a supplemental retail wine and beer sale fee in the amount
set by City Council resolution together with the original license fee which
is set by City Council resolution if he or she engages in the retail sale of
wine and beer other than the sale of wine and beer for consumption on the
premises.



   (D)   Class D (Restaurant, Alcoholic Liquor on Premises Only)
license.  Class D (Restaurant, Alcoholic Liquor on Premises Only) license,
which shall authorize the retail sale in restaurants of alcoholic liquor for
consumption on the premises only. The annual fee for the license shall be set
by City Council resolution.



   (E)   Class E (Other Business, Beer and Wine Only) license.



      (1)   Class E (Other Business, Beer and Wine Only) license,
which shall authorize the retail sale on the premises specified of beer and
wine not for consumption on the premises where sold, in establishments which
also offer other retail merchandise.  For this purpose, ESTABLISHMENTS WHICH
ALSO OFFER OTHER RETAIL MERCHANDISE shall mean any form of business entity
which offers merchandise other than alcoholic beverages for retail sale. The
annual fee for the license shall be set by City Council resolution.



      (2)   This classification shall include convenience stores as
defined in § 110.01.



   (F)   Special Events (Class F) license (not for profit license
holder). 



      (1)   Special Events (Class F) license, which shall authorize
the retail sale on the premises specified of beer and wine for limited time
periods for special events. The application shall state the dates and times
requested and the license shall clearly show this information.



      (2) Class F licenses shall only be issued to a not-for-profit
entity authorized to do business in the State of Illinois.



      (3)   The annual fee for the license shall be set by City
Council resolution.



   (G)   Class G (Brew Pub) license.



      (1)   A brew pub license may be issued to any person who
qualifies to hold a "brew pub" or "craft brewer" license from the State of
Illinois and that is also selling alcoholic beverages for consumption on the
premises. A brew pub licensed pursuant to this section to manufacture malt
liquors or fermented malt beverages upon its licensed premises. Malt liquors
or fermented malt beverages manufactured by a brew pub licensee on the
licensed premises may be:



         (a)   Furnished for consumption on the premises;



         (b)   Sold to independent wholesalers for distribution
to licensed retailers in accordance with state law;



         (c)   Sold to the public in sealed containers for
off-premises consumption.



      (2)   Every person selling alcoholic beverages pursuant to
this section shall purchase alcoholic beverages, other than those that are
manufactured at the licensed brew pub, from a wholesaler licensed by the
State of Illinois.  The brew pub licensee shall retain evidence of each
purchase of malt, vinous, and spirituous liquors from a licensed wholesaler.



      (3)   It shall be a condition of a brew pub licensee's right
to sell alcohol for consumption on the premises that at least 15% of the
gross sales of food and alcohol of the business be attributable to the sale
of food.  The licensee shall provide sufficient records of the sales
revenues to the city to support this requirement.  These records shall be
submitted prior to the annual renewal of the brew pub license.



      (4)   The annual fee for the license shall be set by City
Council resolution.



   (H)   Class H (Special Use) license (current license holder, off
premise location).



      (1)   Special Use (Class H) license, which shall authorize the
retail sale for consumption of alcoholic liquor on the specified premises.



      (2)   Class H licenses shall only be issued to persons or
entities which currently hold a valid liquor license issued by the city, and
shall permit the sale and consumption of only the type of alcoholic beverage
allowed by the holders underlying license.



      (3)   The intent of this license is to permit the sale and
consumption of alcoholic beverages in areas not otherwise authorized by the
holder's underlying license for a specified period of time. The applicant
shall state the dates and times requested and the license shall clearly show
this information.



      (4)   The fee for each individual event shall be set by City
Council resolution.



(Prior Code, § 5-1-7)  (Ord. O-13-078, passed 3-12-2013; Ord. O-15-133,
passed 3-10-2015; Ord. O-15-140, passed 5-12-2015; Ord. O-16-165, passed
6-14-2016)



§ 110.20  NUMBER OF LICENSES RESTRICTED.



   It is hereby declared the policy of the city to limit the total number
of liquor licenses to a maximum of 32 licenses (there may be two events per
calendar day that require Class F Special Event or Class H Special Use
licenses). Any person or organization can receive an unlimited number of
Class F Special Event or Class H Special Use licenses per calendar year.
Licenses shall be distributed among the classifications as follows:



 


Type of License

 

Total Number



Class A-General
 

Nine



Class B-Package store
 

Five



Class C-Restaurant, beer and wine on premises only
 

Three



Class D-Restaurant, alcoholic liquor on premises only
 

Four



Class E-Other business (beer and wine only)
 

Eight



Class G
 

Three




 



(Prior Code, § 5-1-8)  (Ord. 1963, passed 2-9-2010; Ord. 1966, passed
4-13-2010; Ord. 1975, passed 7- 3-2010; Ord. O-12-033, passed 2-14-2012; Ord.
O-13-078, passed 3-12-2013; Ord. O-15-140, passed 5-12-2015; Ord. O-16-165,
passed 6-14-2016)



§ 110.21  PAYMENT AND DISPOSITION OF FEE.



   (A)   Upon an original application for a license, the license fee
shall be paid as follows, depending on the time the original application is
filed:



      (1)   If the original application is filed between the dates
of May 1 and October 31, the license fee shall be the full amount as set
forth in this subchapter for the class for which application is made; or



      (2)   If the original application is filed between the dates
of November 1 and April 30, the license fee shall be one-half of the amount
set forth in this subchapter for the class for which application is made.



   (B)   The license fee for original applications filed between the
dates of May 1 and October 31 and for renewal applications may be paid in two
equal installments, the first installment being due at the time application
is filed with the City Clerk, and the second installment being due on or
before October 31.



   (C)   All fees shall be paid to the office of the City Clerk. In the
event the license applied for is denied, the fee shall be returned to the
applicant. If the license is granted, then the fee shall be deposited in the
General Fund or in another fund as shall have been designated by the City
Council by proper action. The above time frames shall not apply to Class F
Special Events licenses, and the fee set forth in § 110.19 is payable at the
time that the application for the license is made.



(Prior Code, § 5-1-9)  (Ord. O-15-140, passed 5-12-2015; Ord. O-16-165,
passed 6-14-2016)



§ 110.22  LICENSE LIST MAINTAINED.



   The Mayor shall keep, or cause to be kept, a complete record of all
licenses issued by him or her, and shall furnish the Clerk, Treasurer, and
Chief of Police each with a copy thereof. Upon the issuance of any new
license or the revocation of any old license, the Mayor shall give written
notice of the action to each of these officers within 48 hours of the action.



(Prior Code, § 5-1-11)  (Ord. O-15-140, passed 5-12-2015; Ord. O-16-165,
passed 6-14-2016)



§ 110.23  TRANSFER OF LICENSE.



   (A)   A license shall be purely a personal privilege, good for not
to exceed one year after issuance, unless otherwise provided or sooner
revoked as in this subchapter provided, and shall not constitute property,
nor shall it be subject to attachment, garnishment, or execution, nor shall
it be alienable or transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to
being encumbered or hypothecated. The license shall not descend by the laws
of testate or intestate devolution, but shall cease upon the death or
dissolution of the licensee, provided that executors and administrators of
the estate of any deceased licensee and the trustee of any insolvent or
bankrupt licensee, when the estate consists in part of alcoholic liquor, may
continue the business of the sale of alcoholic liquor under order of the
appropriate court and may exercise the privileges of the deceased or
insolvent or bankrupt licensee after the death of the decedent or the
insolvency or bankruptcy until the expiration of the license, but not longer
than six months after the death, bankruptcy, or insolvency of the licensee.



   (B)   Any licensee may renew his or her license at the expiration
thereof provided he or she is then qualified to receive a license, and the
premises for which the renewal license is sought are suitable for the purpose
and, provided further, that the renewal privilege herein provided for shall
not be construed as a vested right which shall in any case prevent the Mayor
and City Council from decreasing the number of licenses to be issued in any
particular classification within the city.



(Prior Code, § 5-1-12)  (Ord. O-15-140, passed 5-12-2015; Ord. O-16-165,
passed 6-14-2016)



§ 110.24  CHANGE OF LOCATION.



   A retail liquor dealer’s license shall permit the sale of alcoholic
liquor only in the premises described in the application and license. The
location may be changed only upon the written permit to make the change
issued by the Mayor. No change of location shall be permitted unless the
proposed new location is a proper one for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor
under the laws of this state and the provisions of this subchapter.
Permission to change location shall not be construed as a change in the
classification of any license.



(Prior Code, § 5-1-13)  (Ord. O-15-140, passed 5-12-2015; Ord. O-16-165,
passed 6-14-2016)



LICENSEE OPERATIONS



§ 110.35  CONSUMPTION ON PREMISES.



   It shall be unlawful for anyone not having a Class A, B Supplement, C,
D, F, G, or H license to sell, or offer for sale, any alcoholic liquor for
consumption on the premises where sold, or to permit the same to be consumed
on the premises where sold.



(Prior Code, § 5-1-10)  (Ord. O-15-133, passed 3-10-2015; Ord. O-15-140,
passed 5-12-2015; Ord. O-16-165, passed 6-14-2016)



§ 110.36  SANITARY CONDITIONS REQUIRED.



   All premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor, or for the
storage of liquor for sale, shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition
and shall be kept in full compliance with the provisions of this subchapter,
regulating the condition of premises used for the storage or sale of food for
human consumption.



(Prior Code, § 5-1-14)  (Ord. O-15-140, passed 5-12-2015; Ord. O-16-165,
passed 6-14-2016)



§ 110.37  LOCATION RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   No license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any
alcoholic liquor within 100 feet of any church, school, hospital, undertaking
establishment, home for aged or indigent persons or veterans, their wives or
children, or any military or naval station, provided that this prohibition
shall not apply to hotels offering restaurant service, regularly organized
clubs, bowling alleys, restaurants, food shops, or other places where sale of
alcoholic liquor is not the principal business carried on, if the place of
business exempted shall have been established for the purposes prior to the
taking effect of this subchapter. This restriction shall not apply to special
events (Class F) or special use (Class H) licenses. Notwithstanding any
provision to the contrary, a special events license (Class F) or special use
(Class H) license may conduct its activities on public sidewalks, streets or
other areas if so approved by the Liquor Commissioner and made part of the
license issued. In that case, the license holder shall provide liability and
dram shop insurance in amounts acceptable to the Liquor Commissioner, naming
the city as an additional insured party for the event for which the license
is issued, and shall further hold the city harmless from all liability
arising in whole or part from the operation of the event.



   (B)   The location and area set aside for the sale of alcohol under
a Class F Special Events or Class H Special Use license must be bounded on
all sides by fencing with only one entrance and exit as approved by the
Liquor Commissioner. Anyone seeking entrance into that area must provide
valid identification of legal age to drink, and be admitted only after being
issued an identifying bracelet.  All Class F and Class H applications must
include a written site plan for approval at the time of application.



(Prior Code, § 5-1-15)  (Ord. O-15-140, passed 5-12-2015; Ord. O-16-165,
passed 6-14-2016)



§ 110.38  CLOSING HOURS.



   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any Class A licensee to
sell, or offer for sale, any alcoholic liquor at hours other than the
following:



         (a)   9:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight, Sunday through
Thursday;



         (b)   9:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m., Friday and Saturday.



      (2)   Class A licensees may remain open until 2:00 a.m. on New
Year’s Eve.



      (3)   It shall be unlawful for Class A licensees to remain
open to the public for a period in excess of 15 minutes after the prohibited
hours for a grace period after closing to clear out the patrons. No alcoholic
beverage shall be consumed by any customers of the establishment and,
further, the establishment will be responsible for the removal of alcoholic
beverages from the customer areas 15 minutes after the prohibited hours.



(Prior Code, § 5-1-16)



   (B)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any Class C or D licensee to
sell, or offer for sale, any alcoholic liquor at hours other than the
following:



         (a)   9:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight, Sunday through
Thursday;



         (b)   9:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m., Friday and Saturday.



      (2)   However, Class C and D licensees may remain open until
2:00 a.m. on New Year’s Eve. The restaurants may, during prohibited hours,
keep open for service of food, but no liquor shall be served in or taken to
the part so kept open during the prohibited hours. No alcoholic beverage
shall be consumed by any customers of the establishment and, further, the
establishment will be responsible for the removal of alcoholic beverages from
the customer areas 15 minutes after the prohibited hours.



(Prior Code, § 5-1-17)



   (C)   Class F license holders shall be allowed to sell beer and wine
only during the hours which are specifically approved by the Liquor
Commissioner and set forth in the license.



   (D)   Class H license holders shall be allowed to sell alcoholic
beverages as authorized by their underlying liquor licenses during the hours
specifically approved by the Liquor Commissioner and set forth in the license
in the areas set forth in the underlying liquor license.



   (E)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any Class G licensee to
sell, or offer for sale, any alcoholic liquor at hours other than the
following:



         (a)   9:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight, Sunday through
Thursday;



         (b)   9:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m., Friday and Saturday.



      (2)   However, Class G licensee may remain open until 2:00
a.m. on New Year's Eve.  The restaurants may, during prohibited hours, keep
open for service of food, but no liquor shall be served in or taken to the
part so kept open during the prohibited hours.  No alcoholic beverage shall
be consumed by an customers of the establishment and, further, the
establishment will be responsible for the removal of alcoholic beverages from
the customer areas 15 minutes after the prohibited hours.



   (F)   Upon an application from a license holder no less than 14 days
in advance and for good cause shown, the Liquor Commissioner may vary the
hours for any license holder for a specific calendar day.  The Liquor
Commissioner shall not grant more than two such variances to any specific
licensee in any one calendar year without the approval of the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 5-1-19)  (Ord. O-15-133, passed 3-10-2-15; Ord. O-15-140,
passed 5-12-2015; Ord. O-17-04, passed 2-14-2017)



§ 110.39  PACKAGE GOODS SALE HOURS.



   It shall be unlawful for any license holder described herein below to
sell alcoholic liquor for consumption off the premises (i.e., package goods
sales) other than at the times listed herein below:



   (A)   Holders of Class A (general) licenses shall not sell alcoholic
liquor for consumption off the license holder’s premises other than at the
following times:



      (1)   9:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight, Sunday through Thursday;



      (2)   9:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m., Friday and Saturday.



   (B)   Holders of Class B (package store) and Class E (other
business, beer and wine only) licenses shall not sell alcoholic liquor for
consumption off the license holder’s premises other than at the following
times:



      (1)   7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., Monday through Thursday;



      (2)   7:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight, Friday and Saturday; and



      (3)   9:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., Sunday.



(Prior Code, § 5-1-18)  (Ord. O-15-140, passed 5-12-2015; Ord. O-16-165,
passed 6-14-2016; Ord. O-17-04, passed 2-14-2017)



§ 110.40  NEW YEAR’S EVE; THANKSGIVING EVE.



   (A)   In addition to the hours specified in this subchapter,
whenever the last day of the year falls on Sunday, all Class A (General) and
Class C and D (Restaurant) license holders shall have the right to sell, or
offer for sale, alcoholic liquor between the hours of 12:00 noon on that day
and 2:00 a.m. the following morning.



   (B)   In addition to the hours specified in this subchapter, all
Class A (General) and Class C and D (Restaurant) license holders shall have
the right to sell, or offer for sale, alcoholic liquor between the hours of
12:00 midnight Thanksgiving Eve and 1:00 a.m. the following morning.



(Prior Code, § 5-1-20)  (Ord. O-15-140, passed 5-12-2015; Ord. O-16-165,
passed 6-14-2016)



§ 110.41  UNOBSTRUCTED INTERIOR VIEW REQUIRED.



   In premises upon which the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption
upon the premises is licensed, other than a restaurant, hotel, motel, club,
or any recreational facility other than one situated on the first or ground
floor, no screen, blind, tinted color, curtain, partition, article, or thing
shall be permitted in the windows or upon the doors of the licensed premises,
or inside the premises, which shall prevent a clear view into the interior of
the licensed premises from any public street, public road, or public sidewalk
adjacent to parts of the establishment at all times, this includes any signs,
posters or banners that cover more than 25% of any window area , and no
booth, screen, partition, or other obstruction or any arrangement of lights
or lighting shall be permitted in or about the interior of the licensed
premises which shall prevent a full view of the entire interior of the
premises from the street, road, or sidewalk, and the premises must be so
located that there shall be a full view of the entire interior of the
premises from the street, road, or sidewalk. All rooms where liquor is sold
for consumption upon the premises shall be continuously lighted during
business hours by natural light or artificial white light so that all parts
of the interior of the premises shall be clearly visible. In case the view
into any licensed premises required by the foregoing provision shall be
willfully obscured by the licensee or by him or her willfully suffered to be
obscured, or in any manner obstructed, then the license shall be subject to
revocation in the manner herein provided. In order to enforce the provisions
of this section, the local Commissioner shall have the right to require the
filing with it of plans, drawings, and photographs showing the clearance of
the view as above required.



(Prior Code, § 5-1-21)  (Ord. O-15-140, passed 5-12-2015; Ord. O-16-165,
passed 6-14-2016)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.42  GAMBLING IN LICENSED ESTABLISHMENT PROHIBITED.



   No licensee shall have or keep in his, her, their, or its possession or
use, or operate on any or all portions of the premises on which intoxicating
liquor is sold, any machine, device, or other thing of any nature or kind
with which money or any other thing of value may in any manner be played or
staked. Activities authorized by state law and city licenses shall be exempt
from the prohibitions of this section when offered in areas restricted or
removed by a border from the area where alcohol is sold.



(Prior Code, § 5-1-23)  (Ord. O-15-140, passed 5-12-2015; Ord. O-16-165,
passed 6-14-2016)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.43  RESTRICTIONS BASED UPON AGE.



   (A)   (1)   No licensee, his, her, or its agent or employee,
shall sell, give, or deliver alcoholic liquor to any person who may not
consume or possess alcoholic liquor under the laws of the state.



      (2)   No licensee, his, her, or its agent or employee, shall
employ or permit any person under the age of 21 years to act as bartender or
to attend bar and/or to draw, pour, or mix any alcoholic liquor in any
licensed premises; provided, that the provisions of this division shall not
be construed to prevent employment of persons who are at least 18 years of
age as servers or wait staff for the purpose of serving food and alcoholic
liquor on the licensed premises.



      (3)   Persons who are at least 18 years of age shall be
authorized to make the retail sale of alcoholic liquor in its original
container or containers or package with the seal unbroken from the license
holder’s establishment, not for consumption on the premises, only if a
person of 21 years of age or older acting in a supervisory capacity is
present at the time. This division shall not be construed to allow persons
under 21 years of age to tend bar or act as bartender.



   (B)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person who, because of
his or her age, may not lawfully consume wine or beer under the laws of the
state to be present on the premises of a licensee hereunder, provided that
this division shall not be construed to prohibit the person from being
present in any area reserved primarily for the service of food or other
accommodation not involving the sale or consumption of alcoholic liquor.



      (2)   It is further declared unlawful for any licensee, his,
her, or its agent or employee, to allow any person to be present in the
prohibited area, as aforesaid.



(Prior Code, § 5-1-24)  (Ord. O-15-140, passed 5-12-2015; Ord. O-16-165,
passed 6-14-2016)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.44  ENTERTAINMENT LICENSE.



   (A)   In addition to any liquor licenses issued pursuant to this
chapter, the Mayor may issue an entertainment license for a fee set by City
Council resolution payable annually and which expires on April 30 next
following issuance. For the purposes of this chapter, ENTERTAINMENT is
defined as the providing of music, dancing, or other visual or audio
performances by an individual, group, or mechanical means, with the exception
of jukeboxes, televisions, or radios, for the viewing, listening, or
participation of public audiences. A license shall not be required for
entertainment for private affairs such as wedding or graduation receptions.



   (B)   Every establishment or person to whom an entertainment license
is issued must be the holder of a liquor license. However, it is not
mandatory that an entertainment license be issued at the time that a liquor
license is issued. Establishments holding an entertainment license must
observe all provisions of this chapter in regard to liquor licenses.
Entertainment must cease at the closing time set forth in this chapter
regarding the sale of liquor for the particular establishment. The
entertainment must be of a nature so as not to be excessively noisy,
offensive, or to interfere with surrounding businesses or residents.



   (C)   Notwithstanding the above provisions, the Mayor of the city
may also issue a special entertainment license at a fee set by City Council
resolution for a period of duration not to exceed five days after the
effective date, at his or her discretion.



(Prior Code, § 5-1-25)  (Ord. O-15-140, passed 5-12-2015; Ord. O-16-165,
passed 6-14-2016)



§ 110.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any violation of this chapter or applicable provisions of
state law pertaining to the sale of alcoholic liquor shall subject the
violator to any one or more of the following penalties:



      (1)   A fine of not less than $50 nor more than $1,000;



      (2)   Suspension of the violator’s liquor license for a
period of not more than ten days;



      (3)   Revocation of the violator’s license; and



      (4)   Any other penalty provided by state law.



   (B)   The local Liquor Commissioner may revoke any liquor license
for any violation of any provision of this chapter or for any violation of
any state law pertaining to the sale of alcoholic liquor or any applicable
rule or regulation established by the State Liquor Control Commission which
is not consistent with the law. Prior to any disciplinary action, the local
Liquor Commissioner shall inform the licensee of his or her right to a public
hearing to contest the imposition of a proposed disciplinary action. If the
licensee does not request a hearing within three days after the licensee’s
receipt of the written notice, then the proposed disciplinary action shall be
imposed. A licensee shall receive not less than three days’ written notice
of the date and place of the public hearing. Notice shall be considered
served by means of certified delivery to either the resident manager, an
employee of the licensee on duty at the licensed establishment, or by
affixing the written notice at the primary entryway of the licensed
establishment.



   (C)   Revocation of a liquor license also revokes any entertainment
license held by the licensee. An entertainment license can be revoked
separately from the liquor license by the Mayor. Revocation of an
entertainment license is mandatory upon the second violation.



   (D)   In the event that a violation of this chapter is observed
during the operation of a Class F special events license, the Police
Department shall have the right to suspend or terminate the right of the
license holder to continue to operate in addition to any other penalty
provided herein.



(Prior Code, § 5-1-26)  (Ord. O-15-2015, passed 5-12-2015; Ord. O-16-165,
passed 6-14-2016)



CHAPTER 111:  TAXIS



Section



   111.01   License required



   111.02   Requirements for issuance of license



   111.03   Application; fee



   111.04   Taxi stands designated by City Council



   111.05   Fares to be posted



   111.06   Plate registration; identification



   111.07   License renewal



 



   111.99   Penalty



§ 111.01  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person, partnership, or corporation shall carry on the business of
operating a taxi for the transportation of passengers to and from points
within the city limits unless the person, partnership, or corporation has a
current taxi license issued under the authority of the city.



(Prior Code, § 5-9-1)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.02  REQUIREMENTS FOR ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.



   No license shall be granted unless the applicant presents proof of the
following:



   (A)   There is in effect public liability insurance coverage in the
minimum amount of $500,000 for personal injury and $100,000 for property
damage covering each vehicle for which a license is sought;



   (B)   The vehicle sought to be licensed has been inspected and found
to be safe in every respect within ten days of the date of application, the
inspection to be performed by a competent, disinterested mechanic selected by
the Mayor or his or her authorized agent;



   (C)   The applicant, or any person who will be allowed to drive the
taxi, has not, for a period of five years preceding the date of the
application, been convicted of a felony or of reckless driving or driving
under the influence of intoxicating liquor or drugs or any similar offense.
Proof may be by sworn affidavit; and



   (D)   The applicant, or any person who will be allowed to drive the
taxi, must be properly licensed by the state.



(Prior Code, § 5-9-2)



§ 111.03  APPLICATION; FEE.



   (A)   Application for license shall be filed in the office of the
City Clerk and presented by the Clerk to the City Council, which shall act
thereon.



(Prior Code, § 5-9-4)



   (B)   The fee for the license shall be $50 per year or any fraction
thereof for each vehicle sought to be licensed, payable on or before the
first day of May of each year. Upon initial application for license, license
fee shall be tendered with application.



(Prior Code, § 5-9-3)



§ 111.04  TAXI STANDS DESIGNATED BY CITY COUNCIL.



   The City Council may from time to time designate particular areas for
exclusive use as taxi stands.



(Prior Code, § 5-9-5)



§ 111.05  FARES TO BE POSTED.



   The schedule of charges for taxi service shall be posted in a
conspicuous place inside each taxi.



(Prior Code, § 5-9-6)



§ 111.06  PLATE REGISTRATION; IDENTIFICATION.



   Any taxi operated within the city shall be equipped with proper taxi
vehicle registration plates and shall be equipped with conspicuous
identification, including illuminated sign for night use identifying the
vehicle as a taxi.



(Prior Code, § 5-9-7)



§ 111.07  LICENSE RENEWAL.



   Any taxi license which may be from time to time outstanding may be
renewed by the original licensee upon tender of the license fee set forth in
§ 111.03, and upon presentation of a certificate of insurance evidencing
continued insurance coverage as set forth in § 111.02(A), and upon
presentation of the same proof required by § 111.02(B) and (C) for original
applications. The City Clerk may renew the licenses without City Council
action, provided the requirements herein are fully satisfied.



(Prior Code, § 5-9-8)



§ 111.99  PENALTY.



   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be fined not less than $25 nor more than $750 for each offense.



(Prior Code, § 5-9-9)



CHAPTER 112:  CONTRACTOR LICENSES



Section




Plumbing




   112.01   License required



   112.02   Bond required



   112.03   Single-family residence owner




Electric




   112.15   Definitions



   112.16   License required; exceptions



   112.17   License application



   112.18   License regulations; bond



   112.19   License renewal



Contractor Registration



   112.30   Registration required



 



   Appendix A:  Owner occupant affidavit




PLUMBING




§ 112.01  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person, firm, or corporation shall engage in the business of
plumbing within the corporate limits of the city unless the person, firm, or
corporation has filed with the Plumbing Inspector a valid license issued in
accordance with the State Plumbing License Law.



(Prior Code, § 5-12-1)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 112.02  BOND REQUIRED.



   (A)   Any person, firm, or corporation who engages in the business
of plumbing within the corporate limits shall file with the Plumbing
Inspector a bond in the sum of $10,000 with surety to be approved by the
Plumbing Inspector. The bond shall be conditional to comply with this
subchapter and applicable provisions of water regulations, sewer regulations,
and excavation ordinances of the city and to indemnify and hold harmless the
city from all liability which may arise out of any act of or omission of the
person, business, or corporation or employees of the person, business, or
corporation in the conduct of or connected with the business.



   (B)   It shall be the responsibility of the person, firm, or
corporation to furnish a valid bond or continuation certificate.



(Prior Code, § 5-12-2)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.03  SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE OWNER.



   (A)   Nothing herein contained shall prohibit the owner on record
who resides within a single-family residence from planning, installing,
allowing, or repairing the plumbing system of the residence, provided that
the plumbing shall comply with the Plumbing Code and all rules and
regulations applicable in other city ordinances pertaining to plumbing. The
plumbing shall be subject to inspection as established by city ordinances.
The owner may not employ any person other than a licensed plumber to assist
him or her in the work.



   (B)   Ownership must be shown and approved by the Plumbing Inspector
before plumbing permits are issued.



(Prior Code, § 5-12-3)




ELECTRIC




§ 112.15  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR.  Any person, firm, or corporation undertaking
the execution of electrical work, or engaged in the business of installing or
altering, by contract or other means, electrical equipment as defined in this
subchapter.



   JOURNEYMAN ELECTRICIAN.  Any electrician with the experience and
knowledge to capably supervise other electricians to properly install
electrical equipment in accordance with the statutes of the state, the
National Electrical Code, ordinances of the city, and in accordance with good
electrical practice.



(Prior Code, § 5-13-1)



§ 112.16  LICENSE REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) below, before any person
shall engage in the business of electrical contracting in the city and before
any person now engaged in that business or any class thereof shall continue
in the business of electrical contractor, he or she shall be required to be
licensed by the city.



   (B)   The following persons shall not be required to be licensed as
an electrical contractor in the city, nor shall they be required to pay the
annual license fee:



      (1)   Electricians employed by electrical contractor to do
electrical work; and



      (2)   Persons doing work in their owned and occupied
single-family dwelling units; however, the Electrical Inspector shall require
a sufficient display of electrical experience of a practical and elementary
character so as to test their knowledge and qualifications of the electrical
work to be done in the interest of safeguarding life and property.



   (C)   An electrical contractor who is currently licensed and who has
paid a license fee of $25 in any city or village in the state shall not be
required by the city to be licensed by the city or to pay a license fee to
engage in electrical contracting in the city; however, the Electrical
Inspector shall require a sufficient display of electrical experience of a
practical and elementary character so as to test the knowledge and
qualifications of an electrical contractor subject to this division for the
electrical work to be done in the interest of safeguarding life and property.
The electrical contractor will be required to meet the bonding requirements
set forth elsewhere in this subchapter.



   (D)   Persons constructing a new single-family dwelling to be their
sole domicile shall be permitted to perform electrical work on the dwelling,
provided that the person affirms by affidavit on the city’s form their
intention to reside in the dwelling for a minimum of nine months following
completion of the dwelling. Completion shall be determined by issuance of
certificate of occupancy. This privilege shall not be further granted to any
herein described person who fails to meet the stated minimum residency
requirement. Multi-family dwellings shall not be entitled to this exception.
Electrical work done in or on multi-family dwellings shall be performed only
by electricians licensed as set forth by this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 5-13-2)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.17  LICENSE APPLICATION.



   (A)   Application for the licensing of an electrical contractor as
required by this subchapter shall be made in writing to the Electrical
Inspector, stating the name and place of business of the applicant and the
name of the journeyman electrician who will act as supervisor of the work to
be done under the license. The application shall be accompanied by a
satisfactory affidavit that the applicant, or his or her representative, has
had at least five years practical experience as a journeyman electrician
installing and altering electrical equipment. The City Clerk shall issue the
license subject to the terms of this subchapter.



   (B)   Before an electrical contractor, or his or her representative,
shall be permitted to register as required by this subchapter, the applicant
for licensing, or his or her representative, shall, following reasonable
advance notice, present himself or herself for examination before the
Electrical Inspector at a time and place fixed by the Electrical Inspector.



   (C)   The applicant will be examined as to his or her practical
knowledge of the installation and alteration of electrical equipment and his
or her knowledge of the rules and regulations for the installation of
electrical wiring devices and equipment as set forth in the statutes of the
state, the provisions of the code of ordinances of the city relative to
electrical installations, and in the latest edition of the National
Electrical Code, which are the regulations of the National Board of Fire
Underwriters as recommended by the National Fire Protection Association and
approved by the American Standards Association. The examination shall be, in
whole or in part, in writing and shall be of a practical character as
determined by the Electrical Board, but sufficiently strict to thoroughly
test the experience and qualifications of the applicant. There shall be an
examination fee of $75 payable to the City Clerk, which shall cover the cost
of the examination and the annual license fee to the following April 30.
Should an applicant fail to qualify after examination, $25 will be returned
to the unsuccessful applicant. The examination fee will again be charged,
however, for each subsequent examination.



(Prior Code, § 5-13-3)  (Ord. O-11-009, passed 6-22-2011)



§ 112.18  LICENSE REGULATIONS; BOND.



   (A)   Before any license required by this subchapter is issued, the
applicant therefore shall furnish a certificate from an insurance company
authorized to do business in the state certifying that the applicant has in
full force a public liability and property damage insurance policy with
limits of not less than $300,000 public liability and $50,000 property damage
and a $2,000 completion bond payable to the city. The bond shall be
conditioned upon the faithful performance of the applicant’s work in
accordance with the provisions of this subchapter and for all work performed
under the license sought. Term of the bond shall be in effect to coincide
with the term of the license sought. The annual fee of renewal for an
electrical contractor’s license pursuant to this subchapter shall be $25.



   (B)   An electrical contractor’s license issued pursuant to this
subchapter shall not be loaned, rented, assigned, or transferred.



   (C)   No person licensed under provisions of this subchapter shall
install or repair electrical equipment for electric light, heat, or power
purposes after the expiration of the license or after the license shall have
been revoked pursuant to this subchapter unless the license renewal has been
received before expiration.



   (D)   Whenever a journeyman electrician designated as his or her
representative by an electrical contractor and licensed by this subchapter
shall sever his or her relations with the electrical contractor, the
electrical contractor shall immediately designate another journeyman
electrician who shall present his or her application, affidavit, and
examination fee as required by this subchapter and shall take the examination
required by this subchapter. If he or she satisfactorily passes the
examination, then the electrical contractor’s license shall be reissued.



   (E)   Any license of an electrical contractor permitted pursuant to
this subchapter may, after a hearing by the City Council, be suspended or
revoked by the City Council upon the failure or the refusal of the electrical
contractor to comply with the rules and requirements of this subchapter.



   (F)   Any license of an electrical contractor permitted pursuant to
this subchapter will, after a hearing by the City Council, not be renewed if
an electrical permit has not been obtained for electrical work in the city in
the past five years. The bid price or cost of the work shall exceed $500.



(Prior Code, § 5-13-4)  (Ord. O-11-009, passed 6-22-2011)



§ 112.19  LICENSE RENEWAL.



   Licenses are due for renewal on April 1 and expire on April 30,
providing a 30-day grace period. Application for renewal of licenses after
April 30 and before July 31 will result in an assessment of a $25 penalty in
addition to the regular $25 renewal fee. Application for renewal of license
after July 31 and before October 30 will result in an assessment of a $50
penalty in addition to the regular $25 renewal fee. After this six-month
period, a new license application must be initiated, including an examination
fee and a written examination taken by the applicant.



(Prior Code, § 5-13-5)



CONTRACTOR REGISTRATION



§ 112.30  REGISTRATION REQUIRED.



   (A)   Permit required.  It shall be unlawful to erect or construct
any building or structure other than a fence where the cost of such
construction exceeds $100 or where such building or structure exceeds 120
square feet in roof area, or to alter or remodel any building or structure so
as to change the bearing walls, beams, supports, roof, or expand or diminish
the existing floor area, without having first secured the required permit or
permits therefore from the Building Inspector.



   (B)   Permit duration and extension.  The building permit shall be
valid for 12 months and may be extended for an additional six months without
fee by the Building Inspector.



   (C)   Permit and compliance bond requirements.  Any person, firm or
corporation desiring to engage in the business of any form of building
construction or reconstruction including, but not limited to, concrete and
masonry contracting, demolition contracting, electrical contracting, fire
sprinkler contracting, fire suppression contracting, fire alarm contracting,
general contracting, heating, ventilation and air conditioning contracting,
lawn sprinkler contracting, swimming pool contractors and installers, roofing
contracting, sign contracting, siding and window contracting, and radon
mitigation contracting in the city shall register with the Inspection
Department effective January 1 of each year, and shall file with the
Inspection Department a compliance bond, with the form thereof to be
furnished by the Building Inspector, in the amount of $10,000, conditioned
upon the faithful performance of all the provisions of this code. This bond
is a continuous bond and shall remain in full force and effect until canceled
by notice. The surety shall have the right to cancel this bond for future
liability upon 30 days' written notice to the city.



   (D)   Plumbing contractors shall provide copy of current State of
Illinois contractor registration and license of plumber of record.



   (E)   Proof of insurance required.  General contractors, upon
registration, shall provide the following:



      (1)   Proof of liability insurance acceptable to the Finance
Department in the type and amount listed below:



         Each applicant shall obtain and maintain for the duration
of such registration, public liability and property damage insurance in the
minimum amount and for as hereby specified: $100,000 for each occurrence of
property damage; and $300,000 for each occurrence of personal injury or
bodily harm. Such policy shall provide that it cannot be canceled except upon
written notification to the office of the Finance Department at least 30 days
prior to the date of cancellation. Proof shall be a certificate of insurance.



      (2)   Proof that the applicant has obtained workers'
compensation insurance or that the applicant is an approved self-insurer of
workers' compensation. Proof shall either be the certificate of insurance
from the insurance provider or the certificate of approval as a self-insurer
issued by the Illinois Industrial Commission. If an applicant is a sole
proprietorship or partnership then the applicant shall not be required to
provide proof of workers' compensation insurance. Such applicant's
application shall include a sworn statement that the applicant has no
employees.



      (3)   The fee for registration shall be $70 and shall be valid
for one year. The filing fee for plumbing contractors shall be $70 and shall
be valid for one year.



      (4)   A “general contractor” shall be taken to be any
person, firm, partnership, or corporation employed directly by any person,
firm, partnership, or corporation, who erects or reconstructs any building or
parts thereof.



(Ord. O-11-024, passed 9-13-2011; Ord. O-11-25, passed 10-10-2011)  Penalty,
see § 10.99



APPENDIX A:  OWNER OCCUPANT AFFIDAVIT



   I.   OWNER OCCUPANT AFFIDAVIT.



   AFFIDAVIT



I am the owner occupant of the structure located at
____________________________________ (address) which I hereby verify is or is
to be a single-family residence. I will occupy said residence for a period of
at least nine months:  Yes _____   No _____



I will personally install the electrical wiring for which the permit was
issued, and, if any assistance is needed on the installation, I will comply
with the Electrical Code of the City of Geneseo, Illinois and hire a legally
licensed and bonded contractor.



Applicable:



§ 112.16  LICENSE REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) below, before any person
shall engage in the business of electrical contracting in the city and before
any person now engaged in that business or any class thereof shall continue
in the business of electrical contractor, he or she shall be required to be
licensed by the city.



   (B)   The following persons shall not be required to be licensed as
an electrical contractor in the city, nor shall they be required to pay the
annual license fee:



      (1)   Electricians employed by electrical contractor to do
electrical work;



      (2)   Persons doing work in their owned and occupied
single-family dwelling units; however, the Electrical Inspector shall require
a sufficient display of electrical experience of a practical and elementary
character so as to test their knowledge and qualifications of the electrical
work to be done in the interest of safeguarding life and property.



   (C)   An electrical contractor who is currently licensed and who has
paid a license fee of $25 in any city or village in the state shall not be
required by the city to be licensed by the city or to pay a license fee to
engage in electrical contracting in the city; however, the Electrical
Inspector shall require a sufficient display of electrical experience of a
practical and elementary character so as to test the knowledge and
qualifications of an electrical contractor subject to this division for the
electrical work to be done in the interest of safeguarding life and property.
The electrical contractor will be required to meet the bonding requirements
set forth elsewhere in this subchapter.



   (D)   Persons constructing a new single-family dwelling to be their
sole domicile shall be permitted to perform electrical work on the dwelling,
provided that the person affirms by affidavit on the city’s form their
intention to reside in the dwelling for a minimum of nine months following
completion of the dwelling. Completion shall be determined by issuance of
Certificate of Occupancy. This privilege shall not be further granted to any
herein described person who fails to meet the stated minimum residency
requirement. Multi-family dwellings shall not be entitled to this exception.
Electrical work done in or on multi-family dwellings shall be performed only
by electricians licensed as set forth by this subchapter.



I, the undersigned, do hereby declare that I am capable of installing said
equipment in a competent manner and I do hereby agree to abide by all
provisions of the Electrical Codes of the City of Geneseo, Illinois.



                     _____________________________________
__



                     (signature)



State of Illinois   )



County of Henry   )



Subscribed and sworn to before me this ________ day of
______________________, 20_____.



   (SEAL)            ___________________________________________



                  Notary Public



CHAPTER 113:  SOLICITORS, HAWKERS, AND PEDDLERS



Section



   113.01   Definitions



   113.02   Certificate of registration required



   113.03   Application for certificate of registration



   113.04   Revocation of certificate



   113.05   Registration fee



   113.06   Occupant notice regarding soliciting



   113.07   Uninvited soliciting prohibited



   113.08   Duty of solicitor to observe occupant notice



   113.09   Hours when soliciting permissible



   113.10   Restriction on peddling in public



   113.11   Creating hazard prohibited



§ 113.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   HAWKER.  A hawker is a solicitor who seeks to sell or obtain orders
for property, as set forth in this section, who conducts his or her business
from one or more specified locations specifically advertised or held out for
the purpose of the business.



   ITINERANT VENDORS.  Any person who transports tangible personal
property for retail sale within the city who does not maintain in this city
an established office, distribution house, in-sales house, warehouse, service
center, or residence from which the business is conducted. However, this
chapter does not apply to any person who delivers tangible personal property
within this city who is fulfilling an order for the property which was
solicited or placed by mail or other means.



   PEDDLER.  A solicitor who seeks to sell or obtain orders for property,
as set forth in this section, who travels to the location of the prospective
customer in order to conduct his or her business.



   REGISTERED SOLICITOR.  Any person who has obtained a valid certificate
of registration as hereinafter provided, which certificate is in the
possession of the solicitor on his or her person while engaged in soliciting.



   RESIDENCE.  Every separate living unit occupied for residential
purposes by one or more persons contained within any type of building or
structure.



   SOLICITING.  Any one or more of the following activities:



      (1)   Seeking to sell or obtain orders for the purchase of
goods, wares, merchandise, foodstuffs, services of any kind, character, or
description whatever for any kind of consideration whatever;



      (2)   Seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines,
periodicals, newspapers, and every other type or kind of publication; or



      (3)   Seeking to obtain gifts or contributions of money,
clothing, or any other valuable thing for the support or benefit of any
charitable or nonprofit association, organization, corporation, or project.



   TRANSIENT MERCHANT.  Any person who is engaged temporarily in the
retail sales of goods, wares, or merchandise in the city and who, for the
purpose of conducting the business, occupies any building, room, vehicle,
structure of any kind, or vacant lot. However, this does not apply to any
person selling goods, wares, or merchandise which are raised, produced, or
manufactured by him or her, to any person selling vegetables, fruits, or
perishable farm products at any established city market, or to any person
operating a stand or booth on or adjacent to property owned by him or her or
upon which he or she resides.



(Prior Code, § 5-6-1)



§ 113.02  CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person 18 years of age or older, any firm,
or any corporation to engage in soliciting or to engage as a hawker or
peddler or itinerant vendor or transient merchant of any merchandise,
article, thing, or amusement without first having secured certificates of
registration thereof.



(Prior Code, § 5-6-2)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.03  APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION.



   (A)   Application for a certificate of registration shall be made
upon a form provided by the municipality. The applicant shall truthfully
state in full the information requested on the application, to wit:



      (1)   Name and address of present place of residence, length
of residence at the address, business address if other than present address,
and address of the place of residence during the past three years, if other
than the present residence;



      (2)   Age of applicant;



      (3)   Physical description of the applicant;



      (4)   Name and address of the person, firm, corporation, or
association by whom the applicant is employed or represents, and the length
of time of the employment or representation;



      (5)   Description sufficient for identification of the subject
matter of the soliciting in which the applicant will engage, and the location
or areas in which the solicitation will take place;



      (6)   Period of time for which the certificate is applied;



      (7)   The date or approximate date of the latest previous
application for certificate under this chapter, if any;



      (8)   Has a certificate of registration issued to the
applicant under this chapter ever been revoked;



      (9)   Has the applicant ever been convicted of a violation of
a felony under the laws of the state or any other state or federal law of the
United States;



      (10)   Sales Tax Identification Number;



      (11)   Tax Exemption Number (if any); and



      (12)   Number and kind of vehicles to be used.



   (B)   Each applicant must submit with the application required
certificates and approvals from all county, state and federal regulatory
agencies for the products the applicant is seeking to sell or obtain orders
for.



   (C)   All statements made by the applicant upon the application or
in connection therewith shall be under oath.



   (D)   The Police Department shall cause to be kept in its office an
accurate record of every application received and acted upon, together with
all other information and data pertaining thereto, all certificates of
registration issued under the provisions of this chapter, and all denials of
applications. Applications for certificates shall be numbered in consecutive
order, as filed, and every certificate issued and any renewal thereof shall
be identified with the duplicate number of the application upon which it was
issued. The Chief of Police shall require every applicant to submit to
photographing and fingerprinting by the Police Department in connection with
the application for a certificate. The Chief of Police shall collect a fee
for the cost of fingerprinting and any photo identification, which fee shall
not be more than $36.50. The background check shall be valid for not more
than one year from the time of its receipt.



   (E)   No certificate of registration shall be issued to any person
who has been convicted of the commission of a felony under the laws of the
state or any other state or federal law of the United States within five
years of the date of application, nor to any person who is a registered sex
offender in this or any other state, nor to any person who has been convicted
of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, nor to any person
whose certificate of registration issued hereunder has previously been
revoked as herein provided.



   (F)   Application for a license under this chapter shall be made in
writing to the City Clerk at least ten days prior to the time that the
applicant desires to commence such business.



   (G)   The application under this division shall be accompanied by a
bond in the penal sum of $1,000 to the city, such bond to be executed by good
and sufficient sureties to be approved by the City Clerk, and to be
conditioned that all goods, wares and merchandise will be as represented, and
that the purchase price will be refunded on any article sold which is not as
represented and that final delivery of goods ordered will be made in
accordance with the terms of such order, and, failing therein, the advance
payment on such order will be refunded. Any person aggrieved by the action of
any such peddler or itinerant merchant shall have the right of action on the
bond for the money paid or damages, or both.



(Prior Code, § 5-6-3)  (Ord. O-13-072, passed 2-12-2013; Ord. O-13-085,
passed 6-25-2013; Ord. O-14-124, passed 11-11-2014)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.04  REVOCATION OF CERTIFICATE.



   (A)   Any certificate of registration issued hereunder shall be
revoked by the Chief of Police if the holder of the certificate is convicted
of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, or has made a false
material statement in the application, or otherwise becomes disqualified for
the issuance of a certificate of registration under the terms of this chapter.



   (B)   Immediately upon the revocation, written notice thereof shall
be given by the Chief of Police to the holder of the certificate in person or
by certified United States mail addressed to his or her residence address set
forth in the application.



   (C)   Immediately upon the giving of the notice, the certificate of
registration shall become null and void.



   (D)   The certificate of registration shall state the expiration
date thereof.



(Prior Code, § 5-6-4)



§ 113.05  REGISTRATION FEE.



   (A)   (1)   In general. Each solicitor shall pay to the City
Clerk a registration fee of $50 for the first day and $10 for each day
thereafter. The charge for the daily fee may be extended for a set period of
days and paid at the time of registration but in no event may a solicitor’s
permit be issued for a period of greater than 30 days without renewal.



      (2)   Exemption to solicitor’s license. A solicitor who
represents an agency or business which maintains a physical office, store or
service center within the corporate limits of the city for a term of at least
12 months, shall be exempt from the $10 fee for each day.



   (B)   Each hawker or peddler shall pay to the City Clerk a
registration fee of $50 per day or for any part of a day as reported in the
application.



(Prior Code, § 5-6-6) (Ord. O-14-124, passed 11-11-2014)



§ 113.06  OCCUPANT NOTICE REGARDING SOLICITING.



   (A)   Every person desiring to secure the protection provided by the
regulations pertaining to soliciting contained in this chapter shall comply
with the following directions.



   (B)   Notice of the determination by the occupant of giving
invitation to solicitors or the refusal of invitation to solicitors to any
residence shall be given in the manner following:



      (1)   A weatherproof card approximately three inches by four
inches in size shall be exhibited upon or near the main entrance door to the
residence indicating the determination by the occupant, containing the
applicable words, as follows:



         (a)   “Only Solicitors Registered in Geneseo
Invited”; or



         (b)   “No Solicitors Invited”.



      (2)   The letters shall be at least one-third inch in height.
For the purpose of uniformity, the cards shall be provided by the Chief of
Police to persons requesting, at the cost thereof.



   (C)   The card so exhibited shall constitute sufficient notice to
any solicitor of the determination by the occupant of the residence of the
information contained thereon.



(Prior Code, § 5-6-5)



§ 113.07  UNINVITED SOLICITING PROHIBITED.



   It is hereby declared to be unlawful, and shall constitute a nuisance,
for any person to go upon any premises and ring the door bell upon or near
any door, or create any sound or motion in any other manner calculated to
attract the attention of the occupant of the residence, for the purpose of
securing an audience with the occupant thereof and engage in soliciting as
herein defined in defiance of the notice exhibited at the residence in
accordance with the provisions of § 113.06.



(Prior Code, § 5-6-8)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.08  DUTY OF SOLICITOR TO OBSERVE OCCUPANT NOTICE.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of every solicitor upon going on to any
premises in the municipality upon which a residence as herein defined is
located to first examine the notice provided for in this chapter, if any is
attached, and be governed by the statement contained on any notice. If the
notice states “Only Solicitors Registered in Geneseo Invited”, then the
solicitor not possessing a valid certificate of registration as herein
provided shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises and if the
notice states “No Solicitors Invited”, then the solicitor, whether
registered or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises.



   (B)   Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any residence,
whether invited or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the
premises when requested to do so by the occupant.



(Prior Code, § 5-6-7)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.09  HOURS WHEN SOLICITING PERMISSIBLE.



   It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance
for any person, whether registered under this chapter or not, to go upon any
premises and ring the door bell upon or near any door of a residence located
thereon and engage in soliciting as herein defined prior to 9:00 a.m. or
after 5:30 p.m. of any week day or at any time on a Saturday, Sunday, or on a
state or national holiday.



(Prior Code, § 5-6-9)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.10  RESTRICTION ON PEDDLING IN PUBLIC.



   No hawker or peddler shall ply his or her vocation on any street,
sidewalk, park, parkway, or in any other public place or any public
right-of-way unless his or her certificate of registration specifies that
solicitation in public places is permitted thereunder.



(Prior Code, § 5-6-10)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.11  CREATING HAZARD PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No hawker or peddler shall be allowed to ply his or her
vocation at any location, whether public or private property, if in so doing
he or she causes, or contributes to the causing, of any hazard to the general
public including, but not limited to, creation of traffic congestion or the
distracting of the operators of motor vehicles from the hazards of the
roadway.



   (B)   (1)   Further, no solicitor, hawker, or peddler shall sell,
or cause to be sold, any firework of any kind, regardless of whether the
firework is permitted by the statutes of the state. This includes, but is not
limited to:



         (a)   Sparklers;



         (b)   Smoke bombs;



         (c)   Snake or glow worm pellets;



         (d)   Party poppers;



         (e)   Booby traps;



         (f)   Snappers;



         (g)   Trick matches; or



         (h)   Cigarette loads.



      (2)   This shall not include toy pistols, canes, toy guns or
other devices in which paper or plastic caps containing twenty-five
hundredths grains or less of explosive compound are used.



(Prior Code, § 5-6-11)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 114:  TOBACCO REGULATIONS



Section



   114.01   License required; warning signs



   114.02   License fee



   114.03   Responsibility for agents and employees



 



   114.99   Penalty



   Appendix A:  License application form



§ 114.01  LICENSE REQUIRED; WARNING SIGNS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or to have, keep,
or offer for sale, any tobacco, nicotine or similar products, including, but
not limited to, any substance containing tobacco leaf, cigarettes, vapor
cigarettes, electronic cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing
tobacco or dipping tobacco without first having obtained a license so to do,
signed by the Mayor, countersigned by the City Clerk, and sealed with the
seal of the city, and it shall further be unlawful for any person to sell any
of the articles or any tobacco of any kind to any minor under the age of 18
years.



   (B)   Signs informing the public of the age restrictions provided
herein shall be posted by every licensee at or near every display of tobacco
products and on or upon every vending machine of tobacco or nicotine products
for sale. Each sign shall be plainly visible and shall state:



   "THE SALE OF TOBACCO OR NICOTINE PRODUCTS TO PERSONS UNDER EIGHTEEN
YEARS OF AGE IS PROHIBITED BY LAW".



(Prior Code, § 5-4-1)  (Ord. O-15-132, passed 3-10-2015)  Penalty, see §
114.99



§ 114.02  LICENSE FEE.



   The Mayor and City Clerk are hereby authorized to issue licenses to
sell the tobacco or nicotine products described in § 114.01 to all persons
carrying on any regular mercantile business who shall apply for the same and
shall pay into the treasury an annual license fee that is set by resolution
by the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 5-4-2)  (Ord. O-15-132, passed 3-10-2015)



§ 114.03  RESPONSIBILITY FOR AGENTS AND EMPLOYEES.



   Every act or omission of whatsoever nature, constituting a violation of
any of the provisions of this chapter, or of §§ 131.075 through 131.078, by
an officer, director, manager, or other agent or employee of any licensee,
shall be deemed and held to be the act of the licensee, and the licensee
shall be punishable in the same manner as if the act or omission had been
done or omitted by the licensee personally.



(Prior Code, § 5-4-3)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.99  PENALTY



   (A)   The Mayor may suspend, revoke, or issue a written reprimand to
any licensee issued under the provisions of this chapter, if the Mayor
determines that the licensee has violated any of the provisions of this
chapter or any of the provisions of §§ 131.075 through 131.078. In lieu of
suspension or revocation of a license, the Mayor may instead levy a fine on
the licensee. The fine imposed shall not exceed $750 for each violation. Each
day on which a violation continues or each sale of tobacco products which is
in violation shall constitute a separate violation.



   (B)   If the Mayor determines that a letter of reprimand is
warranted, or the license should be suspended or revoked, he or she shall
issue a written order within five days stating the reasons for the
determination, and shall cause a copy of the order to be served upon the
licensee within ten days. In the event a penalty is imposed, the order shall
specify the date by which the penalty shall be paid. If the penalty is not
paid by the specified date, the license shall be suspended for a time
determined by the Mayor. All penalties shall be paid at the Police Department.



   (C)   When any license shall have been revoked for any cause, no
license shall be granted to the licensee for the period of six months
thereafter for the conduct of the business of selling tobacco products as set
forth in § 114.01 in the premises described in the revoked license.



(Prior Code, § 5-4-4)



APPENDIX A:  LICENSE APPLICATION FORM



   I.   LICENSE APPLICATION FORM.




City of Geneseo




   APPLICATION FOR A CIGARETTE LICENSE



1.   Name and address of applicant



   ________________________________________________________________________



   ________________________________________________________________________



   ________________________________________________________________________



2.   Name and address of place of business



   ________________________________________________________________________



   ________________________________________________________________________



   _________________________________________________________________________
__



THE UNDERSIGNED HAS KNOWLEDGE OF GENESEO ORDINANCE NO. 1518, DATED  MARCH 9,
1993, REGARDING THE SALE OF CIGARETTES WHICH WAS CODIFIED AND APPROVED BY
ORDINANCE NO. 1953 ON OCTOBER 13, 2009.



Dated this __________ day of ______________________________, 20 _____.



   __________________________________________



   Signature of applicant



Witness:



_____________________________________



Fee:   $50.00



CHAPTER 115:  AMUSEMENTS



Section




Game Rooms




   115.01   License required



   115.02   License classifications established



   115.03   License application



   115.04   License term; fee



   115.05   Prohibitions and restrictions



   115.06   License nontransferable



   115.07   Revocation of license



   115.08   Hours of operation



   115.09   Compliance with health, building, and fire codes



   115.10   City Council duties




Jukeboxes




   115.25   License required



   115.26   Application



   115.27   License fee




Raffles




   115.40   License required



   115.41   Application



   115.42   License duration



   115.43   Regulatory provisions




Shooting Galleries




   115.55   License required



   115.56   License fee



   115.57   License contents



   115.58   Restrictions against minors, gambling, and alcohol



   Appendix A:  Application forms (Amusement, jukebox and raffle)




GAME ROOMS




§ 115.01  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, association, or
corporation to establish or operate any form of game room which offers to the
public electrically or manually operated amusement games, pool or billiard
tables, foosball tables, or any other electrically or manually operated
amusement device or table game in the city without obtaining a license as
herein provided.



(Prior Code, § 5-2-1)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.02  LICENSE CLASSIFICATIONS ESTABLISHED.



   (A)   Class A.  This class is established for AMUSEMENT CENTER,
which is any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised, and held out to
the public to be a place primarily for the offering of games of amusement or
amusement devices, including, but not limited to, billiard, pool, bagetello,
or pigeon hole tables, and any mechanical or electrically operated amusement
device. A place shall be deemed to be primarily for the offering of games of
amusement or amusement devices if more than 50% of the square footage thereof
is used for those purposes. Square footage shall include not only the space
devoted to the games and devices, but also a reasonable space allowance for
the patrons thereof. Classification for an amusement center under this
division shall be termed “A-1”. In addition to Class A-1 license for
amusement centers, other businesses which have more than eight amusement
devices, but which do not meet the requirements of an amusement center as set
forth above, shall be required to have a Class A license. Classification for
businesses of this nature shall be termed “A-2”.



   (B)   Class B.  This class is established for other public places
not primarily for the offering of games of amusement or amusement devices
which have fewer than eight of the same type devices listed under Class A on
the premises. No license is required if the amusement device is stored and
not available to the public.



(Prior Code, § 5-2-2)



§ 115.03  LICENSE APPLICATION.



   (A)   Any person, partnership, association, or corporation who
wishes to establish or operate amusement devices as regulated under this
subchapter shall make application for an amusement license, which application
shall state:



      (1)   The name, age, and address of the applicant if an
individual or partnership and, in case of a corporation or association, the
date and place of incorporation, corporate purposes, and the names and
addresses of officers and directors. If any individual applicant has a prior
felony conviction, the conviction will be disclosed in the application;



      (2)   The location and description of the premises or place
where the business is to be operated and the number of amusement devices to
be operated on the premises. The hours of operation shall also be stated;



      (3)   A statement whether the applicant has any similar
businesses or premises other than those described in the application and the
location and nature of the similar business, if any;



      (4)   A statement that the applicant will not violate any of
the laws of the state or of the United States or any provisions of the
ordinances of this city in the conduct of his or her place of business; and



      (5)   A statement of the rules of the house that will be
publicly posted on the premises for the conduct of the patrons and the
operation and management of the business.



   (B)   These provisions in this section are applicable to both Class
A and Class B applicants. Class A and B applications are to be made first to
the City Council, or its designee. The City Council, or its designee shall
hold a public hearing on each application prior to its recommendation to the
City Council, which will authorize the issuance or denial of the license.
Expansion from a Class B to a Class A license is treated as a new application
and is to be processed pursuant to this section. Expansion within a license
class is to be reviewed and approved by the City Council, or its designee.
The City Clerk formally will issue the license only when authorized by the
City Council.



(Prior Code, § 5-2-3)  (Ord. O-11-009, passed 6-22-2011)



§ 115.04  LICENSE TERM; FEE.



   (A)   Each Class A and Class B license shall terminate on April 30
next following its issuance. The annual fee for the license shall be $35 per
electrically or manually operated amusement game or device or table game
offered for use to the public on the premises of the business. Any license
issued after April 30 of any year shall be issued for a fee which shall be
set by prorating the yearly license fee of that particular operator over the
remainder of the license year. Any licensee may increase the number of
electrically or manually operated games or devices based on the aforesaid fee
of $35 per device, the fee being prorated over the remainder of the license
year. Any license shall be valid only for the premises specified in the
application. No portion of the license fee shall be refunded.



   (B)   Annual renewal of Class A and B licenses shall be accompanied
by the annual fee as set forth in the previous division. The annual renewal
shall be reviewed and approved by the City Council, or its designee. The
renewal request indicates any changes in operation that will be in effect for
the new license year, an inventory listing of the number of devices that are
to be operated on the premises, and a listing of any violations of this
subchapter which have occurred in the past license year.



   (C)   The license herein provided for shall be posted permanently
and conspicuously at the location of the premises.



   (D)   If the licensee shall move his or her place of business to
another location within the city, the license may be transferred to the new
location upon application to the City Clerk, giving the street and number of
the new location. The new location shall be approved by the City Council, or
its designee. The Council, or its designee may seek the advice of the City
Council or any board before granting the request.



(Prior Code, § 5-2-4)  (Ord. O-11-009, passed 6-22-2011)



§ 115.05  PROHIBITIONS AND RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   No Class A-1 license shall be issued for any premises in or
within 200 feet of an area zoned as residential. All license holders must
operate the business in a B-2 or B-3 Business District as established by the
most current Zoning District Map of the city.



   (B)   Licensees under this subchapter shall permit no patron to
bring onto the licensed premises or possess any firearms or weapons or any
cannabis or controlled substance, as defined in ILCS Ch. 720, Act 600, § 3.



   (C)   Class A and Class B licensees who do not hold a valid license
to sell at retail liquor pursuant to Chapter 110 of this code shall not
dispense alcohol or allow any patrons to have in their possession or dispense
alcohol or any beverage containing alcohol. A finding of violation of this
division by the City Council, or its designee shall result in permanent
revocation of the license authorized by this chapter.



   (D)   Class A and Class B licensees shall eject any patron if the
patron has caused a disturbance, is engaged in disorderly conduct, or
violates the house rules. It shall be the responsibility of the licensee to
preclude patrons from loitering in or near the premises so as to create a
breach of the peace, create annoyance or disturbance of the comfort and
repose of any other person, or obstruct free passage of pedestrians or
vehicles on public thoroughfares.



   (E)   Class A and Class B licensees shall have adult supervision by
a person not less than 21 years of age on the premises at all times of open
operation.



   (F)   Licenses shall be issued only to those who are 21 years or
more of age or to corporations, all of the shareholders of which are 21 years
or older.



   (G)   Separate licenses shall be required if the license holder
operates one or more businesses at separate locations, each of which is
subject to the terms of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 5-2-5)  (Ord. O-11-009, passed 6-22-2011)



§ 115.06  LICENSE NONTRANSFERABLE.



   Any license issued under this chapter shall be considered a personal
privilege granted to the holder thereof and not as a vested property right.
Any license issued under this chapter shall not be transferable by
assignment, inheritance, or any other method.



(Prior Code, § 5-2-8)



§ 115.07  REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   Every license issued under this chapter is subject to the right, which
is hereby expressly reserved, to revoke the same should the licensee directly
or indirectly operate contrary to the provisions of this chapter, the
regulations of the city, or the laws of the state. The license may be revoked
by the City Council, or its designee after written notice to the licensee,
which notice shall specify the violations with which the licensee is charged,
if after a hearing the licensee is found to be guilty of the violation(s).
Ten days notice of the hearing shall be given in writing and sent to the
address of the licensee. At the hearing, the licensee and his or her attorney
may present and submit evidence of witnesses in his or her defense.



(Prior Code, § 5-2-10)  (Ord. O-11-009, passed 6-22-2011)



§ 115.08  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any Class A-1 licensee to operate any
hours except the following:



      (1)   During that portion of the year when the public schools
are in session, the following hours:



         (a)   Monday through Thursday, 3:30 p.m. to 11:00 p.m.;



         (b)   Friday, 3:30 p.m. to 12:00 midnight;



         (c)   Saturday, 12:00 noon to 12:00 midnight; and



         (d)   Sunday, 1:00 p.m. to 11:00 p.m.



      (2)   During that portion of the year when the public schools
are not in session, the following hours:



         (a)   Monday through Thursday, 12:00 noon to 11:00 p.m.;



         (b)   Friday and Saturday, 12:00 noon to 12:00 midnight;
and



         (c)   Sunday, 1:00 p.m. to 11:00 p.m.



   (B)   The above hours as set out in this section shall not limit the
operation of electrically or manually operated games, amusement devices, or
game tables which are located within premises which house a place of business
maintaining a liquor license and which, under the license, minors are
excluded from the premises. The businesses may utilize their electrically and
manually operated games, game tables, and amusement devices during the hours
they are allowed to operate under the liquor license. However, no liquor
licensee who is prohibited from having minors on his or her premises by any
local ordinance or state statute shall allow the use of his or her
electrically or manually operated games, game tables, and other amusement
devices by minors.



   (C)   The purpose of this section is to place the responsibility on
the license holder so that when the schools are in session, the license
holder does not allow a student(s) to be on their premises when the
student(s) is required to be in school.



(Prior Code, § 5-2-6)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.09  COMPLIANCE WITH HEALTH, BUILDING, AND FIRE CODES.



   All license holders under this subchapter shall fully comply with the
health, building, fire, plumbing, electrical, and all other codes of the city
and the state. The premises will conform to all ordinances adopted by the
city for zoning and building purposes.



(Prior Code, § 5-2-7)



§ 115.10  CITY COUNCIL DUTIES.



   The City Council, or its designee shall perform the duties set out in
this subchapter and enforce the provisions thereof. The Council shall conduct
all hearings on the revocation of licenses. The Council will review the
annual renewal applications and shall approve those that conform with the
purposes of this and other applicable ordinances and laws of the state.



(Prior Code, § 5-2-9)  (Ord. O-11-009, passed 6-22-2011)




JUKEBOXES




§ 115.25  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to have, keep, or permit so called
jukebox to be used in or upon any premises owned, occupied, or controlled by
the person for his or her gain or profit without having first obtained a
license signed by the Mayor and the City Clerk as hereinafter provided.



(Prior Code, § 5-3-1)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.26  APPLICATION.



   Any person desiring a license shall file with the City Clerk a written
application therefore setting forth the location of the building or room to
be occupied, and the number and nature of the boxes or machines for which a
license is desired, and shall pay to the City Clerk the license fee required.



(Prior Code, § 5-3-2)



§ 115.27  LICENSE FEE.



   The license above provided for may be granted for the term of one year
upon the applicant paying to the city the sum of $25 for each jukebox to be
licensed. The license year shall, however, begin on May 1 of each year, and a
license granted during any year shall be for the period from the granting
thereof until the first day of the following May. If the period shall be less
than six months, the fee for the license shall be $12.50 instead of $25, but
if the period shall be more than six months, the full $25 fee shall be
charged.



(Prior Code, § 5-3-3)




RAFFLES




§ 115.40  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person or organization to operate a raffle
within the city limits without having a raffle license in accordance with the
terms of this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 5-5-1)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.41  APPLICATION.



   Application for the license shall be made to the City Clerk in writing,
and shall contain all the information required by ILCS Ch. 230, Act 15, §§
0.01 et seq., known as the Raffles Act of the Illinois Compiled Statutes, and
all amendments thereto. Application shall be made on the form supplied to the
applicant by the City Clerk. If the applicant and the application conform in
all respects to the subchapter and the aforesaid statute, the City Clerk
shall issue the raffle license. Otherwise, the City Clerk shall deny the
application, citing the reason for the denial in writing on the application,
and return it to the applicant. No fee shall be charged for each application.



(Prior Code, § 5-5-2)



§ 115.42  LICENSE DURATION.



   Licenses issued pursuant to this subchapter shall be valid for a period
of up to one year with a maximum allowable number of raffles not to exceed
365 during that period. Term and number of raffles shall be so indicated upon
the application for raffle license. The license may be suspended or revoked
for any violation of this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 5-5-3)



§ 115.43  REGULATORY PROVISIONS.



   (A)   The following provisions shall be followed in the operation of
each licensed raffle:



      (1)   The aggregate retail value of all prizes or merchandise
awarded in a single raffle shall be up to $100,000;



      (2)   The maximum retail value of each prize awarded in a
single raffle shall be up to $25,000;



      (3)   The maximum price which may be charged for each raffle
chance issued or sold shall be up to $25,000; and



      (4)   The maximum number of days during which chances for any
individual raffle may be issued or sold shall not exceed 120 days,
notwithstanding that in no case shall a license issued for more than one
raffle be valid nor shall chances be issued or sold for longer than the
period so stated on the license.



   (B)   In all other respects, the operation of each license raffle
shall conform to the aforesaid statute, and all amendments thereto.



   (C)   Fiducial bond shall not be required.



(Prior Code, § 5-5-4) (Am. Ord. O-11-029, passed 12-14-2011)




SHOOTING GALLERIES




§ 115.55  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, run, operate, or
maintain for profit any form of public amusement known as a shooting gallery,
targets, or target range, or like form of public amusement without first
being licensed so to do by the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 5-11-1)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.56  LICENSE FEE.



   Every person so desiring to conduct, run, operate, or maintain for
profit any form of public amusement mentioned in § 115.55 shall pay in
advance to the City Clerk the sum of $5 per month for every month or part
thereof during which it is desired so to conduct, run, operate, or maintain
the same, provided that no person shall be so licensed, nor any license be
issued as hereinafter provided, for a less period or term than three months
and license fees shall be payable quarterly in advance.



(Prior Code, § 5-11-2)



§ 115.57  LICENSE CONTENTS.



   Licenses so issued shall be signed by the Mayor and attested under the
seal of the city by the City Clerk and shall state the nature of the
amusement thereunder licensed, the time for which it is granted, the name of
the person to whom it is granted, the building, room, or place intended to be
occupied, that the license shall be used and the privileges granted
thereunder shall be exercised at the place only and that the license shall
not be transferable nor assignable and shall be conditioned so that any
violation of this subchapter shall work a forfeiture of the license and all
sums of money which may have been paid thereon at the election of the City
Council.



(Prior Code, § 5-11-3)



§ 115.58  RESTRICTIONS AGAINST MINORS, GAMBLING, AND ALCOHOL.



   No person holding a license shall keep open the gallery or like
amusement place except during the hours from 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. on week
days and shall keep closed on Sundays, nor shall suffer or permit any minor
under the age of 18 years to frequent or loiter about the premises so
occupied by him or her without the written permission or order of the parent
or guardian of the minor, nor shall sell, barter, exchange, or give away in
connection with the business or otherwise any intoxicating liquors, nor shall
suffer or permit any betting, gaming or riotous or disorderly conduct upon
the premises occupied by him or her.



(Prior Code, § 5-11-4)  Penalty, see § 10.99



APPENDIX A:  APPLICATION FORMS (AMUSEMENT, JUKEBOX AND RAFFLE)



   I.   Amusement center license application



   II.   Amusement license application



   III.   Jukebox application



   IV.   Raffle application



I.  AMUSEMENT CENTER LICENSE APPLICATION.



   City of Geneseo



   APPLICATION FOR   Application 115.03



   AMUSEMENT CENTER LICENSE



1.   Name and address of applicant



   ___________________________________________________________



   ___________________________________________________________



   ___________________________________________________________




2.   Driver’s license number of applicant _____________________________




Have you ever been convicted of a felony under the laws of the State of
Illinois? ____ yes ____no




1.   Name and address of place of business




      ___________________________________________________________________
_____



   ________________________________________________________________________



   ________________________________________________________________________



If business is a corporation or association*



Date of incorporation   ____________________    State of incorporation
_______________________



Illinois Retail Occupation Tax Number _________________



*Attach a list of officers and directors



4.   Number of amusement devices per location ______________



Do you have any other similar place of business or premises? ____yes ____no



If yes, state name and location of such other place of business or premises
_____________________



_______________________________________________________________________________
_



Please attach a statement of the rules of the establishment that will be
publicly posted on the premises for the conduct of the patrons and the
operation and management of the business.



I HEREBY CERTIFY THAT I WILL NOT VIOLATE ANY OF THE LAWS OF THE STATE OF
ILLINOIS OR OF THE UNITED STATES OR ANY PROVISIONS OF THE ORDINANCES OF THE
CITY OF GENESEO IN THE CONDUCT OF MY PLACE OF BUSINESS. I FURTHER CERTIFY
THAT I HAVE KNOWLEDGE OF GENESEO ORDINANCE NO. 1518, DATED MARCH 9, 1993, 
REGARDING AMUSEMENT LICENSES.



Dated this __________ day of ____________________________, 20 ______.



                  ___________________________________________
__



                   Signature of applicant



Witness:



__________________________________



II.  AMUSEMENT LICENSE APPLICATION.



   City of Geneseo



   APPLICATION



   FOR   



   AMUSEMENT LICENSE



1.   Name and address of applicant



   ________________________________________________________________________



   ________________________________________________________________________



   ________________________________________________________________________



2.   Name and address of place of business



   ________________________________________________________________________



   ________________________________________________________________________



   ________________________________________________________________________




3.   Number of amusement devices per location   __________




THE UNDERSIGNED HAS KNOWLEDGE OF GENESEO ORDINANCE NO. 1518, DATED  MARCH 9,
1993, REGARDING AMUSEMENT LICENSES.



Dated this __________ day of ____________________________, 20 ______.



                  ___________________________________________
__



                   Signature of applicant



Witness:



__________________________________




Fee:   $35.00 per amusement machine




III.  JUKEBOX LICENSE APPLICATION.



   City of Geneseo



   APPLICATION FOR A JUKEBOX LICENSE



1.   Name and address of applicant



   ________________________________________________________________________



   ________________________________________________________________________



   ________________________________________________________________________



2.   Name and address of place of business



   ________________________________________________________________________



   ________________________________________________________________________



   ________________________________________________________________________



3.   Number of jukeboxes per location   __________



THE UNDERSIGNED HAS KNOWLEDGE OF GENESEO ORDINANCE NO. 1518, DATED  MARCH 9,
1993, REGARDING JUKEBOXES.



Dated this ________ day of ____________________________, 20 _____.



                  __________________________________________



                  Signature of applicant



Witness:



_____________________________________




Fee:   $25.00 per jukebox




IV.  RAFFLE LICENSE APPLICATION.



      Application 115.02



   APPLICATION NO. _____



   APPLICATION FOR RAFFLE LICENSE



___________________________________________ makes the following statements in
application for a raffle license according to the provisions of the Illinois
Compiled Statutes and Geneseo Ordinance No. 1518.



NAME OF ORGANIZATION ________________________________________________________



_______________________________________________________________________________
____



Said organization is a bona fide religious, charitable, labor, fraternal,
educational, or veteran’s organization which is nonprofit in character.



AREA AND TIME PERIOD WITHIN WHICH THE RAFFLE CHANCES WILL BE SOLD OR ISSUED
___________________________________________________________________________



_______________________________________________________________________________
____



LOCATION AND TIME OF DETERMINATION OF WINNING CHANCES ________________



_______________________________________________________________________________
____



WAIVE OF FIDELITY BOND



It is the unanimous vote of the members of
________________________________________ that the fidelity bond required by
law of the raffle manager be waived.



THE UNDERSIGNED HAS KNOWLEDGE OF THE ILLINOIS STATUTORY PROVISIONS AND THE
CITY OF GENESEO ORDINANCE REGARDING RAFFLES AND REPRESENTS THAT THE RAFFLE
WHICH LICENSE IS HEREBY APPLIED FOR WILL BE CONDUCTED IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE
REQUIREMENTS OF SAID LAWS AND IS FULLY AWARE OF AND HAS READ THE ATTACHED
RAFFLE ORDINANCE NO. 1518.



   Dated this _____ day of ____________________________, 20_____.



By _______________________________   Attest
____________________________________



      President



   RAFFLE LICENSE



__________________________________, according to the provisions of the
Illinois Compiled Statutes and Geneseo Ordinance No. 1518, is hereby granted
a license to conduct a raffle as applied for by Application No.________,
dated ____________________________, 20_____. Fidelity bond of the raffle
manager is hereby waived.



CITY OF GENESEO



By ____________________________________



City Clerk



CHAPTER 116:  TRAILER CAMPS



Section




General Provisions




   116.01   Definitions



   116.02   License required



   116.03   Annual fee



   116.04   Application



   116.05   Revocation of license




Camp Requirements




   116.20   Camp plan



   116.21   Location



   116.22   Water supply



   116.23   Sanitation facilities



   116.24   Laundry facilities



   116.25   Sewage disposal



   116.26   Garbage receptacles



   116.27   Fire protection



   116.28   Control of pets



   116.29   Occupant register required; contents



   116.30   License to be posted



   Appendix A:  License application




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 116.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CAMP.  Trailer coach camp.



   TRAILER COACH.  Any vehicle used or maintained for use as a conveyance
upon highways or city streets so designed and so constructed as to permit
occupancy thereof as a temporary dwelling or sleeping place for one or more
persons, having no other foundation than wheels or jacks.



   TRAILER COACH SPACE.  A plot of ground within a trailer coach camp
designed for the accommodation of one trailer coach.



   TRAILER HOME.  Any TRAILER COACH, but being placed on a foundation of
blocks, timbers, or some other foundation more stable and permanent than
wheels or jacks.



(Prior Code, § 5-10-1)



§ 116.02  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or operate any trailer
coach camp unless the person shall first obtain a license therefore.



(Prior Code, § 5-10-2)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 116.03  ANNUAL FEE.



   The annual license fee for each trailer coach camp shall be $25.



(Prior Code, § 5-10-3)



§ 116.04  APPLICATION.



   (A)   Application for a trailer coach camp license shall be filed
with and issued by the City Clerk after approval of the application by the
City Council. Application shall be in writing signed by the applicant and
shall contain the following:



      (1)   The name and address of the applicant;



      (2)   The location and legal description of the trailer coach
camp;



      (3)   A complete plan of the camp showing compliance with §
116.20;



      (4)   Plans and specifications of all buildings and other
improvements constructed or to be constructed within the trailer coach camp;
and



      (5)   Further information as may be requested by the City
Council to enable it to determine if the proposed camp will comply with all
requirements and located in an area zoned for the purpose.



   (B)   The application and all accompanying plans and specifications
shall be filed in triplicate. The City Council shall investigate the
applicant and inspect the proposed plans and specifications. If the applicant
is found to be of good moral character and the proposed trailer coach camp
will be in compliance with all provisions of this chapter and all other
applicable ordinances or statutes, the Council shall approve the application,
and, upon completion of the camp according to the plans, shall issue the
license.



   (C)   Upon application for a transfer of the license, the City
Council shall issue a transfer if it finds that the transferee is of good
moral character.



(Prior Code, § 5-10-4)



§ 116.05  REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   The City Council may revoke any license to maintain and operate a camp
when the licensee has been found guilty by a court of competent jurisdiction
of violating any provision of this chapter. After the conviction, the license
may be reissued if the circumstances leading to conviction have been remedied
and the camp is then maintained and operated in full compliance with law.



(Prior Code, § 5-10-15)




CAMP REQUIREMENTS




§ 116.20  CAMP PLAN.



   (A)   The trailer coach camp shall conform to the following
requirements.



      (1)   The camp shall be located on a well drained site,
properly graded to ensure rapid drainage and freedom from stagnant pools of
water.



      (2)   Trailer coach spaces shall be provided consisting of a
minimum of 1,000 square feet for each space which shall be at least 25 feet
wide and clearly defined. Trailer coaches shall be so placed on each space
that there shall be at least a 15-foot clearance between trailer coaches. No
trailer coach shall be located closer than ten feet from any property line
bounding the camp.



      (3)   All trailer coach spaces shall abut upon a driveway of
not less than 20 feet in width which shall have unobstructed access to a
public street, alley, or highway. All driveways shall be hard surfaced or
treated with gravel or crushed rock, or well oiled, well marked in the
daytime and lighted at night with 25-watt lamps at intervals of 100 feet
located approximately 15 feet from the ground.



   (B)   Each camp shall provide service buildings to house toilet
facilities, bathing facilities, laundry facilities and other sanitary
facilities, as hereinafter more particularly described.



   (C)   An electrical outlet supplying at least 110 volts shall be
provided for each trailer coach space.



(Prior Code, § 5-10-5)



§ 116.21  LOCATION.



   Trailer coach camps may be located in any district for which a license
is granted by the Council. Each boundary of the camp must be at least 200
feet from any permanent residential building located outside the camp unless
separated therefrom by a natural or artificial barrier or unless a majority
of the property owners according to area within the 200 feet consent in
writing to the establishment of the camp.



(Prior Code, § 5-10-6)



§ 116.22  WATER SUPPLY.



   An adequate supply of pure water for drinking and domestic purposes
shall be supplied to meet the requirements of the camp. The water supply
shall be obtained from faucets only. No common drinking cups shall be
permitted.



(Prior Code, § 5-10-7)



§ 116.23  SANITATION FACILITIES.



   (A)   Each camp shall be provided with toilets, baths, or showers,
slop sinks, and other sanitation facilities, which shall conform to the
following requirements:



      (1)   Toilet facilities for men and women shall be provided,
and they shall be either in separate buildings at least 20 feet apart, or
shall be separated if in the same building by a sound proof wall.



      (2)   Service buildings housing the toilet facilities shall be
permanent structures complying with all applicable provisions of the
ordinances of this city and statutes regulating buildings, electrical
installations, and plumbing and sanitation systems and shall be located not
closer than ten feet nor farther than 200 feet from any trailer coach space.



      (3)   The service buildings shall be well lighted at all times
of the day or night, shall be well ventilated with screened openings, shall
be constructed of moisture proof material, including painted woodwork, as
shall permit repeated cleaning and washing, and shall be maintained at a
temperature of at least 68F during the period from October 1 to May 1. The
floors of the service buildings shall be of water impervious material and
shall slope to a floor drain connected with the sewage system.



   (B)   All service buildings and the grounds of the camp shall be
maintained in a clean, sightly condition and kept free of any condition that
will menace the health of any occupant or the public or constitute a nuisance.



(Prior Code, § 5-10-8)



§ 116.24  LAUNDRY FACILITIES.



   The laundry facilities shall be provided in the ratio of one double
laundry tub and ironing board for every 20 trailer coach spaces. All
electrical outlet supply current sufficient to operate an iron shall be
located conveniently near the ironing board. The service building housing the
laundry facilities shall be a permanent structure complying with all
applicable ordinances of this city and statutes regulating buildings,
electrical installations, and plumbing and sanitation systems.



(Prior Code, § 5-10-9)



§ 116.25  SEWAGE DISPOSAL.



   Waste from showers, bath tubs, toilets, slop sinks, and laundries shall
be discharged into a public sewer system in compliance with applicable
regulations, or into a private sewer or disposal plant or septic tank system
of the construction and in the manner as will present no health hazard.



(Prior Code, § 5-10-10)



§ 116.26  GARBAGE RECEPTACLES.



   Tightly covered metal garbage cans shall be provided in quantities
adequate to permit disposal of all garbage and rubbish. Garbage cans shall be
located not farther than 200 feet from any trailer coach space. The cans
shall be kept in sanitary condition at all times. Garbage and rubbish shall
be collected and disposed of as frequently as may be necessary to ensure that
the garbage cans shall not overflow.



(Prior Code, § 5-10-11)



§ 116.27  FIRE PROTECTION.



   Every camp shall be equipped at all times with one fire extinguisher in
good working order for every ten trailer coach spaces located not farther
than 200 feet from each trailer coach space. No open fires shall be permitted
at any place which would endanger life or property. No fires shall be left
unattended at any time.



(Prior Code, § 5-10-12)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 116.28  CONTROL OF PETS.



   No owner or person in charge of any dog, cat, or other pet animal shall
permit it to run at large or commit any nuisance within the limits of any
trailer coach camp.



(Prior Code, § 5-10-13)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 116.29  OCCUPANT REGISTER REQUIRED; CONTENTS.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the licensee to keep a register
containing a record of all trailer coach owners and occupants located within
the camp. The register shall contain the following information:



      (1)   Name and address of each occupant;



      (2)   The make, model, and year of all automobiles and trailer
coaches;



      (3)   License number and owner of each trailer coach and
automobile by which it is towed;



      (4)   The state issuing the licenses; and



      (5)   The dates of arrival and departure of each trailer coach.



   (B)   The camp shall keep the register available for inspection at
all times by law enforcement officers, public health officials, and other
officials whose duties necessitate obtaining the information contained in the
register. The register records shall not be destroyed for a period of three
years following the date of registration.



(Prior Code, § 5-10-14)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 116.30  LICENSE TO BE POSTED.



   The license certificate shall at all times be conspicuously posted in
the office of or on the premises of the trailer coach camp.



(Prior Code, § 5-10-16)  Penalty, see § 10.99



APPENDIX A:  LICENSE APPLICATION



   I.   Application for trailer camp license



I.  APPLICATION FOR TRAILER CAMP LICENSE,



   No. __________



   City of Geneseo



   APPLICATION FOR TRAILER CAMP LICENSE



It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or operate any trailer coach
camp unless such person shall first obtain a license. This application shall
be filed with and issued by the City Clerk after approval of the application
by the City Council.



Name of
Applicant   ____________________________________________________________



Address   ____________________________________________________________



      ____________________________________________________________



Location and legal description of the trailer coach camp
   _____________________________



   _________________________________________________________________________
_____



   _________________________________________________________________________
_____



Attach a complete plan of the camp showing compliance with § 116.20 of the
city code.



_____________________________________________



Signature of Applicant



__________________________________________



Date



================================================



License issued by the City Clerk this ________ day of
_________________________, 20 _____.



_____________________________________________



Signature of City Clerk



CHAPTER 117:  ALARM BUSINESSES AND SYSTEMS



Section



   117.01   Definitions



   117.02   System standards and regulations



   117.03   Permit required; types of permits



   117.04   Permit application



   117.05   Investigation; permit denial



   117.06   Fee



   117.07   Suspension or revocation of permit



   117.08   Limitation of city liability



   117.09   Conflict of interest



   117.10   Response outside city limits



 



   117.99   Penalty



§ 117.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALARM AGENT.  Any person who is employed by an alarm business, either
directly or indirectly, whose duties include selling, maintaining, leasing,
servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving, or installing on or in any
building, structure or facility, any alarm system. Exemption: The provisions
of this chapter do not apply to a person who engages in the manufacture or
sale of an alarm system from a fixed location and who neither visits the
location where the alarm system is to be installed, nor designs the scheme
for physical location and installation of the alarm system in a specific
location.



   ALARM SYSTEM.  Any mechanical or electrical device which is designed
or used for the detection of an unauthorized entry into a building,
structure, or facility, or for alerting others of the commission of an
unlawful act within a building, structure, or facility, or both, and which
emits a sound or transmits a signal or message when actuated and to which
police are expected to respond.  In this chapter, the term ALARM SYSTEM
shall include the terms AUDIBLE ALARM, AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE, BURGLAR
ALARM SYSTEM, and HOLDUP ALARM SYSTEM, as those terms are hereinafter defined.



   ANSWERING SERVICE.  A telephone answering business providing among its
services receiving, on a continuous basis through trained employees,
emergency signals from alarm systems, and thereafter immediately relaying the
message by live voice over a signal channel circuit to the Communication
Center of the Police Department.



   APPELLANT.  A person who perfects an appeal pursuant to this chapter.



   APPLICANT.  A person, firm, or corporation that files an application
for a new or renewal permit as provided in this chapter.



   AUDIBLE ALARM.  A device designed for the detection of unauthorized
entry on premises which generates an audible sound on the premises when it is
actuated. This AUDIBLE ALARM may or may not be combined with a method of
transmitting a signal to a remote point. Exemption: The provisions of this
chapter are not applicable to audible alarms affixed to motor vehicles.



   AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE.  An alarm system which automatically sends
over regular telephone lines, by direct connection or otherwise, a
prerecorded voice message or coded signal indicating the existence of the
emergency situation that the alarm system is designed to detect.



   BURGLAR ALARM SYSTEM.  A method of detecting and signaling the
presence, entry or attempted entry of an intruder into protected premises.



   CENTRAL STATION SYSTEM.  A system or group of systems, usually
operated for its customers by a person, in which the operations of protected
circuits and devices are transmitted to, recorded in, maintained, and
supervised from a central station having trained operators and guards in
attendance at all times, that have the duty to take appropriate action upon
receipt of a signal or message including the relaying of messages by a signal
channel circuit to the Communications Center of the Police Department.



   CITY.  The City of Geneseo or its authorized employees or agents.



   DIRECTOR ALARM SYSTEM.  An alarm system which has the capability of
transmitting signals to and receiving them at the communications center of
the City Police Department.



   FALSE ALARM.  The intentional or unintentional activation of an alarm
system through mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation or the
negligence of the owner or lessee of an alarm system or of his or her
employees or agents which necessitates response by the City Police Department
where an attempted or actual burglary or holdup does not exist. The
terminology does not include, for example, alarms caused by tornadoes,
earthquakes, or other violent conditions.



   HOLDUP ALARM SYSTEM.  An alarm system signaling a robbery or attempted
robbery.



   MODIFIED CENTRAL STATION.  An office to which remote alarm and
supervisory signaling devices are connected, where operators supervise the
circuits and relay the messages by a signal channel circuit to the
Communications Center of the Police Department.



   POLICE CHIEF.  The Chief of the Police Department of the city, or his
or her authorized representative.



   PRIMARY TRUNK LINE.  A telephone line leading into the Communications
Center of the Police Department, that is for the purpose of handling
emergency calls on a person-to-person basis, and which line is identified by
a specific listing among the emergency numbers in a telephone directory
issued by the telephone company serving the city.



   PROTECTED PREMISES.  The part of a building, structure, or facility to
which protection is afforded by an alarm system.



   SIGNAL CHANNEL CIRCUIT.  A telephone service that only provides a
two-way telephone service from one location to another location. In the
police station, it will be used to report emergency signals from an ANSWERING
SERVICE, a CENTRAL STATION or from a MODIFIED CENTRAL STATION to the Police
Communication Center on a person-to-person basis.



   SUBSCRIBER.  A person who buys and/or leases, or otherwise obtains an
alarm signaling system and thereafter contracts with or hires an alarm
business to monitor and/or service the alarm device.



(Prior Code, § 7-12-1)



§ 117.02  SYSTEM STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS.



   (A)   The Police Chief may prescribe reasonable minimum standards
and regulations for the construction and maintenance of all alarm system
installed within the city. All devices shall meet or exceed the standards and
regulations before permits may be issued pursuant to this chapter. The Police
Chief may require inspection and approval of all alarm systems installed
within the city.



   (B)   All alarm systems that emit an audible signal that may be
heard by persons outside the protected building, structure, or facility shall
conform to the following requirements.



      (1)   Every person maintaining an audible alarm shall provide
the Police Chief with the names and telephone numbers of the persons to be
notified to render repairs or service and secure the premises during any hour
of the day or night that the alarm system is activated. It is the
responsibility of every person maintaining an alarm system to assure that the
names and telephone numbers recorded with the Police Department are kept
current.



      (2)   No person shall install an audible alarm system which
creates a sound similar to that of an emergency vehicle siren or a civil
defense warning system.



      (3)   No person shall install an audible alarm system which
does not automatically discontinue emitting an audible sound within one-half
hour after it is activated.



   (C)   (1)   No alarm system using an automatic dialing device
will be allowed to send a pre-recorded voice message or coded signal over a
primary trunk line or direct line into the Communications Center of the
Police Department.



      (2)   Panic or trouble alarms used to signal any type of
fight, disturbance or any other activity other than an actual or attempted
burglary or holdup will not be allowed.



   (D)   (1)   Persons owning or leasing an automatic dialing device
may have the device interconnected to a telephone line transmitting directly
to:



         (a)   A central station;



         (b)   A modified central station; or



         (c)   A licensed answering service.



      (2)   The relaying of messages by intermediate services to the
Police Department shall be over a signal channel circuit on a
person-to-person basis.



      (3)   The Police Chief may limit the number of signal channel
circuits that come into the communications center of the Police Department.



   (E)   No alarm system equipment, unless police-owned and operated,
shall transmit any message on the police base radio frequency.



   (F)   Every person who has on his or her premises under his or her
control or ownership an alarm system, audible or silent, shall, upon
notification that the alarm system is giving a signal, proceed within 20
minutes to the premises and render all necessary services. Provided, however,
that the owner of the premises may enter into an agreement with an alarm
business to respond in his or her stead.



(Prior Code, § 7-12-2)



§ 117.03  PERMIT REQUIRED; TYPES OF PERMITS.



   (A)   No person shall possess or use an alarm system without first
applying for and receiving an alarm system permit therefore in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter. The permit shall be kept on the premises
where the alarm system is located. The Police Chief shall issue an
appropriate identification number and establish requirements for its posting.



   (B)   No person shall engage in, conduct, or carry on an alarm
business without first applying for and receiving an alarm business permit
therefore in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. This includes a
central station, modified central station, and an answering service. The
permit shall be kept on the premises where the business is located. The
Police Chief shall issue an appropriate identification number and establish
requirement for its posting.



   (C)   No person shall engage in, conduct, or operate as an alarm
agent without first applying for and receiving an alarm agent permit
therefore in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.



      (1)   Every person engaged in the business of repairing,
servicing, altering, replacing, removing, designing, selling, leasing,
maintaining, or installing alarm systems shall carry on his or her person at
all times while so engaged a valid alarm agent permit and shall display the
permit to any police office upon request.



      (2)   It shall be a violation of this chapter for the
applicant to willfully fail to return an identification card to the issuing
agency or business upon termination of his or her employment with an alarm
business. It shall also be a violation of this chapter for the alarm business
to fail to return to the Police Chief an identification card issued by the
Police Chief upon termination of the employment of the alarm agent.



   (D)   No direct alarm system shall be permitted within the Police
Department except as is connected to an indicator panel installed in uniform
consoles with uniform operation within the communication facilities of the
Department pursuant to a permit issued in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter.



      (1)   An owner or lessee of an alarm system may authorize an
alarm business or alarm agent to connect the system to an indicator panel
installed in the communication facilities of the Police Department in
accordance with this chapter, upon first obtaining a permit therefore.



      (2)   If the location of the communication facilities of the
Police Department shall be changed at any time, the cost of moving any alarm
system or parts thereof shall be borne by permittees.



      (3)   The Police Chief may limit the number of permits and may
set standards and regulations governing direct alarm systems.



   (E)   The permit provisions contained in this section shall apply to
all existing alarm system as well as any future systems.



   (F)   Upon approval by the Chief of Police of applications for a
permit or for renewal thereof, the Chief shall endorse his or her approval
thereon and transmit the permit to the permittee. Permits shall be applied
for renewal on an annual basis.



(Prior Code, § 7-12-3)  Penalty, see § 117.99



§ 117.04  PERMIT APPLICATION.



   Applications for all permits required under this chapter shall be on a
form prescribed by the Chief of Police and may request information as is
necessary to evaluate and act upon the permit application. Applications shall
be accompanied by a non-refundable requisite fee as set forth in § 117.06.
The fee is established to cover part of the cost of investigating and
processing the applications and permits. The fee shall not be charged on
applications for existing alarm systems.



(Prior Code, § 7-12-4)



§ 117.05  INVESTIGATION; PERMIT DENIAL.



   (A)   Every application for an alarm business or alarm agent permit
shall require a picture and fingerprints of the applicant. The Police Chief
shall conduct an appropriate investigation of the applicant to determine
whether the permit shall be issued. The Police Chief may require additional
information of applicants which he or she deems necessary to conduct his or
her investigation. The permit shall be denied by the Chief of Police if:



      (1)   The character or reputation of the applicant is
determined to be inimical to the safety or general welfare of the community;



      (2)   The applicant for the alarm business permit or alarm
agent does not comply with the standards and regulations adopted pursuant to
this chapter;



      (3)   The applicant, his or her employee or agent, has
knowingly made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of a material
fact in the application for a permit; or



      (4)   The applicant has had a similar type permit previously
revoked for good cause within the past year unless the applicant can show a
material change in circumstances since the date of revocation.



   (B)   The permit shall be denied by the Police Chief if the alarm
system does not comply with the standards and regulations adopted pursuant to
this chapter. The permit shall be issued to the person owning, using, or
possessing the alarm system. If the permit is denied, the reasons for denial
shall be set forth in writing and provided to the applicant. If the basis for
denial can be corrected, the writing shall so state and shall explain how
these corrections may be made and set a reasonable time limit for making the
corrections. The notice of denial shall inform the applicant that he or she
may appeal the denial in accordance with provisions of this chapter, and set
forth the procedure for appeal.



(Prior Code, § 7-12-5)



§ 117.06  FEE.



   (A)   Permit fees under this chapter shall be paid to the City
Collector. The fees are as follows:



      (1)   For an alarm system permit: $50; and



      (2)   For an alarm business, central station, modified central
station, or telephone answering system permit: $50 annual fee payable in
advance of July 1 of each year.



   (B)   The city reserves the right to own all indicator panels and
accessory equipment for direct alarm systems located within the station. In
that case, each permittee, in addition to the annual permit fee, shall pay an
initial installation fee and an annual user fee, as the same may be
established by ordinance, and uniformly applied to cover the cost of the
maintenance of the facilities. In the event the city decides not to own the
equipment within the station, but to provide for its installation and
maintenance by a third party, it shall establish and regulate reasonable fees
and charges which may be charged permittees. All fees provided in division
(A)(1) to be charged by the city shall be payable on the date of installation
and shall cover the system until the resident or occupant changes.



   (C)   Regardless of the status of an alarm permit, the members of
the Police Department will always respond as promptly and effectively as
possible to any and all alarm actuations. However, there will be a service
charge for each false alarm that the Police Department responds to while the
alarm permit is under suspension or revocation. A fee of $25 will be assessed
for each false burglary alarm and a fee of $25 will be assessed for each
false holdup alarm that the Police Department responds to during this period.
This service charge will be deposited into the city’s General Citizens’
Fund. This service charge will not exempt the permit holder from the
violation penalty adopted pursuant to this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 7-12-6)



§ 117.07  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   (A)   The Police Chief, in the case of suspension, shall serve the
permittee with a written order of suspension which shall state the reasons
for the suspension. The order shall be effective immediately if personally
served, or 48 hours after the same has been deposited in the course of
transmission in the United States postal service. Immediately upon an order
becoming effective, the permittee shall discontinue the use of any alarm
system requiring a permit under this chapter and cease all operations
conducted under the authority of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter.



   (B)   (1)   The permittee shall have a period of ten days after
the issuance of a notice of suspension or revocation order to present to the
Chief of Police, or his or her designee, as to the circumstances surrounding
the incident which the permittee considers to be beyond the control of the
permittee or its alarm agent. The Chief shall have the authority to dismiss
the ticket upon good cause shown.



      (2)   Failure to file a letter of appeal within the ten days
shall constitute a waiver of appellant’s right to review, but the Chief, in
his or her discretion, may nevertheless grant the review.



      (3)   If the appellant disagrees with the decision of the
Chief, the appellant may have a hearing before the City Council on the matter.



   (C)   If any permit is revoked pursuant to this chapter, the
permittee shall surrender the permit to the Services Division of the Police
Department.



(Prior Code, § 7-12-11)  (Ord. O-11-009, passed 6-22-2011)



§ 117.08  LIMITATION OF CITY LIABILITY.



   The city shall take every reasonable precaution to assure that alarm
signals received by the city are given appropriate attention and are acted
upon with dispatch. Nevertheless, the city shall not be liable for any
defects in operation of any alarm devices or signal lines system, for any
failure or neglect to respond appropriately upon receipt of an alarm from a
source, nor for the failure or neglect of any person with a permit issued
pursuant to this chapter, in connection with the installation and operation
of equipment, the transmission of alarm signals or the delaying of the
signals. In the event the city finds it necessary to disconnect a defective
automatic protective device or signaling device, the city shall incur no
liability for the action.



(Prior Code, § 7-12-7)



§ 117.09  CONFLICT OF INTEREST.



   No employee of the Police Department nor member of any employee’s
immediate family shall have any interest, directly or indirectly, in any
alarm business within the limits of the city. No employee or member of his or
her immediate family shall be employed by an alarm business, subject to the
provisions of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 7-12-8)



§ 117.10  RESPONSE OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS.



   The Police Department will be governed by city ordinance regulating
burglar and holdup alarm businesses, systems, and users when responding to
any alarm for another jurisdiction.



(Prior Code, § 7-12-9)



§ 117.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person or business who violates any provision of this
chapter shall, in addition to any other penalty, be subject to a fine of not
less than $25 nor more than $750, subject to division (C)(5) below.



   (B)   In addition to a fine imposed in division (A) above, any
permit issued under this chapter may be suspended by the Police Chief for
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, for a reasonable period
of time, not to exceed seven days, or may be revoked completely.



   (C)   The following shall constitute grounds for suspension and/or
revocation of a permit issued under this chapter:



      (1)   Where an alarm system is knowingly activated by a
subscriber, his or her employee or agent, in a situation where no burglary or
robbery is actually in progress;



      (2)   Where the permittee, his or her employee or agent, has
knowingly made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of material
fact in the application for a permit or in any report or record required to
be filed with any city agency;



      (3)   Where any alarm business permittee or alarm agent is
charged with a crime involving moral turpitude or where the character,
reputation or moral integrity of the permit holder, or his or her employee,
is determined inimical to public safety or the general welfare of the
community;



      (4)   Where the permittee has had a similar type permit
previously revoked for good cause within the past year, unless the applicant
can show a material change in circumstances since the date of revocation; or



      (5)   Where an alarm system, while under a valid permit,
actuates excessive false alarms, it shall constitute a public nuisance. There
shall be no penalty for the first two false alarms by the system in any one
calendar year. Thereafter, there shall be a penalty for each false alarm for
the third, fourth, and fifth violations in the year in the amount of $50
each, or $25 if paid within 30 days of the issuance of the citation. For any
additional false alarms in the year, there shall be a penalty of $100 each,
or $50 if paid within 30 days of the issuance of the citation.



(Prior Code, § 7-12-10)



CHAPTER 118:  FINANCIAL INCENTIVES FOR NEW OR EXPANDING RETAIL BUSINESSES



Section



   118.01    Definitions



   118.02    Incentives



   118.03    Limitation; requirements



§ 118.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   EXISTING EXPANDING BUSINESS. All businesses subject to the Illinois
Retailers’ Occupation Tax Act, ILCS Ch. 35, Act 120, §§ 1 et seq. in
operation at the time of passage of this Ordinance which undertake to enlarge
or substantially modify their operation with the intent of drawing more
customers.  To include all incorporated areas of the City of Geneseo.



   EXISTING STRUCTURE.   A commercial, residential or storage building
constructed prior to August 12, 2014.



   NEW RETAIL BUSINESS.   All businesses subject to the Illinois
Retailers’ Occupation Tax Act, ILCS Ch. 35, Act 120, §§ 1 et seq., which
have not previously existed or done retail business in Geneseo.



   SALES TAX.   The tax known as the Illinois Retailers’ Occupation
Tax, set forth in ILCS Ch. 35, Act 120, §§ 1 et seq.



   UTILITIES.   The water, sewer and electric services provided by the
City of Geneseo to customers and billed according to applicable city
ordinances.



(Ord. O-14-109, passed 8-12-2014)



§ 118.02  INCENTIVES.



   (A)   The City of Geneseo may offer to all new retail businesses or
existing, expanding businesses in an existing structure located in any area
of the city one or more of the following financial incentives, subject to the
limits of a General Fund appropriation and payable from an account in the
General Fund:



      (1)   All or a portion of such business's sales taxes payable
to the city for two years from the date approved by the City Council.



      (2)   All or a portion of any sales taxes payable to the city
for construction materials used to improve an existing structure used as a
new or existing expanding retail business site which are paid by such
business for six months after such business is established, enlarged or
substantially modified. Construction materials shall include concrete,
lumber, floor coverings, wall coverings and paint.



      (3)   A rebate up to 20% of the utility charges of such
business, payable quarterly, for two years from the date approved by the City
Council.



      (4)   All or a portion of such business's real estate taxes
payable to the city for two years from the date approved by the City Council.



   (B)   The rebates set forth in divisions (A)(2) and (4) will not be
provided for such businesses that receive benefits of any tax increment
financing provisions.



(Ord. O-14-109, passed 8-12-2014)



§ 118.03  LIMITATION; REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   This chapter in no way limits the ability of the City Council
to offer incentives over and above those outlines in this ordinance if the
economic development project is of such size or importance to deserve greater
incentives.



   (B)   The City Council may adopt guidelines, rules and procedures
governing requests made pursuant to this chapter which may include
confirmation in writing from the business proving the amount of the taxes
paid by the business before authorizing the payments set forth in § 118.02
(A)(1), (2) and (4) above.  Such confirmation would include copies of
applicable retailers’ occupation tax returns to the State of Illinois and
real estate tax bills, with appropriate receipts.



   (C)   A business must be, and remain, current with all payments to
the City of Geneseo as a condition to be eligible for any incentives under
this chapter. The incentives awarded pursuant to this chapter are
non-transferable and are void with the transfer of ownership of the business.



(Ord. O-14-109, passed 8-12-2014)



CHAPTER 119:  FOOD TRUCKS



Section



   119.01   Definitions



   119.02   License required



   119.03   Effect on other laws



   119.04   Operation



   119.05   Exemption



 



   119.99   Penalty



§ 119.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   MERCHANT. The owner of a sales vehicle, operator and/or person
physically making sales from a sales vehicle.



   RETAIL STREET SALES or STREET SALES.  The sale of food products and
non-alcoholic beverages to the public intended for immediate consumption,
from a licensed and registered motor vehicle, push cart or pull-behind
trailer, including but not limited to ice cream trucks (hereinafter sales
vehicle) that is on a public highway or private land. Sales of other goods or
merchandise are prohibited under this chapter.



(Ord. O-16-169, passed 7-12-2016)



§ 119.02  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person shall engage in retail street sales without having
first obtained a license from the city for each sales vehicle. The license
shall apply to the specific location or locations or sites provided for in
the license.



   (B)   The annual fee for the license shall be established by
resolution for each sales vehicle and shall be valid from March 1 through the
last day of the immediately following February. A seven-day license may be
applied for instead of an annual license and the fee for such license shall
be established by resolution.  In the event a seven-day license is granted
and application for an annual license is made within 30 days of the
expiration of the seven-day license, then the fee for the annual license
shall be reduced by the fee paid for the seven-day license.



   (C)   The license fee shall not be prorated in the event a license
is awarded after March 1.



   (D)   Application for the license shall be made on forms provided by
the City Clerk and shall identify the location(s) or sites requested.



   (E)   The forms shall, among other things, require the license to
identify all individuals who will operate and/or provide service from each
sales vehicle.



   (F)   The owner or manager of each applicant for a license shall
submit to a background check at the applicant's cost.  In the case of ice
cream trucks, all persons conducting sales from the sales vehicle shall
submit to a background check at the applicant's cost.



   (G)   No person required to have a background check shall operate a
sales vehicle or provide any service in or from a sales vehicle who has not
been approved by the city.



   (H)   It is also a violation of this section for any owner of any
sales vehicle to allow any person who was not been approved by the city to
operate or work from the sales vehicle.



   (I)   In order to obtain a license, the applicant must provide
adequate evidence that the applicant has all applicable health and sanitation
licenses.



(Ord. O-16-169, passed 7-12-2016)



§ 119.03  EFFECT ON OTHER LAWS.



   The requirements of this chapter shall not affect any other laws or
ordinances of the city or another jurisdiction and each merchant shall, as a
condition of the license issued under this chapter, obtain and maintain all
other required licenses and permits under state or county law, ordinance,
regulation or guidelines.



(Ord. O-16-169, passed 7-12-2016)



§ 119.04  OPERATION.



   (A)   All sales vehicles shall be operated in such a manner so as
not to interfere with the flow of traffic. Prior to engaging in sales, the
sales vehicle shall be pulled as far to the right as possible, and all sales
shall only be made from the right side of such vehicle.



   (B)   Signage shall be in accordance with Chapter 8 of the Geneseo
Zoning Ordinance if off the sales vehicle.  On-vehicle signage will have no
size limitations. Neither the sales vehicle nor its signage may block any
traffic visibility in driveways or roadways.  All signage must be put away
at the end of each work day.



   (C)   Upon reasonable request by the city, any licensee shall
provide proof that it has submitted all required sales tax information for
sales in the city.



   (D)   No street sales will be conducted within 300 feet of an
established restaurant or active concession stand except with the consent in
writing of the restaurant or concession stand proprietor. Ice cream trucks
shall be exempt from this provision.



   (E)   Upon reasonable request by the city, any licensee shall
provide proof of automobile liability insurance where applicable to the
licensee's operations.



(Ord. O-16-169, passed 7-12-2016)



§ 119.05  EXEMPTION.



   Sales vehicles that are participating in a community event are exempt
from this chapter so long as they are part of and approved by the community
event sponsor. This exemption applies only to community events which are no
longer than a four-day event.



(Ord. O-16-169, passed 7-12-2016)



§ 119.99  PENALTY.



   Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to
a fine of $200. Each day that a violation continues shall be a distinct and
separate offense.



(Ord. O-16-169, passed 7-12-2016)



CHAPTER 120: ANNUAL BUSINESS REGISTRATION



Section



   120.01   Required



   120.02   Definition of business



   120.03   Exemptions



   120.04   Applications



   120.05   Registration deadlines



   120.06   Changes to registration



   120.07   Fees



 



   120.99   Penalties



§ 120.01  REQUIRED.



   Every business, as defined in this chapter, whether or not subject to
any licensing requirements of the city or of any other governmental agency,
shall annually register with the city in the manner and at the times
prescribed in this chapter.



(Ord. O-17-12, passed 4-11-2017)



§ 120.02  DEFINITION OF BUSINESS.



   For purposes of this chapter, the term BUSINESS shall include any and
all persons selling or providing any type of service or product. It shall
also mean any for-profit or not-for-profit entity, including, without
limitation, any sole proprietorship, partnership, limited liability company,
limited liability partnership, corporation, joint venture, association,
franchisee, or cooperative that leases or owns a building or space within a
building located in the city for occupational purposes. Businesses that
operate from distinct spaces or buildings with separate addresses shall be
deemed to be separate businesses regardless if such businesses are owned or
operated by the same sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation, joint
venture, association, franchisee, or cooperative.



(Ord. O-17-12, passed 4-11-2017)



§ 120.03  EXEMPTIONS.



   The registration requirements of this chapter shall not apply to
educational, governmental, religious, or political organizations. The
registration requirements of this chapter shall also not apply to home-based
businesses that do not require a special use zoning permit; home-based
businesses that do require a special use zoning permit are subject to this
chapter.  Exempt entities may register voluntarily. 



(Ord. O-17-12, passed 4-11-2017)



§ 120.04  APPLICATIONS.



   Annual business registration applications shall be on forms prepared
and supplied by the City Clerk's office.



(Ord. O-17-12, passed 4-11-2017)



§ 120.05  REGISTRATION DEADLINES.



   Every business subject to the regulations in this chapter shall renew
their registration on or before May 1 of each year. Each new business must
register prior to commencing operations.



(Ord. O-17-12, passed 4-11-2017; Ord. O-19-03, passed 4-9-2019)



§ 120.06  CHANGES TO REGISTRATION.



   Every business shall submit written notice of any change to the
information set forth in a previously submitted annual business registration
application to the city within 30 days of the occurrence of such change.



(Ord. O-17-12, passed 4-11-2017)



§ 120.07  FEES.



   Business registration fees shall be $10; however, any business that has
paid for and obtained another license from the city (e.g., contractor's
license, liquor license) shall be exempt from the business registration fee.
The fee is waived for charitable and other registered not-for-profit
organizations.



(Ord. O-17-12, passed 4-11-2017)



§ 120.99  PENALTIES.



   Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall subject the
violator to a penalty of $50 after a 30 days notice.



(Ord. O-17-12, passed 4-11-2017)



CHAPTER 121:  CABLE AND VIDEO REGULATIONS



Section




Cable/Video Service Provider Fee




   121.01   Definitions



   121.02   Cable/video service provider fee imposed



   121.03   PEG access carriage requirements



   121.04   Applicable principles



   121.05   No impact on other taxes due from holder



   121.06   Audit of cable/video service provider



   121.07   Late fees/payments




Cable and Video Customer Protection Law




   121.10   Customer service and privacy protection law



   121.11   Enforcement



   121.12   Customer credits



 



   121.99   Penalty



CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE



§ 121.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CABLE SERVICE.  As defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(6).



   COMMISSION.  The Illinois Commerce Commission.



   GROSS REVENUES.  All consideration of any kind or nature, including,
without limitation, cash, credits, property, and in-kind contributions
received by the holder for the operation of a cable or video system to
provide cable service or video service within the holder's cable service or
video service area within the city.



      (1)   GROSS REVENUES shall include the following:



         (a)   Recurring charges for cable or video service;



         (b)   Event-based charges for cable service or video
service, including, but not limited to, pay-per-view and video-on-demand
charges;



         (c)   Rental of set top boxes and other cable service or
video service equipment;



         (d)   Service charges related to the provision of cable
service or video service, including but not limited to activation,
installation, and repair charges;



         (e)   Administrative charges related to the provision of
cable service or video service, including but not limited to service order
and service termination charges;



         (f)   Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds
check charges, and other charges assessed to recover the costs of collecting
delinquent payments;



         (g)   A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the
holder or its affiliates pursuant to compensation arrangements for
advertising or for promotion or exhibition of any products or services
derived from the operation of the holder's network to provide cable service
or video service within the city. The allocation shall be based on the number
of subscribers in the city divided by the total number of subscribers in
relation to the relevant regional or national compensation arrangement;



         (h)   Compensation received by the holder that is
derived from the operation of the holder's network to provide cable service
or video service with respect to commissions that are received by the holder
as compensation for promotion or exhibition of any products or services on
the holder's network, such as a "home shopping" or similar channel, subject
to division (1)(i) below.



         (i)   In the case of a cable service or video service
that is bundled or integrated functionally with other services, capabilities,
or applications, the portion of the holder's revenue attributable to the
other services, capabilities, or applications shall be included in the gross
revenue unless the holder can reasonably identify the division or exclusion
of the revenue from its books and records that are kept in the regular course
of business;



         (j)   The service provider fee permitted by the Cable
and Video Customer Protection law, ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801(b).



      (2)   GROSS REVENUES do not include any of the following:



         (a)   Revenues not actually received, even if billed,
such as bad debt, subject to ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801(c)(1)(vi);



         (b)   Refunds, discounts, or other price adjustments
that reduce the amount of gross revenues received by the holder of the
state-issued authorization to the extent the refund, rebate, credit, or
discount is attributable to cable service or video service;



         (c)   Regardless of whether the services are bundled,
packaged, or functionally integrated with cable service or video service, any
revenues received from services not classified as cable service or video
service, including, without limitation, revenue received from
telecommunication services, information services, or the provision of
directory or Internet advertising, including yellow pages, white pages,
banner advertisement, and electronic publishing or any other revenues
attributed by the holder to non-cable service or non-video service in
accordance with the holder's books and records and records kept in the
regular course of business and any applicable laws, rules, regulations,
standards, or orders;



         (d)   The sale of cable services or video services for
resale in which the purchaser is required to collect the service provider fee
from the purchaser's subscribers to the extent the purchaser certifies in
writing that it will resell the service within the city and pay the fee
permitted by ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801(b) with respect to the service;



         (e)   Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed
upon the subscribers or the transaction by a city, state, federal, or any
other governmental entity and collected by the holder of the state-issued
authorization and required to be remitted to the taxing entity, including
sales and use taxes;



         (f)   Security deposits collected from subscribers;



         (g)   Amounts paid by subscribers to "home shopping" or
similar vendors for merchandise sold through any home shopping channel
offered as part of the cable service or video service.



      (3)   Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be included in
the calculation of gross revenues to the extent the treatment of the revenue
as revenue of the affiliate rather than the holder has the effect of evading
the payment of the fee permitted by ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801(b) which
would otherwise be paid by the cable service or video service.



   HOLDER.  A person or entity that has received authorization to offer
or provide cable or video service from the Commission pursuant to ILCS Ch.
220, Act 5, § 21-401.



   INCUMBENT CABLE OPERATOR.  A person or entity that provided cable
services or video services in the city under a franchise agreement with the
city pursuant to the Illinois Municipal Code, ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §
11-42-11, on January 1, 2007.



   SERVICE.  The provision of cable service or video service to
subscribers and the interaction of subscribers with the person or entity that
has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from
the Commission pursuant to ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-401.



   SERVICE PROVIDER FEE.  The amount paid under this chapter and ILCS Ch.
220, Act 5, § 21-801 by the holder to the city for the service areas within
its territorial jurisdiction.



   VIDEO SERVICE.  Video programming and subscriber interaction, if any,
that is required for the selection or use of such video programming services,
and which is provided through wireline facilities located at least in part in
the public right-of-way without regard to delivery technology, including
Internet protocol technology.  This definition does not include any video
programming provided by a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47
U.S.C. § 332(d) or any video programming provided solely as part of, and
via, service that enables users to access content, information, electronic
mail, or other services offered over the public Internet.



(Ord. O-17-26, passed 10-10-2017)



§ 121.02  CABLE/VIDEO PROVIDER FEE IMPOSED.



   (A)   Fee imposed. A service provider fee is hereby imposed on any
holder providing cable service or video service in the city.



   (B)   Amount of fee. The amount of the service provider fee imposed
hereby shall be 5% of the holder's gross revenues.



   (C)   Notice to the city.  Unless the holder has earlier sent
notice to the city pursuant to ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801(a), the holder
shall notify the city at least ten days prior to the date on which the holder
begins to offer cable service or video service in the city.



   (D)   Holder's liability.  The holder shall be liable for and pay
the service provider fee to the city.  The holder's liability for the fee
shall commence on the first day of the calendar month following 30 days after
receipt by the holder of the ordinance adopting this chapter. 



   (E)   Payment date.  The payment of the service provider fee shall
be due on a quarterly basis, 45 days after the close of the calendar
quarter.  If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is
postmarked. Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for
the calculation of the fee.



   (F)   Exemption.  The fee hereby imposed does not apply to cable
service or video service providers that have an existing franchise agreement
with the city, under ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-42-11, under which a franchise
fee is paid.



   (G)   Credit for other payments.  An incumbent cable operator that
elects to terminate an existing agreement pursuant to ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, §
21-301(c) with credit for prepaid franchise fees under that agreement may
deduct the amount of such credit from the fees that operator owes under
division (B) above.



(Ord. O-17-26, passed 10-10-2017)



§ 121.03  PEG ACCESS CARRIAGE REQUIREMENTS.



   On the date set forth in § 121.02(D), the holder shall:



   (A)   Designate the same amount of capacity on its network to
provide for public, education, and government access use, as an incumbent
cable operator was required to designate under its franchise terms in effect
with the city on January 1, 2007; and



   (B)   Retransmit to its subscribers the same number of public,
education, and government access channels as the incumbent cable operator was
retransmitting to subscribers on January 1, 2007.



(Ord. O-17-26, passed 10-10-2017)



§ 121.04  APPLICABLE PRINCIPLES.



   All determinations and calculations under this chapter shall be made
pursuant to generally accepted accounting principles.



(Ord. O-17-26, passed 10-10-2017)



§ 121.05  NO IMPACT ON OTHER TAXES DUE FROM HOLDER.



   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to exempt a holder
from any tax that is or may later be imposed by the city, including any tax
that is or may later be required to be paid by or through the holder with
respect to cable service or video service.  A state-issued authorization
shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the
city's simplified municipal telecommunications tax or any other tax as it
applies to any telecommunications service provided by the holder.  A
state-issued authorization shall not affect any requirement of the holder
with respect to payment of the local unit of government's 911 or E911 fees,
taxes or charges.



(Ord. O-17-26, passed 10-10-2017)



§ 121.06  AUDITS OF CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER.



   (A)   Audit requirement.  The audit requirements shall be those
described in ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-42-11.05.  No acceptance of amounts
remitted should be construed as an accord that the amounts are correct.



   (B)   Additional payments. Any additional amount due after an audit
shall be paid within 30 days after the municipality's submission of an
invoice for the sum.



(Ord. O-17-26, passed 10-10-2017)



§ 121.07  LATE FEES/PAYMENTS.



   All fees due and payments which are past due shall be governed by
ordinances adopted by the city pursuant to the Local Government Taxpayers'
Bill of Rights Act, ILCS Ch. 50, Act 45, §§ 1 et seq., including §§ 33.01
through 33.14, inclusive, of this Code of Ordinances.



(Ord. O-17-26, passed 10-10-2017)



CABLE AND VIDEO CUSTOMER PROTECTION LAW



§ 121.10  CUSTOMER SERVICE AND PRIVACY PROTECTION LAW.



   (A)   Adoption.  The regulations of ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 22-501
are hereby adopted by reference and made applicable to the cable or video
providers offering services within the city's boundaries.



   (B)   Amendments.  Any mandatory amendment to the Cable and Video
Customer Protection Law that becomes effective after the effective date of
this chapter shall be incorporated into this chapter by reference and shall
be applicable to cable or video providers offering services within the city's
boundaries.  However, any amendment that makes its provisions optional for
adoption by municipalities shall not be incorporated into this chapter by
reference without formal action by the corporate authorities of the city.



(Ord. O-17-26, passed 10-10-2017)



§ 121.11  ENFORCEMENT.



   The city does hereby pursuant to law declare its intent to enforce all
of the customer service and privacy protection standards of the Cable and
Video Customer Protection Law.



(Ord. O-17-26, passed 10-10-2017)



§ 121.12  CUSTOMER CREDITS.



   The city hereby adopts and incorporates by reference the schedule of
customer credits for violations provided for in the provisions of ILCS Ch.
220, Act 5, § 22-501(s).  Those credits shall be applied on the statement
issued to the customer for the next billing cycle following the violation or
following the discovery of the violation.  The cable or video provider is
responsible for proactively providing the credits and the customer is under
no obligation to request the credit.



(Ord. O-17-26, passed 10-10-2017)



§ 121.99  PENALTY.



   The city, pursuant to ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 22-501(r)(1), does hereby
declare that for any material breach of the standards and requirements of the
Cable and Video Customer Protection Law, as incorporated by reference in this
chapter, a cable or video provider shall be subject to monetary penalties
which shall not exceed $750 for each day of the material breach, and shall
not exceed $25,000 for each occurrence of a material breach per customer. 
Such penalties shall be in addition to the penalties provided in the Cable
and Video Customer Protection Law and shall not represent the city's
exclusive remedy for any material breach.  All monetary penalties shall
apply on a competitively neutral basis.



   (A)   Material breach means any substantial failure of a cable or
video provider to comply with service quality and other standards specified
in any provision of the Cable and Video Customer Protection Law.



   (B)   The city shall give the cable or video provider written notice
of any alleged material breaches of the law and allow such provider at least
30 days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material
breach.



   (C)   A material breach, for the purposes of assessing penalties,
shall be deemed to occur for each day that a material breach has not been
remedied by the cable or video service provider after the notice in division
(B) above.



   (D)   The City Council hereby delegates authority to levy penalties
to the City Administrator.



   (E)   Any decision of the City Administrator to levy penalties may
be appealed to the City Council, which shall conduct a hearing on the alleged
material breach and penalties levied therefore within 21 days following
receipt of the cable or video providers request for an appeal, which must be
filed within ten days of the City Administrator's decision.



(Ord. O-17-26, passed 10-10-2017)



TITLE XIII:  GENERAL OFFENSES



   Chapter



      130.   OFFENSES AGAINST THE PEACE



      131.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS



CHAPTER 130:  OFFENSES AGAINST THE PEACE



Section



   130.01   Disorderly conduct



   130.02   Discharge of firearms prohibited; discharge of blanks
permitted



   130.03   Provoking a disturbance



   130.04   Loud and unnecessary noise prohibited



 



   130.99   Penalty



§ 130.01  DISORDERLY CONDUCT.



   A person commits disorderly conduct when he or she knowingly:



   (A)   Commits any act in an unreasonable manner so as to
unnecessarily alarm or disturb another or to provoke a breach of peace;



   (B)   Intends to annoy another, makes a telephone call, whether or
not conversation thereby ensues;



   (C)   Transmits in any manner to the Fire Department of this city or
Fire Protection District within this city, a false alarm of fire, knowing at
the time of the transmission that there is not reasonable ground for
believing that the fire exists;



   (D)   Transmits in any manner to another a false alarm to the effect
that a bomb or other explosive of any nature is concealed in a place that its
explosion would endanger human life, knowing at the time of the transmission
that there is no reasonable ground for believing that a bomb or explosive is
concealed in the place;



   (E)   Enters upon the property of another and for a lewd or unlawful
purpose deliberately looks into a dwelling on the property through any window
or other opening in it; or



   (F)   Violates any other provision in this code of ordinances which
designates the offense as disorderly conduct.



(Prior Code, § 7-7-1)



§ 130.02  DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS PROHIBITED; DISCHARGE OF BLANKS PERMITTED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any firearms
within the corporate limits of the city, provided that:



      (1)   Duly authorized officers, when necessary for the proper
discharge of their duties, may discharge firearms;



      (2)   Citizens may participate in pigeon shoots when
necessary; and/or



      (3)   Members of a gun or rifle club, which maintains a gun or
rifle range located and constructed as to fully protect members of the public
from injury or annoyance, may discharge firearms on the gun or rifle range.



   (B)   Gunsmiths, whose applications are approved by the City
Council, or its designee and who obtain a permit to do so from the City
Clerk, may discharge firearms. The permit may be revoked at any time by the
City Council.



   (C)   It shall be lawful for persons to discharge blank cartridges
under proper supervision at special military events, veteran funerals,
parades, and sporting events. However, persons wishing to discharge blanks at
parades shall obtain prior approval of the Chief of Police.



(Prior Code, § 7-7-2)  (Ord. O-11-009, passed 6-22-2011)  Penalty, see §
130.99



§ 130.03  PROVOKING A DISTURBANCE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to challenge another to fight or to
threaten or traduce another, or indulge in any conduct toward another tending
to provoke a disturbance or breach of the peace or to use any profane,
obscene or offensive language in connection therewith; and any person so
violating the provisions hereof shall be deemed guilty of a violation hereof.



(Ord. O-12-034, passed 2-14-2012) Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.04  LOUD AND UNNECESSARY NOISE PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      NOISE. Any sound which unreasonably disturbs humans or which
causes or tends to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on
humans.



      NOISE DISTURBANCE. Any sound which either:



         (a)   Endangers or injures the safety or health of
humans or animals;



         (b)   Disturbs a reasonable person or normal
sensitivities; or



         (c)   Endangers or injures personal or real property.



   (B)   General. No person shall make or cause to be made any loud,
disturbing or unnecessary sounds or noise such as may tend to disturb a
person of ordinary sensibilities in or about any public street, alley or park
or any private residence between the hours of 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.



   (C)   Public address systems and amplifiers. No person shall use or
operate any P.A. system, amplifier or device which increases the volume of
voice, music or other sounds so loud as to disturb the public peace or the
quiet and peacefulness of the neighborhood from the hours of 10:00 p.m. until
6:00 a.m. unless an entertainment license has been approved and issued for
different hours.



   (D)   Construction and machinery noise. Except for city employees
and those contracted to do work for the city, between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m., no person shall do construction work or operate any chain saw,
lawn mower or any other loud machinery of a similar nature in a residential
area. In a commercial area the hours shall be between 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.
This section shall not apply to snow removal equipment.



(Ord. O-15-149, passed 8-11-2015)



§ 130.99  PENALTY.



   A person who violates a provision of this chapter is guilty of a
separate offense for each day or part of a day during which the violation is
committed, continued, or permitted. Each offense, upon conviction, is
punishable by a fine not to exceed $750.



(Prior Code, § 7-7-4)



CHAPTER 131:  OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS



Section



Gambling



   131.001   Gambling prohibited; exceptions



Obscenity



   131.015   Obscenity prohibited



   131.016   Definitions



   131.017   Sale to minors



Curfew



   131.030   Definitions



   131.031   Violation of curfew



   131.032   Exceptions



Alcohol



   131.045   Definition



   131.046   Public property prohibitions



   131.047   Possession or consumption upon private property



   131.048   Possession and/or consumption by minor



Drug Paraphernalia



   131.060   Definitions



   131.061   Possession of drug paraphernalia prohibited



   131.062   Manufacture or delivery of drug paraphernalia prohibited



   131.063   Advertisement of drug paraphernalia prohibited



   131.064   Regulation of synthetic alternative drugs



   131.065   Cannabis



Tobacco Possession by Minors



   131.075   Definitions



   131.076   Use or possession by minors on public property



   131.077   Restrictions on tobacco distribution



   131.078   Enforcement by school district personnel



 



   131.999   Penalty




GAMBLING




§ 131.001  GAMBLING PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to play for money or other
thing of value at any game of cards, dice, faro, roulette, billiards, or with
any other articles, instruments, or things whatsoever which may be used for
the purpose of playing or betting upon, or winning or losing money or other
article or thing of value, or to bet upon any game others may be playing.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep a common gaming
house or any building, booth, yard, garden, or other premises or to procure
or permit any person to frequent or come together to play for money or other
valuable thing at any game, or keep, or suffer to be kept, any poker, keno,
faro, or crap table, wheel of fortune, roulette, cards, or other instruments
or apparatus for the purpose of playing at any game or sport for money or
other thing of value, or knowingly rent any place for the purpose; provided,
however, that the finding of any tables, instruments, or apparatus upon the
premises shall be prima facie evidence that the owner or occupant thereof is
keeping a gaming house.



   (C)   Whoever shall be an inmate of any gambling house or room in
this city, or shall be in any way connected therewith, or shall frequent or
visit the same or be found therein or in any room where gaming is carried on
or permitted, shall be guilty of violation of this section and subject to the
fines hereafter set forth.



   (D)   Every clock, tape, and slot machine, or other machine or
device for the reception of money or chance, or upon the action of which
money is taken, hazarded, bet, won, or lost, is hereby declared a gambling
device and shall be subject to seizure, confiscation, and destruction under
order of the Mayor.



   (E)   Every owner, occupant, lessee, or other person in possession
of any premises upon which any gambling device may be located, and every
person in the use, operation, lease, or other possession of the same, shall
be guilty of a violation of this section and subject to the fines hereinafter
set forth.



   (F)   The terms and provisions of this section do not apply to
charities and public service organizations operating raffles or other games
of chance under the authorization and approval of state and local law.



(Prior Code, § 7-1-2)  Penalty, see § 131.999




OBSCENITY




§ 131.015  OBSCENITY PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful to sell, offer for sale, or exhibit any
publications or other article which is obscene.



(Prior Code, § 7-1-3)  Penalty, see § 131.999



§ 131.016  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   OBSCENE.  A thing, if considered as a whole in relation to prevailing
standards within the community, its predominant appeal is to prurient
interest, that is a shameful or morbid interest in nudity, sex, or excretion,
and, if it goes substantially beyond customary limits or candor in
description or representation of the matters.



   PUBLICATION or OTHER ARTICLE.  Any representation, description, or
embodiment whatsoever, including, but not limited to:



      (1)   Writings and pictures, whether or not printed;



      (2)   Photographs and photographic film, developed or
undeveloped;



      (3)   Phonograph records and other sound recordings; or



      (4)   Sculptures.



   SALE or EXHIBITION.  Circulation, distribution, giving away, and all
other forms of dissemination.



(Prior Code, § 7-1-3)



§ 131.017  SALE TO MINORS.



   The sale or exhibition to any person under the age of 18 years of any
obscene publication or other article, as judged with reference to ordinary
persons of the age of the person to whom the sale or exhibition is made, is
declared to be a public nuisance and is prohibited.



(Prior Code, § 7-1-3)  Penalty, see § 131.999




CURFEW




§ 131.030  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CURFEW HOURS.  11:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday,
or Thursday until 6:00 a.m. of the following day, and 12:00 midnight on any
Friday or Saturday until 6:00 a.m. of the following day.



   EMERGENCY.  An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the
resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is
not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any
situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss
of life.



   ESTABLISHMENT.  Any privately-owned place of business operated for a
profit to which the public is invited including, but not limited to, any
place of amusement or entertainment.



   GUARDIAN.  A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the
person of a minor, or, a public or private agency with whom a minor has been
placed by a court.



   MINOR.  Any person under 17 years of age.



   OPERATOR.  Any individual, firm, association, partnership, or
corporation operating, managing, or conducting any establishment. The term
includes the members or partners of an association or partnership and the
officers of a corporation.



   PARENT.  A person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, or
step-parent of another person, or at least 18 years of age and authorized by
a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor.



   PUBLIC PLACE.  Any place to which the public or a substantial group of
the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways,
and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office
buildings, transport facilities, and shops.



   REMAIN.  To linger or stay, or, fail to leave premises when requested
to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator, or other person in
control of the premises.



   SERIOUS BODILY INJURY.  Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk
of death, or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or
protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.



(Prior Code, § 7-7-3)



§ 131.031  VIOLATION OF CURFEW.



   (A)   A minor commits an offense if he or she remains in any public
place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew
hours.



   (B)   A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if he or
she knowingly permits, or by insufficient control allows, the minor to remain
in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city
during curfew hours.



   (C)   The owner, operator, or any employee of an establishment
commits an offense if he or she knowingly allows a minor to remain upon the
premises of the establishment during curfew hours.



(Prior Code, § 7-7-3)



§ 131.032  EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   Exception to the offense of curfew shall consist of any of the
following:



      (1)   Accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian;



      (2)   On an errand at the direction of the minor’s parent or
guardian, without any detour or stop;



      (3)   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;



      (4)   Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or
returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;



      (5)   Involved in an emergency;



      (6)   On the sidewalk abutting the minor’s residence, or
abutting the residence of a next door neighbor if the neighbor did not
complain to the Police Department about the minor’s presence;



      (7)   Attending an official school, religious, or other
recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic
organization, or another similar entity that takes the responsibility for the
minor, or, going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an
official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by
adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization, or another similar
entity that takes responsibility for the minor;



      (8)   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the
United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of
speech, and the right of assembly; and/or



      (9)   Married or had been married or is an emancipated minor
under the Emancipation of Mature Minors Act, as amended.



   (B)   It is a defense to prosecution under § 131.031(C) that the
owner, operator, or employee of an establishment promptly notified the Police
Department that a minor was present on the premises of the establishment
during curfew hours and refused to leave.



   (C)   Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a
police officer shall ask the apparent offender’s age and reason for being
in the public place. The officer shall not make further inquiries or subject
the apparent offender to breath, urine, or other tests, and shall not issue a
citation or make an arrest under this section unless the officer reasonably
believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any response and
other circumstances, no defense in divisions (A) or (B) above is present.



(Prior Code, § 7-7-3)  Penalty, see § 131.999




ALCOHOL




§ 131.045  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR.  All spirits, wine, beer, ale, or other liquor
containing more than 0.5% of alcohol by volume, which is fit for beverage
purposes.



(Prior Code, § 7-9-1)



§ 131.046  PUBLIC PROPERTY PROHIBITIONS.



   (A)   The consumption of any alcoholic beverage upon public
sidewalks, public thoroughfares, public streets, public highways, public
parks, and all other public areas within the city limits is hereby prohibited
unless part of an approved Class F Special Event or Class H Special Use
license stated in §§ 110.19 and 110.37.



   (B)   The possession of any alcoholic beverage, except in the
original package or container and with the seal unbroken, upon public
sidewalks, public thoroughfares, public streets, public highways, public
parks, and all other public areas within the city limits is hereby prohibited.



   (C)   The transportation, carrying, possession, or having of any
alcoholic beverage within the passenger area of any motor vehicle, except in
the original package or container and with the seal unbroken, upon the public
thoroughfares, public streets, and public highways is hereby prohibited.



(Prior Code, § 7-9-2)  (Ord. O-15-141, passed 5-12-2015)  Penalty, see §
131.999



§ 131.047  POSSESSION OR CONSUMPTION UPON PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to have any alcoholic
liquor in his or her possession, or to consume any alcoholic liquor upon any
private property within the city, without the consent of the persons or
entity that owns the property. For the purposes of this section, PRIVATE
PROPERTY means all property not owned by the city, including, but not limited
to, property owned by any school district or any subdivision thereof.



   (B)   The city and the Police Department are granted the right to
enforce this section upon receiving a complaint from the owner of private
property that a violation hereof has occurred. All fines collected in the
enforcement of this section shall belong to the city.



(Prior Code, § 7-9-3)  Penalty, see § 131.999



§ 131.048  POSSESSION AND/OR CONSUMPTION BY MINOR.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years
to have any alcoholic liquor in his or her possession or to consume any
alcoholic liquor.



   (B)   This section does not apply to:



      (1)   Possession by a person making a delivery of alcoholic
liquor pursuant to the order of the minor person’s parent or place of
employment;



      (2)   Possession, consumption, or dispensing of alcoholic
liquor in the performance of a religious service; or



      (3)   Consumption of alcoholic liquor by a minor person in the
privacy of a home under the direct supervision and control of the parent or
parents of the minor.



(Prior Code, § 7-9-4)  Penalty, see § 131.999




DRUG PARAPHERNALIA




§ 131.060  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.  All equipment, products and materials of
any kind which are used or intended for use in planting, propagating,
cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting,
producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging,
storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise
introducing into the human body a controlled substance in violation of ILCS 
Ch. 720, Act 550, §§ 100 et seq., known as the Cannabis Control Act, and
ILCS Ch. 720, Act 570, §§ 1 et seq., known as the Illinois Controlled
Substances Act, (hereinafter referred to as Acts 550 and 570). It includes,
but is not limited to:



         (a)   Kits used, or intended for use, in manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing, or preparing controlled
substances;



         (b)   Isomerization devices used, or intended for use,
in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled
substance;



         (c)   Testing equipment used, or intended for use, in
identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of
controlled substances;



         (d)   Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine
hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose and lactose, used, or intended for
use, in cutting controlled substances;



         (e)   Separation gins and sifters used, or intended for
use, in removing twigs and seeds from or in otherwise cleaning or refining,
marijuana;



         (f)   Hypodermic syringes, needles, and other objects
used, or intended for use, in parenterally injecting controlled substances
into the human body; and



         (g)   Objects used, or intended for use, in ingesting,
inhaling, or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish, or hashish
oil into the human body, such as:



            1.   Metal, wood, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic,
or ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads,
or punctured metal bowls;



            2.   Carburetion tubes and devices;



            3.   Water pipes;



            4.   Smoking and carburetion masks;



            5.   Roach clips, meaning paper clips, alligator
clips, hairpins, or other similar objects that have been altered by the
defendant or prior to or while in the possession of the defendant so that
there exists a handle attached to the object at an angle between 45 degrees
and 135 degrees so that the alteration would facilitate a person’s holding
of burning materials such as a marijuana cigarette that has become too small
or too short to be held by the fingers, and so that the alteration prohibits
the use of the object for its normal function;



            6.   Cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;



            7.   Chamber pipes;



            8.   Carburetor pipes;



            9.   Electric pipes;



            10.   Air-driven pipes;



            11.   Chillums;



            12.   Bongs; and



            13.   Ice pipes or chillers.



   (B)   In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a
court or other authority should consider, in addition to all other logically
relevant factors, the following:



      (1)   Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the
object concerning its use;



      (2)   Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or of anyone in
control of the object, under any state or federal law relating to any
controlled substance;



      (3)   The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a
direct violation by the objects’ owner or person in control of the object,
of Acts 550 and 570;



      (4)   The proximity of the object to controlled substances
owned by the objects’ owner or person in control of the object;



      (5)   The existence of any residue of controlled substances on
the object;



      (6)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of the
owner or of anyone in control of the object to deliver it to persons whom he
or she knows intend to use the object to facilitate a violation of Acts 550
and 570 shall not prevent a finding that the object is intended for use, or
designed for use, or designed for use as drug paraphernalia;



      (7)   Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object
concerning its use;



      (8)   Descriptive materials accompanying the object which
explain or depict its use;



      (9)   National and local advertising concerning its use;



      (10)   The manner in which the object is displayed for sale;



      (11)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales
of the objects to the total sales of the business enterprise; and



      (12)   Expert testimony concerning its use.



(Prior Code, § 7-10-1)



§ 131.061  POSSESSION OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA PROHIBITED.



   It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with intent to use,
drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest,
manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze,
pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise
introduce into the human body, a controlled substance in violation of Acts
550 and 570.



(Prior Code, § 7-10-2)  Penalty, see § 131.999



§ 131.062  MANUFACTURE OR DELIVERY OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA PROHIBITED.



   It is unlawful for any person to deliver, or possess with interest to
deliver, drug paraphernalia, knowing that it will be used to plant,
propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce,
process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal,
inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body, a
controlled substance in violation of Acts 550 and 570.



(Prior Code, § 7-10-3)  Penalty, see § 131.999



§ 131.063  ADVERTISEMENT OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA PROHIBITED.



   It is unlawful for any person to place in any newspaper, magazine,
handbill, or other publication offered for sale within the city, any
advertisement, knowing that the purpose of the advertisement is to promote
the sale within the city of objects designed or intended for use as drug
paraphernalia.



(Prior Code, § 7-10-4)  Penalty, see § 131.999



§ 131.064  REGULATION OF SYNTHETIC ALTERATIVE DRUGS.



   (A)   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning:



      (1)   A product containing a synthetic alternative drug means
any product containing a synthetic cannabinoid, stimulant or
psychedelic/hallucinogen, as those terms are defined herein such as, but not
limited to, the examples of brand names or identifiers shown below:



 




2010

 
Freedom
 
K2 Silver


8-Ball
 
Fully Loaded
 
K2 Solid Sex on the Mountain


Aztec Gold
 
Funky Monkey
 
K2 Solid Sex on the Mountain


Aztec Midnight Wind Tezcatlipoca
 
Funky Monkey XXXX
 
K2 Standard


Back Draft
 
G Four
 
K2 Strawberry


Bad 2 the Bone
 
G Greenies Caramel Crunch
 
K2 Summit


Banana Cream Nuke
 
Genie
 
K2 Summit Coffee Wonk


Bayou Blaster
 
Gold Spirit Spice
 
K2 Thai Dream


Black Diamond
 
Green Monkey Chronic Salvia
 
K2 Ultra


Black Magic Salvia
 
Greenies Strawberry
 
K2 Watermelon


Black Mamba
 
Heaven Improved
 
K3


Blueberry Hayze
 
Heavenscent Suave
 
K3 Blueberry


Bombay Blue
 
Humboldt Gold
 
K3 Cosmic Blend


Buzz
 
Jamacian Gold
 
K3 Dusk


C3
 
Jamacian Gold
 
K3 Grape


C4 Herbal Incense
 
K Royal
 
K3 Heaven Improved


Caneff
 
K1 Orbit
 
K3 Heaven Legal


Cherry Bomb
 
K2
 
K3 Kryptonite


Chill X
 
K2 (unknown variety)
 
K3 Legal


Chronic Spice
 
K2 Amazonian Shelter
 
K3 Legal - Original (Black)


Cill Out
 
K2 Amazonian Shelter
 
K3 Legal- Earth (silver) IC3


Citrus
 
K2 Blonde
 
Legal- Sea (silver) IC3


Colorado Chronic
 
K2 Blue
 
Legal- Sun (Black)


Dal3lock
 
K2 Blueberry
 
K3 Mango


Dark Night II
 
K2 Citron
 
K3 Original


Demon
 
K2 Cloud 9
 
K3 Original Improved


Diamond Spirit
 
K2 Kryptonite
 
K3 Strawberry


Dragon Spice
 
K2 Latte
 
K3 Sun


D-Rail
 
K2 Mellon
 
K3 Sun


Dream
 
K2 Mint
 
Improved K3 Sun


Earthquake
 
K2 Orisha Black Magic Max
 
Legal K3 XXX


Eruption Spice
 
K2 Orisha Max
 
K4 Bubble Bubble


Euphoria
 
K2 Orisha Regular
 
K4 Gold


EXSES Platinum Strawberry
 
K2 Orisha Super
 
K4 Purple Haze


EXSES
 
K2 Orisha White Magic Super
 
K4 Silver


EX-SES Platinum
 
K2 Peach
 
K4 Summit


EX-SES Platinum Blueberry
 
K2 Pina Colada
 
K4 Summit Remix


EX-SES Platinum Cherry
 
K2 Pineapple
 
Kind Spice


EX-SES Platinum Strawberry
 
K2 Pineapple Express
 
K1 Gravity


EX-SES Platinum Vanilla
 
K2 Pink
 
K1 Orbit


Fire Bird Ultimate Strength
 
K2 Pink Panties
 
K2 Sex


Cinnamon Forest Humus
 
 
 
 


Legal Eagle
 
Potpourri Gold
 
Stinger


Legal Eagle Apple Pie
 
Pulse
 
Summer Skyy


Love Potion 69
 
Rasta Citrus Spice
 
Super Kush


Love Strawberry
 
Rebel Spice
 
Super Summit


Magic Dragon Platinum
 
Red Bird
 
Swagger Grape


Magic Gold Magic
 
S1 Swerve
 
SYN Chill


Magic Silver
 
Samurai Spirit
 
SYN Incense Lemon Lime


Magic Spice
 
Sativah
 
SYN Incense Smooth


Mega Bomb
 
Scope Vanilla
 
SYN Incense Spearmint


Mid-Atlantic Exemplar
 
Scope Wildberry
 
SYN Lemon Lime


Mid-Atlantic Exemplar (K2 Summit)
 
Sence
 
SYN Lemon Lime #2


Midnight Chill
 
Shanti Spice
 
SYN Smooth


MNGB Almond Vanilla
 
Shanti Spice Blueberry
 
WYN Spearmint


MNGB Peppermint
 
Silent Black
 
SYN Spearmint #2


MNGB Pinata Coloda
 
Skunk
 
SYN Suave


MNGB Spear Mint
 
Smoke
 
SYN Swagg


MNGB Tropical Thunder
 
Smoke Plus
 
SYN Vanilla


Moe Joe Fire
 
Space
 
SYN Vanilla #2


Mojo
 
Spice Arctic Strategy
 
Texas Gold


Mr. Smiley's
 
Spice Diamond
 
Time Warp


MTN-787
 
Spice Gold
 
Tribal Warrior


Mystery
 
Spice Gold 2
 
Ultra Cloud 10


Naughty Nights
 
Spice Silver
 
Unknown Cigarette


New Improved K3
 
Spice Tropical Synergy
 
Utopia


New Improved K3 Cosmic Blend
 
SPicey Regular XXX Blueberry
 
Utopia-Blue Berry


New Improved K3 Dynamite
 
Spicey Regular XXXStrawberry
 
Voo Doo Remix (black package)


New Improved K3 Kryptonite
 
Spicey UltraStrong XXXStrawberry
 
Voo Doo Remix (orange package)


New K3 Earth
 
Spicey Ultra Strong XXXVanilla
 
VooDoo Child


New K3 Heaven
 
Spicey XXX
 
VooDoo Magic


New K3 Improved
 
Spicey Ultra StrongXXXVanilla
 
VooDoo Remix


New K3 Sea Improved
 
Spicylicious
 
Who Dat


New-Kron Bomb
 
Spike 99
 
Who Dat Herbal Incense


Nitro
 
Spike 99 Ultra
 
Wicked X


Ocean Blue
 
Spike 99 Ultra Blueberry
 
Winter Boost


POW
 
Spike 99 Ultra Cherry
 
Wood Stock


Pep pourri Love Strawberry
 
Spike 99 Ultra Strawberry
 
Xtreme Spice


Pep pourri Original Spearmint
 
Spike Diamond
 
Yucatan Fire


Pep pourri Twisted Vanilla
 
Spike Gold
 
Yucatan Fire 2


Pep pourri X Blueberry
 
Spike Maxx
 
Zombie World


Paradise
 
Spike Silver
 
 


Pink Tiger
 
Spike 99
 
 


Potpourri
 
 
 
 




 



      (2)   Synthetic cannabinoid means any laboratory-created
compound that functions similar to the active ingredient in marijuana,
tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), including but not limited to, any quantity of a
natural or synthetic material, compound, mixture, preparation, substance and
their analog (including isomers, esters, ethers, salts, and salts of isomers)
containing a cannabinoid receptor agonist, such as:



         (a)   JWH-007 (1-pentyl-2-methyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole)



         (b)   JWH-015 (2-Methyl-1-propyl-1
H-indol-3-yl)-1naphthalenylmethanone



         (c)   JWH-018 (1-pentyl-3-(1-naphthpyl)indole



         (d)   JWH-019 (1-hexyl-3-(naphthalene-1-oyl)indole



         (e)   JWH-073
(naphthalene-1-yl-(1-butylindol-3-yl)methanone



         (f)   JWH-081
(4-methoxynaphthalen-1-yl-(1-pentylindol-3-yl)methanone)



         (g)   JWH-098
(4-methoxynaphthalen-1-yl-(1-pentyl-2-methyfindol-3-yl)methanone)



         (h)   JWH-122 (1-pentyl-3-(4-methyl-1-naphthoyl)indole)



         (i)   JWH-164
(7-methoxynaphthalen-1-yl-(1-pentylindol-3-yl)methanone



         (j)   JWH-200
(1-(2-morpholin-4-ylethyl-3-yl)-naphthalen-1-ylmethanone)



         (k)   JWH-203
(2-(2-chloropheny1)-1-(1-pentylindol-3-0ethan one



         (l)   JWH-210
(4-ethylnaphthalen-1-0-(1-pentylindol-3-yl)methanone



         (m)   JWH-250 (1-pentyl-3-(2-methoxyphenylacetyl)indole)



         (n)   JWH-251 (1-pentyl-3-(2-methylphenylacetyl)indole)



         (o)   JWH-398 (1-pentyl-3-(4-chloro-1-naphthoyl)indole)



         (p)   HU-210
((6aR,10aR)-9-(Hydroxymethyl)-6,6-dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)-6a, 7,
10,10a-tetrahydrobenzo [c]chromen-1-ol)



         (q)   HU-211 
((6aS,10aS)-9-(Hydroxymethyl)-6,6-dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)-6a, 7,
10,10a-tetrahydrobenzo c]chromen-1-ol)



         (r)   HU-308
([(1R,2R,5R)-2-[2,6-dimethoxy-4-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)phenyl]-7,7-dimethyl-4-
bicyclo[3.1.1]hept-3-enyl]methanol)



         (s)   HU-331
((3-hydroxy-2-[(1R,6R)-3-methyl-6-(1-methylethenyl)-2-cyclohexen-1-yl]-5-
pentyl-2,5-cyclohexadiene-1,4-dione)



         (t)   CP 55,940
(2-[(1R,2R,5R)-5-hydroxy-2-(3-hydroxypropyl)cyclohexyl]-5-(2-
methyloctan-2-yl)phenol)



         (u)   CP 47,497
(2-[(1R,3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-5-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)phenol) and its
homolouges



         (v)   WIN 55,212-2
((R)-(+)-[2,3-Dihydro-5-methyl-3-(4-morpholinylmethyl) pyrrolo
[1,2,3-de)-1,4-benzoxazin-6-yl]-1-nepthalenylmethanone)



         (w)   RCS-4
((4-methoxyphenyl)(1-pentyl-1H-indol-3-yl)methanone)



         (x)   RCS-8
(1-(1-(2-cyclohexylethyl)-1H-indol-3-yl)-2-(2-nnethoxyphenyl)ethanone)



      (3)   Synthetic stimulant means any compound that mimics the
effects of any federally controlled Schedule I substances such as cathinone,
methcathione, MDMA and MDEA, including, but not limited to, any quantity of a
natural or synthetic material, compound, mixture, preparation, substance and
their analog (including salts, isomers, and salts of isomers) containing
substances which have a stimulant effect on the central nervous system, such
as:



         (a)   3-Fluoromethcathinone



         (b)   4-Fluoromethcathinone (other name: flephedrone)



         (c)   3,4-Methylenedioxymethcathinone (other name:
methylone, MDMC)



         (d)   3,4-Methylendeioxypyrovalerone (other name: MDPV)



         (e)   4-Methylmethcathinon (other names: mephedrone,
4-MMC)



         (f)   4-Methoxymethcathinone (other names: methedrone,
bk-PMMA, PMMC)



         (g)   4-Ethylmethcathinone (other name: 4-EMC)



         (h)   Ethcathinone



         (i)   Beta-keto-N-methylbenzodioxyolylpropylamine (other
names: butylone, bk-MBDB)



         (j)   Napthylpyrovalerone (other names: naphyrone, NRG-1)



         (k)   N,N-dimethylcathinone (other name: metamfepramone)



         (l)   Alpha-pyrrolidinopropiophenone (other name:
alpha-ppp)



         (m)   4-methoxy-alpha-pyrrolidinopropiophenone (other
name: MOPPP)



         (n)   3,4-methylemedioxy-alpha-pyrrolidinopropiophenone
(other name: MDPPP)



         (o)   Alpha-pyrrolidinovalerophenone (other name:
alpha-PVP)



         (p)   6,7-kihydro-5H-indeno(5,6-d)-1,3-dioxal-6-amine)
(other name: MDAI)



         (q)   Any compound that is structurally derived from
2-amino-1-phenyl-1-propanone by modification or substitution in any of the
following ways:



            1.   In the phenyl ring to any extent with alkyl,
alkoxy, alkylenedioxy, haloalkyl, or halide substituents, whether or not
further substituted in the phenyl ring by one or more other univalent
substituents;



            2.   At the three-position with an alkyl
substituent;



            3.   At the nitrogen atom with alkyl, dialkyl,
benzyl, or methoxybenzyl groups;



            4.   Or by inclusion of the nitrogen atom in a
cycle structure.



      (4)   Synthetic psychedelic/hallucinogen means any compound
that mimics the effects of any federally controlled Schedule I substance,
including but not limited to, any quantity of a natural or synthetic
material, compound, mixture, preparation, substance and their analog
(including salts, isomers, esters, ethers and salts of isomers) containing
substances which have a psychedelic/hallucinogenic effect on the central
nervous system and/or brain, such as:



         (a)   2-(2,5Dimethoxy-4-ethylphenyl)ethanamine (2C-E);



         (b)   2-(2,5-dimethoxy-4-methylphenyl)ethanamine (2C-D);



         (c)   2-(4-Chloro-2,5-dimethoxyphenyl)ethanamine (2C-C);



         (d)   2-(4-lodo-2,5-dimethoxyphenyl)ethanamine (2C-I);



         (e)   2-(4-Ethylthio)-2,5-dimethoxyphenyi)ethanamine
(2C-T-2);



         (f)   2-(4-lsopropylthio)-2,5-dimethoxyphenyl)ethanamine
(2C-T-4);



         (g)   2-(2,5-Dimethoxyphenyl)ethanamine (2C-H);



         (h)   2-(2,5-Dimethoxy-4-nitro-phenyl)ethanamine(2C-N);



         (i)   2-(2,5-Dimethoxy-4-(n)-propylphenyl)ethanamine(2C-P)
.



   (B)   Sale or delivery. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell,
offer for sale or deliver any product containing a synthetic cannabinoid,
stimulant or psychedelic/hallucinogen.



   (C)   Possession. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly
possess a product containing a synthetic cannabinoid, stimulant or
psychedelic/hallucinogen.



   (D)   Use. It shall be unlawful for any person to be under the
influence of a synthetic cannabinoid, stimulant or psychedelic/hallucinogen.



(Ord. O-12-035, passed 2-14-2012)



§ 131.065  CANNABIS.



   (A)   The terms used herein shall be defined as set forth in the
Illinois Cannabis Control Act, ILCS Ch. 720, Act 550, § 3.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to possess
cannabis within the city.



   (C)   Any person violating this section by knowingly possessing
cannabis in an amount of ten grams or less shall be subject to the provisions
of § 10.99 of this Code.



(Ord. O-16-177, passed 10-11-2016)




TOBACCO POSSESSION BY MINORS




§ 131.075  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   MINOR.  Any person under 18 years of age.



   PUBLIC AREAS.  Any street, sidewalk, or other public right-of-way or
place, park, or other public place including the quasi-public area in front
of or adjacent to any store, shop, restaurant, luncheonette, or other place
of business, and also including parking lots or other vacant property not
owned or under the control of the person charged with the violation of this
subchapter.



   PUBLIC SCHOOL.  A public school or school offering general education
courses the same as ordinarily given in a public school, or a private
preschool, play school, special curriculum school, and any other private
school.



   TOBACCO AND NICOTINE PRODUCTS.  Any substance containing tobacco leaf
or nicotine, or alternative nicotine products, including, but not limited to,
cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco, or dipping tobacco,
vapor cigarettes or e-cigarettes.



(Prior Code, § 7-11-1)  (Ord. O-15-135, passed 3-10-2015)



§ 131.076  USE OR POSSESSION BY MINORS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.



   (A)   The use or consumption of tobacco or nicotine, or nicotine
alternative products by minors upon any public sidewalks, public
thoroughfares, public streets, public highways, public parks, or any property
of a public school, or any other public areas within the city limits is
hereby prohibited.



   (B)   The possession of any tobacco or nicotine, or alternative
nicotine products by minors while upon any public sidewalks, public
thoroughfares, public streets, public highways, public parks, or any property
of a public school, or any other public areas within the city limits is
hereby prohibited.



(Prior Code, § 7-11-2)  (Ord. O-15-135, passed 3-10-2015)  Penalty, see §
131.999



§ 131.077  RESTRICTIONS ON TOBACCO DISTRIBUTION.



   It shall be unlawful for any licensee, as set forth in Chapter 114 of
this code, or any person in the business of selling or otherwise promoting or
advertising tobacco or nicotine products, or any employee or agent of any
licensee or person in the course of the licensee’s or person’s business,
to distribute, give away or deliver tobacco products free of charge to any
person upon any public sidewalks, public thoroughfares, public streets,
public highways, public parks, or any property of a public school, or any
other public areas within the city limits.



(Prior Code, § 7-11-3)  (Ord. O-15-135, passed 3-10-2015)  Penalty, see §
131.999



§ 131.078  ENFORCEMENT BY SCHOOL DISTRICT PERSONNEL.



   The following appointed officials of any public school shall have
authority to sign all complaints and charge any violations of this subchapter
that take place upon school property: Principal, Assistant Principal, and
Dean of Students.



(Prior Code, § 7-11-4)



§ 131.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   Any person found guilty of a violation of § 131.001 shall be
liable for a fine of not less than $25 nor more than $750.



(Prior Code, § 7-1-2)



   (C)   (1)   Any person who violates the provisions of §§
131.015 through 131.017 shall be subject to a fine not less than $25 nor more
than $750, except that the minimum fine for a violation involving a sale or
exhibiting obscene material to a person under the age of 18 years shall be
$100. Each day that the obscene material is offered for sale or exhibited
shall constitute a separate offense.



      (2)   Any person who, with knowledge of the nature of contents
thereof, sells, offers to sell, exhibits, or offers to exhibit to any other
person any obscene publication or other article, as judged with reference to
ordinary adults, shall be fined an amount not to exceed $200 for each offense.



(Prior Code, § 7-1-3)



   (D)   A person who violates a provision of §§ 131.030 through
131.032 is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day during
which the violation is committed, continued, or permitted. Each offense, upon
conviction, is punishable by a fine not to exceed $750.



(Prior Code, § 7-7-4)



   (E)   Any person found in violation of §§ 131.045 through 131.048
shall be subject to a fine of not less than $25 nor more than $750. In
addition to or as an alternative to the imposition of the fine, the offender
may be ordered to perform public service work not to exceed 20 hours.



(Prior Code, § 7-9-5)



   (F)   (1)   Any person who violates any provision of §§ 131.060
through 131.063 shall be subject to a fine of not less than $25 nor more than
$750.



      (2)   Any person who keeps for sale, offers for sale, sells,
or delivers for any commercial consideration any item which that person
knows, or, under all of the circumstances, reasonably should have known, to
be drug paraphernalia, commits a business offense for which a fine of $500
shall be imposed for each item.



      (3)   Any store, place, or premises from which or in which any
item of drug paraphernalia is kept for sale, offered for sale, sold, or
delivered for any commercial consideration is declared to be a public
nuisance, and the City Attorney may commence an action in the Circuit Court,
in the name of the people of the city, to abate a public nuisance as
described in § 131.062, and request that the court enter:



         (a)   Temporary and permanent restraining orders to
enjoin any defendant from maintaining the nuisance; and



         (b)   Preliminary and permanent injunctions restraining
any defendant from removing or interfering with any property used in
connection with the public nuisance.



      (4)   All drug paraphernalia is subject to forfeiture.



      (5)   Property subject to forfeiture under this chapter may be
seized by any peace officer and may be made without process:



         (a)   If there is probable cause to believe that the
property is directly dangerous to health or safety and existing circumstances
do not allow reasonable time for the officer to obtain lawful process; or



         (b)   In accordance with the provisions of The Code of
Criminal Procedure, as amended.



      (6)   The presence of items which are deemed violative of §§
131.060 through 131.063 or are otherwise subject to its forfeiture provisions
in an inventory shall not subject the entire inventory to seizure or
forfeiture.



      (7)   Any person who shall violate any provision of § 131.064
shall, upon conviction, be fined in an amount not less than $250 nor more
than $750.



(Prior Code, § 7-10-5)



   (G)   (1)   Any violations of the provisions of §§ 131.075
through 131.078 shall be punishable by a minimum fine of $25 and a maximum
fine of $750. In the event a person violates the provisions a second or
subsequent time, the minimum fine shall be $50.



      (2)   The fines in division (G)(1) above are in addition to
administrative provisions for suspension, revocation or forfeiture of a
license issued pursuant to Chapter 114 of this code, and payment of the fine
shall not constitute an admission of guilt or innocence for purposes of the
administrative proceedings for suspension, revocation or forfeiture.



      (3)   In the event that a person is charged with a violation
of §§ 131.075 through 131.078 under an ordinance violation notice as a
first-time offender, the person may satisfy the penalty by paying the $25
fine in person or by mail within five days of being charged with the
violation. All penalties shall be paid at the Police Department.



(Prior Code, § 7-11-5)



(Am. Ord. O-12-035, passed 2-14-2012)



TITLE XV:  LAND USAGE



   Chapter



      150.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      151.   BUILDING CODE



      152.   PLUMBING CODE



      153.   ELECTRICAL CODE



      154.   FIRE CODE



      155.   MECHANICAL CODE



      156.   DEVELOPMENT IN FLOODPLAIN AREAS



CHAPTER 150:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



General Provisions



   150.01   Storm Water Control Ordinance adopted



   150.02   Zoning Ordinance adopted



   150.03   Subdivision Ordinance adopted



Dangerous Buildings; Abatement



   150.15   State Code adopted



Moving Buildings



   150.30   Permit required



   150.31   Permit requirements; issuance; fee



 



   150.99   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 150.01  STORM WATER CONTROL ORDINANCE ADOPTED.



   The city’s storm water control ordinance is hereby adopted by
reference and incorporated herein as if set out in full.



(Prior Code, Title 11)



§ 150.02  ZONING ORDINANCE ADOPTED.



   The city’s zoning ordinance is hereby adopted by reference and
incorporated herein as if set out in full.



(Prior Code, Title 9)  (Ord. O-11-017, passed 8-4-2011; Ord. O-11-021,
passed 9-13-2011; Ord. O-12-037, passed 5-8-2012; Ord. O-12-038, passed
5-8-2012; Ord. O-12-047, passed 6-12-2012; Ord. O-13-070, passed 2-12-2013;
Ord. O-13-086, passed 7-9-2013; Ord. O-13-099, passed 11-13-2013; Ord.
O-15-147, passed 6-9-2015; Ord. O-16-176, passed 10-11-2016; Ord. O-17-05,
passed 2-14-2017; Ord. O-17-27, passed 10-10-2017; Ord. O-18-09, passed
7-10-2018; Ord. O-18-11, passed 7-10-2018; Ord. O-19-02, passed 3-12-2019)



§ 150.03  SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE ADOPTED.



   The city’s subdivision ordinance is hereby adopted by reference and
incorporated herein as if set out in full.



(Prior Code, Title 10) (Ord. O-18-12, passed 7-10-2018)




DANGEROUS BUILDINGS; ABATEMENT




§ 150.15  STATE CODE ADOPTED.



   Demolition, repair, enclosure, or other legal actions pertaining to
unsafe buildings should be conducted in accordance with the terms and
provisions of ILCS, Ch. 65, Act 5, 11-31-1, as the same may be hereafter
amended.



(Prior Code, § 4-4-1)  Penalty, see § 150.99




MOVING BUILDINGS




§ 150.30  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   Any person, firm, or corporation is hereby prohibited from moving a
residence, building, or structure upon or across a public sidewalk, public
thoroughfare, public right-of-way, public street, or public highway within
the city limits unless a moving permit is first obtained from the City Clerk.



(Prior Code, § 4-8-1)  Penalty, see § 150.99



§ 150.31  PERMIT REQUIREMENTS; ISSUANCE; FEE.



   (A)   A building moving permit shall be issued to a person, firm, or
corporation moving a residence, building, or structure only after each of the
following conditions have been met.



   (B)   (1)   Notification of the Chief of Police and Public
Service Superintendent regarding the time of the intended move and route of
the intended move;



      (2)   Notification of the Superintendents of both the
Municipal Electrical Utilities and the Municipal Water and Sewer Utilities
and payment of any utility relocation costs as may be assessed by the
superintendents;



      (3)   Provide the City Clerk with a certificate of insurance
showing proof that the applicant has in force a public liability insurance
policy with minimum limits of $100,000 per person, $300,000 per occurrence
bodily injury, and $50,000 per occurrence property damage for the purpose of
moving a building or structure over or on any public property or
thoroughfare; and



      (4)   Payment of a $25 permit fee to the City Clerk.



(Prior Code, § 4-8-2)  Penalty, see § 150.99



§ 150.99  PENALTY



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating § 150.15 shall be
fined not less than $50 nor more than $1,000 for each offense. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.



(Prior Code, § 4-4-2)



   (C)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating §§ 150.30 or
150.31 shall be fined not less than $25 nor more than $750 for each offense.



(Prior Code, § 4-8-3)



CHAPTER 151:  BUILDING CODE



Section



   151.01   Building Code adopted



   151.02   Permit required; exceptions



   151.03   Permit application



   151.04   Permit issuance; validity; revocation



   151.05   Inspection required



   151.06   Utility inspection at time of request for service



 



   151.99   Penalty



   Appendix A:  Schedule of fees



   Appendix B:  Permit application form



§ 151.01  BUILDING CODE ADOPTED.



   (A)   The 2000 International Building Code “IBC”, three copies
of which are on file in the office of the City Clerk, and all subsequent
editions, and all existing and future supplements, amendments, and appendixes
thereto, as published by the International Code Council, in cooperation with
the Building Officials and Code Administrators International, International
Conference of Building Officials, and the Southern Building Code Congress, is
hereby adopted as the Building Code for the city, with the exceptions set
forth in division (B) below.



   (B)   (1)   Chapter 1, Administration § 101.4 Referenced codes,
page 1 shall be deleted, except 101.4.5, Property Maintenance, shall be
adopted as the Property Maintenance Code.



      (2)   Chapter 1, Administration § 102.4, Referenced codes and
standards, page 2 shall be deleted. Referenced codes and standards shall be
used for reference purposes only.



      (3)   Appendices A through J, pages 699 - 731, may be used for
reference purposes only and shall not be mandatory.



      (4)   Appendix F, “Radon Control Methods” of the 2000
International Residential Code shall be mandatory for new construction as
defined therein.



(Prior Code, § 4-3-1)



§ 151.02  PERMIT REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   No building or structure regulated by the adopted code shall
be erected, constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired, moved, improved,
removed, converted, or demolished unless a separate permit for each building
or structure has first been obtained from the Building Inspector.



   (B)   A building permit shall not be required for the following work:



      (1)   One-story detached accessory buildings used as tool and
storage sheds, playhouses, and similar uses, provided the projected roof area
does not exceed 120 square feet;



      (2)    Fences not over seven feet high at the highest point
including the post;



      (3)   Oil derricks;



      (4)   Movable cases, counters, and partitions not over five
feet, nine inches high;



      (5)   Retaining walls which are not over four feet in height,
measured from the bottom of the footings to the top of the wall, unless
supporting a surcharge or impounding Class I, II, or III-A liquids;



      (6)   Water tanks supported directly upon grade if the
capacity does not exceed 5,000 gallons and the ratio of height to diameter or
width does not exceed two to one;



      (7)   Platforms, walks, and driveways not more than 30 inches
above grade and not over any basement or story below;



      (8)   Painting, papering, and similar finish work;



      (9)   Temporary motion picture, television, and theater stage
sets and scenery;



      (10)   Window awnings supported by an exterior wall of a
family dwelling, private garages, carports, and shed occupancies when
projecting not more than 54 inches; and/or



      (11)   Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to a family
dwelling occupancy in which the pool’s walls are entirely above the
adjacent grade and if the capacity does not exceed 5,000 gallons.



   (C)   Unless otherwise exempted and applicable, separate plumbing,
electrical, street opening, street access, and any other permit required by
the city will be required for the above exempted items.



   (D)   Exemption from the permit requirements of this chapter shall
not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in
violation of the provisions of the adopted code or any other ordinances of
the city.



(Prior Code, § 4-3-2)  (Ord. 1976, passed 9-14-2010)   Penalty, see §
151.99



§ 151.03  PERMIT APPLICATION.



   (A)   The property owner or the contractor, if the work is performed
by a contractor, shall file an application for a permit on a form furnished
by the Building Inspector.



   (B)   Plans, engineering calculations, diagrams, and other data
shall be submitted in two sets with each application for permit. The Building
Inspector may require plans, computations, and specifications to be prepared
and designed by a licensed engineer or architect.



   (C)   The Building Inspector may waive the submission of plans,
engineering calculations, diagrams, and other data if the Building Inspector
determines that the nature of the work is such that reviewing of the
documents is not necessary to obtain compliance.



(Prior Code, § 4-3-3)  Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.04  PERMIT ISSUANCE; VALIDITY; REVOCATION.



   (A)   The application and supporting documents filed by an applicant
for a permit shall be reviewed by the Building Inspector. If the Building
Inspector finds that the work described in an application for a permit and
supporting documents conform to the requirements of the city’s adopted code
and other pertinent ordinances, then the Building Inspector shall issue a
permit to the applicant. A copy of the permit shall be filed with the City
Clerk.



   (B)   Permits issued by the Building Inspector shall expire by
limitation and become void after 365 days from the date of issuance.



   (C)   The Building Inspector shall, in writing, suspend or revoke a
permit issued under the provisions of the city’s adopted code whenever the
permit is issued in error or on the basis of incorrect information supplied,
or in violation of any ordinance or regulation of any of the city’s adopted
codes.



   (D)   The issuance of a permit shall not be construed to be a permit
for or an approval of any violation of any of the provisions of the city’s
adopted codes or of any ordinances of the city. The issuance of a permit
shall not prevent the Building Inspector from requiring the correction of
errors in any plans, specifications, and other data submitted with the
application.



(Prior Code, § 4-3-4)  Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.05  INSPECTION REQUIRED.



   (A)   Construction or work for which a permit is required shall be
subject to inspection by the Building Inspector and shall remain accessible
and exposed for inspection purposes until approved by the Building Inspector.



   (B)   It shall be the duty of the permit applicant to cause the work
to remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes. Neither the
Building Inspector nor the city shall be liable for any expenses incurred for
the removal of material to allow for inspection or for the replacement of the
material removed.



   (C)   It shall be the duty of the person doing the work authorized
by a permit to notify the Building Inspector that the work is ready for
inspection. The request may be in writing or by telephone and must be
requested at least one working day before the inspection is desired.



   (D)   An inspection record card shall be posted on the premises so
as to allow the Building Inspector to make the required entries thereon
regarding inspection of the work.



   (E)   The inspector record card shall be maintained and available by
the permit holder until final inspection and approval has been granted by the
Building Inspector.



(Prior Code, § 4-3-6)



§ 151.06  UTILITY INSPECTION AT TIME OF REQUEST FOR SERVICE.



   (A)   Whenever an application is made for utility services, whether
for new services or for a new customer at a property already receiving
service, the city may require an inspection by the Code Official/Building
Inspector of the electric, water, and/or sewer connections for compliance
with all current building codes. The city may require repairs or other action
as a condition of receiving utility service where such is required under any
current building code adopted by the city and, upon seven days notice, may
suspend the delivery of utility services until the repairs or other actions
are completed. The city may immediately suspend any utility service where and
when conditions are such that there is an imminent threat of harm to persons
or property.



   (B)   The city shall not, on the basis of authority granted in this
§ 151.06, inspect any particular property sooner than 24 months from the
date of the last inspection. Nothing herein shall prevent the city from
conducting inspections on the basis of any other lawful authority.



   (C)   The fee for any inspection conducted under the authority of
this §151.06 shall be $25 which shall be added to the first invoice
following the commencement of the new utility service.



(Ord. O-18-17, passed 11-13-2018)



§ 151.99  PENALTY.



   A person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of this chapter
or the adopted code shall, on conviction, be fined not less than $25 nor more
than $750 for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.



(Prior Code, § 4-3-8)



APPENDIX A:  SCHEDULE OF FEES




   I.   Schedule of fees




I.  SCHEDULE OF FEES.



   (A)   The fee shall be assessed as set forth in the table below. The
fee schedule shall also be assessed and applicable to demolition work as
defined in the adopted code.



   (B)   Whenever work described in the building permit application is
altered to cause additional valuation, the additional fee shall be the
difference between the original valuation and the valuation had the work been
included in the original application valuation.



   (C)   Fees for permits issued to the city are hereby waived.



   (D)   Fees for permits issued to schools, churches, or other
governmental entities will be reduced by 20%.  No fees shall be charged for
permits issued to non-for-profit organizations primarily engaged in providing
home repairs free of charge to low income homeowners.



   (E)   The payment of the permit fee established by the Building
Inspector shall be submitted along with the copy of the permit to the City
Clerk.  Whenever the fee does not accompany the copy of the permit, the City
Clerk shall render a bill for the fee.



 


Total valuation

 

Fee





$1 to $500
 
$15


$501 to $2,000
 
$15 for the first $500 plus $2 for each additional $100 or fraction thereof,
to and including $2,000


$2,001 to $25,000
 
$45 for the first $2,000 plus $9 for each additional $1,000 or fraction
thereof, to and including $25,000


$25,001 to $50,000
 
$252 for the first $25,000 plus $6.50 for each additional $1,000 or fraction
thereof, to and including $50,000


$50,001 to $100,000
 
$414.50 for the first $50,000 plus $4.50 for each additional $1,000 or
fraction thereof, to and including $100,000


$100,001 to $500,000
 
$639.50 for the first $100,000 plus $3.50 for each additional $1,000 or
fraction thereof, to and including $500,000


$500,001 to $1,000,000
 
$2,039.50 for the first $500,000 plus $3 for each additional $1,000 or
fraction thereof, to and including $1,000,000


$1,000,001 and up
 
$3,539.50 for the first $1,000,000 plus $2 for each additional $1,000 or
fraction thereof



Other Inspections and Fees




Inspections outside of normal business hours (2 hours minimum)

 

$30 per hour




Reinspection fees assessed under provisions of § 305.8

 

$30 per hour




Inspections for which no fee is specifically indicated (one-half hour minimum)

 

$30 per hour




Additional plan review required by changes, additions or revisions to plans
(one-half hour minimum)

 

$30 per hour




For use of outside consultants for plan checking or inspections, or both

 

Actual cost




Source: 1991 Uniform Building Code: Table No. 3-A-Building Permit Fees





 



(Prior Code, § 4-3-5)  (Ord. 1961, passed 2-9-2010; Ord. O-16-170, passed
6-14-2016)



APPENDIX B:  PERMIT APPLICATION FORM




   I.   Permit application form




I.  PERMIT APPLICATION FORM.




City of Geneseo





APPLICATION FOR BUILDING PERMIT




Location of Work
____________________________________________________________________



_______________________________________________________________________________
_____



                  Estimated Cost of
Work___________________________



Property
Owner_______________________________________________________________________



Address of Property
Owner______________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________________________
_____



Is this work to be performed by a contractor?   _____ Yes   _____ No



Name of
Contractor   _______________________________________________________________
_



Address of
Contractor   _______________________________________________________________
_



Will plumbing work be involved?         _____ Yes   _____ No



Name of Plumbing
Contractor   _________________________________________________________



Address of Plumbing
Contractor   _________________________________________________________



Will electrical work be involved?         _____ Yes   _____ No



Name of Electrical
Contractor   _________________________________________________________



Address of Electrical
Contractor   _________________________________________________________



Brief Description of Work
_______________________________________________________________________________
____
_______________________________________________________________________________
____
_______________________________________________________________________________
____
_______________________________________________________________________________
____



If the work described above is for construction of a home or building, attach
prints.



If the work described above is for an addition to an existing building or
home, construction of a garage, addition to a garage, or construction of an
accessory building (over 120 square feet), attach a diagram showing general
area of property; property lines, including dimensions; placement of
structure or addition on property with distance from property lines; and
dimension of the structure or addition.



Phone number:   day: ______________________   evening:
______________________



Signed ________________________________________________   Date
_______________




REQUEST FOR INSPECTION MUST BE MADE AT LEAST 24 HOURS IN ADVANCE.





OCCUPANCY PERMIT MUST BE ISSUED PRIOR TO OCCUPYING BUILDING.




CHAPTER 152:  PLUMBING CODE



Section



   152.01   Plumbing Code adopted



   152.02   Permit required



   152.03   Permit application



   152.04   Permit issuance; validity; revocation



   152.05   Licensed plumber required



   152.06   Inspection required



   Appendix A:  Schedule of fees



   Appendix B:  Permit application form



Cross-reference:



   Water distribution system construction, see § 53.10



   Fire protection system construction, see § 53.11



   Sanitary sewer system construction, see § 51.037.5



§ 152.01  PLUMBING CODE ADOPTED.



   The State Plumbing Code, and all subsequent editions and amendments
thereto, as published by the State Department of Public Health, are hereby
adopted by the city, in its current form, without addition, modification,
exception or amendment.



(Prior Code, § 4-1-1)  (Ord. 1929, passed 1-13-2009; Ord. O-15-138, passed
8-11-2015)



§ 152.02  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   No plumbing system of a building or structure regulated by the
adopted code shall be undertaken, constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired,
improved, removed, or converted unless a separate permit for each building or
structure has first been obtained from the city’s Plumbing Inspector.



   (B)   A plumbing permit shall not be required for the following work:



      (1)   For minor repairs which do not require changes, removal,
replacement, installation, or reinstallation in the piping of a plumbing
system to or from plumbing fixtures;



      (2)   For minor repairs of leaks in pipes, faucets, or traps,
for opening up of pipes, traps, or drains, and for the opening up of frozen
pipes;



      (3)   For the mere replacement of existing dishwashers,
garbage disposals, washers, or water-cooled air conditioners, unless the
replacement involves the relocation of the aforesaid fixtures; and/or



      (4)   For the installation of dishwashers, garbage disposals,
washers, or water-cooled air conditioners, unless the installation involves
the relocation of the aforesaid fixtures or modification of existing piping
system.



   (C)   Unless otherwise exempted, separate building, electrical,
street opening, street access, and any other permit required by the city will
be required for the above exempted items.



   (D)   Exemption from the permit requirements shall not be deemed to
grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the
provisions of the adopted code or any ordinances of the city.



(Prior Code, § 4-1-2)



§ 152.03  PERMIT APPLICATION.



   (A)   The property owner of record or a licensed plumber who is
contracted to perform the work shall first file an application on a form
furnished by the Plumbing Inspector.



   (B)   Permit to install washing machines, water-cooled air
conditioners, dishwashers, and garbage disposals may be secured by the
dealers of the appliances although the dealers are not licensed plumbers.



   (C)   Plans, engineering calculations, diagrams, and other data
shall be submitted with each application for a permit. The Plumbing Inspector
may require plans, computations, and specifications to be prepared and
designed by a licensed engineer or architect.



   (D)   The Plumbing Inspector may waive the submission of plans,
engineering calculations, diagrams, and other data if the Plumbing Inspector
determines that the nature of the work is such that reviewing of the
documents is not necessary to obtain compliance.



(Prior Code, § 4-1-3)



§ 152.04  PERMIT ISSUANCE; VALIDITY; REVOCATION.



   (A)   The application and supporting documents filed by an applicant
for permit shall be reviewed by the Plumbing Inspector. If the Plumbing
Inspector finds that the work described in an application for a permit and
supporting documents conform to the requirements of the city’s adopted code
and other pertinent ordinances, then the Plumbing Inspector shall issue a
permit to the applicant. A copy of the permit shall be filed with the City
Clerk.



   (B)   Permits issued by the Plumbing Inspector shall expire by
limitation and become void after 365 days from the date of issuance.



   (C)   The Plumbing Inspector shall, in writing, suspend or revoke a
permit issued under the provisions of the city’s adopted code whenever the
permit is issued in error, or on the basis of incorrect information supplied,
or in violation of any ordinance or regulation of any of the city’s adopted
code.



   (D)   The issuance of a permit shall not be construed to be a permit
for or any approval of any violation of any of the provisions of the city’s
adopted code or of any ordinances of the city. The issuance of a permit shall
not prevent the Plumbing Inspector from requiring the correction of errors in
any plans, specifications, and other data submitted with the application.



(Prior Code, § 4-1-4)



§ 152.05  LICENSED PLUMBER REQUIRED.



   All work for which a permit is required shall be performed by a
licensed plumber of the state.



(Prior Code, § 4-1-6)  (Ord. O-15-138, passed 8-11-2015)



§ 152.06  INSPECTION REQUIRED.



   (A)   All work for which a permit is required shall be subject to
inspection by the Plumbing Inspector, and all work shall remain accessible
and exposed for inspection purposes until approved by the Plumbing Inspector.
The Plumbing Inspector must make a rough-in inspection before fixtures are
set and the plumbing work shall not be closed in, concealed, or covered until
after it has been inspected and approved.



   (B)   It shall be the duty of the permit applicant to cause the work
to remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes. Neither the
Plumbing Inspector nor the city shall be liable for any expense incurred for
the removal of material to allow for inspection or for the replacement of the
material removed.



   (C)   It shall be the duty of the person doing the work authorized
by a permit to notify the Plumbing Inspector that the work is ready for
inspection. The request may be in writing or by telephone and must be
requested at least one working day before the inspection is desired.



   (D)   An inspection record card shall be posted as to allow the
Plumbing Inspector to make the required entries thereon regarding inspection
of the work.



   (E)   The record card shall be maintained and available by the
permit holder until final inspection and approval has been granted by the
Plumbing Inspector.



   (F)   New plumbing, water or sewer systems, or systems which have
been altered, extended, replaced, or repaired shall be tested in accordance
to the procedure established by the Plumbing Inspector. Plumbing work
requiring testing shall be uncovered and unconcealed until after it has been
tested and approved. The Plumbing Inspector may waive the testing requirement.



(Prior Code, § 4-1-7)  Penalty, see § 152.99



APPENDIX A:  SCHEDULE OF FEES




   I.   Schedule of fees




I.  SCHEDULE OF FEES.



   (A)    Fees shall be assessed in accordance with the provisions of
this section, divisions (A) and (B). The determination of fees owed under any
of the provisions of this section shall be made by the Plumbing Inspector.
Whenever extra inspections are made on account of inaccurate or incorrect
information or repair of faulty construction, an additional charge of $15 per
hour (with a $15 minimum) shall be made by the Plumbing Inspector for time
consumed in making extra inspections. Inspections made outside of regular
business hours shall be charged $25 per hour, two hour minimum fee, at the
convenience and availability of the Inspector. Whenever any work for which a
permit is required by this section has commenced without first obtaining a
permit, the fee for the permit shall be double the scheduled fee. Fees for
permits issued to the city are hereby waived. Whenever work described in the
plumbing permit application is altered to cause an additional fee, the fee
shall be at the same rate as established by the issuance of the original
permit. The payment of the permit fee established by the Plumbing Inspector
shall be submitted along with the copy of the permit to the City Clerk.
Whenever the fee does not accompany the copy of the permit, the City Clerk
shall render a bill for the fee.



   (B)   Fees. For each opening for a fixture or appliance whether for
immediate or future use:  $10 per opening, subject to a minimum fee of $25.



(Ord. O-18-25, passed 12-11-2018)



APPENDIX B:  PERMIT APPLICATION FORM




   I.   Permit application form




I.  PERMIT APPLICATION FORM.



   City of Geneseo



   APPLICATION FOR PLUMBING PERMIT



   Geneseo, Illinois ___________________________________, 20______



PLUMBING INSPECTOR:



_______________________________________________________________, the
undersigned, licensed ________________________________ Plumber, do hereby
make application for a permit to construct a system of drainage plumbing for a



_______________________________________________________________________________
__



_______________________________________________________________________
building



located at
______________________________________________________________________



and owned by
__________________________________________________________________



including the following fixtures and materials:



 



_____ New Water Service Tap
 
 
_____ Back Flow Valve


_____ New Sewer Main Tap
 
 
_____ Washer


_____ Lavatories
 
 
_____ Laundry Tray


_____ Tubs
 
 
_____ Water Heater


_____ Showers
 
 
_____ Water Conditioner


_____ Water Closets
 
 
_____ Water-cooled Air Conditioner


_____ Kitchen Sink
 
 
_____ Automatic Cube-making Refrigerator


_____ Disposal
 
 
_____ Repair or Replace Existing Water Line


_____ Dish Washer
 
 
_____ Repair or Replace Existing Sewer Line


_____ Floor Drains
 
 
_____ Grease Traps


 
 




 



   TOTAL    _____________________________



   FEE        $_____________________________



CHAPTER 153:  ELECTRICAL CODE



Section



   153.01   Definition



   153.02   Standards and specifications applied



   153.03   Electrical Code adopted



   153.04   Permit required



   153.05   Permit application and eligibility



   153.06   Permit issuance



   153.07   Inspection required



   153.08   Order to repair



   153.09   Liability for damages



   153.10   New subdivision construction



   153.11   Temporary service for construction



   153.12   Commercial underground service



 



   153.99   Penalty



   Appendix A:  Schedule of fees



   Appendix B:  Permit application form



§ 153.01  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT.  Conductors and equipment (including but not
limited to conduit hollow or filled, raceway, trough, solid and flex tubing)
installed for the utilization of electricity supplied for lights, heat, or
power, but excluding:



      (1)   All conductors and other equipment installed for or by
the Municipal Utility and/or Jo-Carroll Energy, Inc.;



      (2)   All telephone equipment and lines operating at telephone
line voltages;



      (3)   All cable television equipment and lines operating at
cable television line voltages;



      (4)   All radio and television equipment for the transmission
or reception of wireless sounds, pictures, or signals; and



      (5)   Twenty-four volt temperature control wiring and 24-volt
temperature control equipment installed by a heating and/or ventilation
contractor.



(Prior Code, § 4-2-1) (Am. Ord. O-16-164, passed 1-12-16)



§ 153.02  STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS APPLIED.



   The standards and specifications for the installation or alteration of
electrical equipment except as otherwise provided in this chapter shall be in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter, with the statutes of the
state, with any orders, rules, and regulations issued by authority thereof,
and with approved electrical standards for safety to persons and property.
Where no specific standards are prescribed by this chapter or by the statutes
of the state or by any orders, rules, or regulations issued by authority
thereof, conformity with the electrical provisions of other safety codes
approved by the American Standards Association shall be prima facie evidence
of conformity with approved minimum standards for safety to persons and
property.



(Prior Code, § 4-2-2)



§ 153.03  ELECTRICAL CODE ADOPTED.



   (A)   The National Electrical Code, Latest Edition, as published by
the National Fire Protection Association, is hereby adopted as the Electrical
Code of the city, and is incorporated herein.



(Prior Code, § 4-2-3) (Am. Ord. 1974, passed 7-13-2010)  Penalty, see §
153.99



§ 153.04  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person shall install or alter electrical equipment in the city
without first obtaining a permit from the City Clerk as detailed in this
chapter. When a permit is required and the work is started or proceeds prior
to obtaining the permit, the city may issue a stop work order and all work
must cease immediately until a permit is obtained.  The permit fees in this
case shall be doubled. Strict compliance, therefore, is required in
conformity with the National Electrical Code and all other applicable
regulations.



(Prior Code, § 4-2-4) (Am. Ord. O-16-162, passed 1-12-16) Penalty, see §
153.99



§ 153.05  PERMIT APPLICATION AND ELIGIBILITY.



   (A)   Any person desiring a permit required by this chapter shall
file with the Electrical Inspector an application therefore, in writing, in
which the application shall describe in detail materials and apparatus as are
intended to be used and the location by street and number where the work is
to be accomplished. Complete plans and specifications showing in detail the
location, nature, and character of all electrical work proposed to be done
under the permit shall accompany the application along with the proposed
permit fee and job bid.



(Prior Code, § 4-2-6)



   (B)   No required permit shall be issued to any person, except the
following:



      (1)   An electrical contractor who is licensed in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter.



      (2)   The owner/occupant of a single-family dwelling may, with
the assistance of any member of his or her immediate family, personally carry
on in his or her dwelling any work governed by this chapter without having to
be a licensed electrical contractor. The Electrical Inspector will interview
the owner/occupant to validate his or her capability of performing the work
in a manner assuring safety to persons and property. The owner/occupant shall
obtain a permit for the work, conform to all regulations of this chapter, and
provide complete plans, specifications, and descriptions of materials to be
used.



(Prior Code, § 4-2-7)



Penalty, see § 153.99



§ 153.06  PERMIT ISSUANCE.



   (A)   The permit shall be issued upon approval of the plans and
specifications by the Electrical Inspector and payment of the permit fees.



   (B)   The permit shall expire one year from the date of its issuance.



   (C)   The permit certificate issued shall be posted in plain view
inside the building for which the permit was issued near the entrance switch
or, if outdoors, inside the entrance switch.



(Prior Code, § 4-2-8)  Penalty, see § 153.99



§ 153.07  INSPECTION REQUIRED.



   (A)   The Electrical Inspector shall inspect all electrical
equipment installed or altered in the city and shall require that it conform
to the standards and specifications prescribed in this chapter.



      (1)   After the wires are drawn in the conduits or conductors
mounted, properly spliced and ground wire grounded, and before the wiring is
concealed, it shall be the obligation of the persons making the electrical
installation or alteration to notify the Electrical Inspector, who shall
inspect the work.



      (2)   Failure to obtain the inspection prior to covering the
included work shall be cause to reject the work until it is uncovered for
inspection purposes and to refuse to issue a certificate of inspection unless
and until it is uncovered for inspection purposes.



      (3)   Upon completion of any installation or alteration of
electrical equipment, it shall be the obligation of the persons making the
installation or modification to notify the Electrical Inspector, who shall
make the required final inspection of the work, and, if the work meets all
the standards prescribed by this chapter, he or she will issue a certificate
of inspection.



   (B)   Nothing in this section shall restrict the issuance of a
certificate by the Electrical Inspector for the use of electricity for
construction purposes.



(Prior Code, § 4-2-9)



§ 153.08  ORDER TO REPAIR.



   (A)   No person, being the owner, occupant, or lessee of any
building or other structure which is occupied or situated as to endanger
persons or property, shall permit the building or structure by reason of use,
installation, alteration, or repair or replacement of electrical equipment to
become susceptible to fire or become liable to cause injury to any person by
electrocution.



   (B)   If, during the course of his or her inspection or during the
course of supervision of the installation, alteration, repair or replacement
of electrical equipment, the Electrical Inspector shall find any unsafe
equipment or unsafe use of equipment, which equipment or use of equipment
renders the premises, building, or structure susceptible to fire or persons
in the area liable to electrocution, the Electrical Inspector shall notify
the owner, occupant, or lessee of the premises, building, structure, or
electrical equipment to repair, replace, remove, or abate the hazard. The
order to repair shall be served upon the owner, occupant, or lessee of the
premises, building, structure, or electrical equipment either personally or
by certified mail. The order to repair shall direct the repair, replacement,
removal, or abatement of the hazard within ten days, unless, in the opinion
of the Electrical Inspector, remedial steps cannot be completed in the time.



(Prior Code, § 4-2-10)  Penalty, see § 153.99



§ 153.09  LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES.



   This chapter shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the
responsibility or liability of any party owning, operating, controlling, or
installing any electric wiring, devices, appliances, or equipment for damages
to persons or property caused by any defects therein, nor shall the city be
held as assuming any liability by reason of the inspection authorized herein
or certificate of approval issued as herein provided.



(Prior Code, § 4-2-11)



§ 153.10  NEW SUBDIVISION CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   This section shall apply only to new residential subdivisions
and shall not apply to existing subdivisions where the electrical
distribution system has already been installed.



   (B)   Any subdivider developing a new residential subdivision that
will be served by the Municipal Electric Utility must have the electrical
distribution for the entire subdivision installed underground. The
underground electric distribution system will be constructed by and
engineered by the utility.



   (C)   The Municipal Electric Utility, hereinafter referred to as
“Utility”, will install a single-phase primary-secondary distribution
system (exclusive of underground individual service) with transformers and
service pedestals above grade level. The Utility reserves the right to leave
existing or to build new three phase main feeders, transmission and
sub-transmission lines above ground alongside and around the subdivision.



   (D)   The subdivider shall be obligated by this section to pay all
costs of a single-phase primary-secondary underground system based upon
material costs only.



   (E)   If the Utility finds obstructions or hindrances in any new
subdivision which prevent installation by normal plowing or trenching, such
as trees, rocks, drainage facilities, street crossings, or other similar
obstructions or hindrances, the subdivider shall pay the Utility all excess
installation costs incurred as a result of the obstructions or hindrances.



   (F)   If it is deemed necessary by either the subdivider or the
Utility that all or part of an underground electrical distribution system
shall be three-phase, then subdividers shall pay the Utility all excess
installation costs over and above the cost established herein.



   (G)   Street lighting in new subdivisions having underground
electric distribution shall be constructed with pedestal type lights and all
wiring shall be underground. The Utility shall design the street lighting
system and will install same, but the subdivider shall reimburse the Utility
the difference in cost between this system and a conventional overhead
lighting system, based upon material cost only. The street lighting system
shall belong to the Utility after installation.



   (H)   The subdivider shall provide the Utility with all easements
the Utility deems necessary for the underground electrical distribution and
street lighting system. The subdivider shall also insert a title covenant or
restriction in the owner’s certificate requiring each lot owner to install
an underground service to each house constructed within the subdivision. The
Utility will not install overhead service to any lot which is part of a
subdivision that is served by underground service.



   (I)   The Utility will not be obligated to start construction of the
underground electrical system until subdivider provides survey markers  for
lot corners showing grades of the easement areas and the grade level has been
established within four inches of final grade within the easement areas.



   (J)   Each lot owner in the subdivision shall pay for service
materials for underground service from the pedestal to the house. If the
service can be installed by normal trenching or plowing through unobstructed
soil, it will be provided by the Utility. All additional cost will be billed
to owner.



   (K)   The Utility shall not be obligated under this section until a
written agreement has been approved by the City Council and signed by the
subdivider.



(Prior Code, § 4-2-14)  (Ord. O-11-009, passed 6-22-2011)



§ 153.11  TEMPORARY SERVICE FOR CONSTRUCTION.



   A temporary meter for construction shall be supplied by the contractor
for the purpose of construction or remodel. Current specifications can be
picked up at the Electrical office. It is the developer’s responsibility to
ensure latest specifications are being utilized.



(Prior Code, § 4-2-13)  Penalty, see § 153.99



§ 153.12  COMMERCIAL UNDERGROUND SERVICE.



   Commercial underground services are owned and maintained by the
customer from a point of demarcation to the meter. Point of demarcation will
be determined on a case-by-case basis by the line foreman. Developer is
responsible for the construction of the concrete pad for the transformer.
Current specifications can be picked up at the electrical office. It is the
developer’s responsibility to ensure  latest specifications are being
utilized. Commercial overhead service shall be supplied and maintained by the
Utility to the service attachment point or weather head.



(Prior Code, § 4-2-12)



§ 153.99  PENALTY.



   A person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of this chapter
or the adopted code shall, on conviction, be fined not less than $25 nor more
than $500 for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.



(Prior Code, § 4-2-15)



APPENDIX A:  SCHEDULE OF FEES.




   I.   Schedule of fees




I.  SCHEDULE OF FEES.



   (A)   Permit fees will be flat rates as follows:



 



All new single-family residences

(No additional fees for service entrance but temporary services require fee)
 
$20 plus $0.05 per square foot


New multi-family residences or apartments (No additional fees for service
entrance but temporary services require fee)
 
$40 plus $0.05 per square foot


Detached residential accessory buildings
 
$0.05 per square foot

$20 minimum application fee applies


Incidental units: air conditioner units; water heaters; electrical ranges;
dishwashers; complete furnaces, including humidifiers; motors; garbage
disposals; signs; and metal siding grounding, and the like
 
$5 per unit

$20 minimum application fee applies


Entrance services, residential, including temporary services
 
$15


Building rewiring, for rooms, garages,  basements (including new services):
 



   Single-family, residential

 
$20 plus $0.05 per square foot



   Multi-family

 
$40 plus $0.05 per square foot



   Commercial

 
$45 plus 1% of bid cost of labor and materials


New additions to existing structures:
 



   Residential

 
$20 plus $0.05 per square foot



   Other than residential

 
$40 plus 1% of bid cost of labor and materials


Commercial or industrial wiring
 
$45 plus 1% of bid cost of labor and materials




 



   (B)   Whenever extra inspections are made on account of inaccurate
or incorrect information or repair of faulty construction, an additional
charge of $25 per hour (with a $15 minimum) shall be made by the Electrical
Inspector for time consumed in making extra inspections. Inspections made
outside of regular business hours shall be charged $40 per hour, two hour
minimum fee, at the convenience and availability of the Inspector.



   (C)   All permit fees, license fees, and examination fees shall be
paid directly to the City Clerk.



(Prior Code, § 4-2-5)



APPENDIX B:  PERMIT APPLICATION FORM




   I.   Permit application form




I.  PERMIT APPLICATION FORM.



   City of Geneseo



   APPLICATION FOR ELECTRICAL PERMIT



   Geneseo, Illinois _____________________________________, 20 _____



ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR:



Name ________________________________________________________________________



Address ______________________________________________________________________



License Number _______________________________



Materials and apparatus to be used
_______________________________________________________________________________
____
_______________________________________________________________________________
____
_______________________________________________________________________________
____
_______________________________________________________________________________
____
_______________________________________________________________________________
____
_______________________________________________________________________________
____
_______________________________________________________________________________
____ ___________________________________________



Location of Work
_______________________________________________________________________________
____
_______________________________________________________________________________
____
_______________________________________________________________________________
____
_______________________________________________________________________________
____
_______________________________________________________________________________
____
_______________________________________________________________________________
____ ________________________________________________



CHAPTER 154:  FIRE CODE



Section



   154.01   Uniform Fire Code adopted



 



   154.99   Penalty



§ 154.01  UNIFORM FIRE CODE ADOPTED.



   The Uniform Fire Code, 1997 edition, and all subsequent editions, and
all existing and future supplements, amendments, and appendixes thereto,
published by the International Fire Code Institute, is hereby adopted.



(Prior Code, § 4-5-1)



§ 154.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of this
chapter shall be fined not less than $25 nor more than $500 for each offense.
A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which
a violation occurs or continues.



(Prior Code, § 4-5-2)



CHAPTER 155:  MECHANICAL CODE



Section



   155.01   Uniform Mechanical Code adopted



   Appendix A:  Schedule of fees



§ 155.01  UNIFORM MECHANICAL CODE ADOPTED.



   The Uniform Mechanical Code, 1982 edition, and all existing and future
supplements and appendixes thereto, is hereby adopted by the city.



(Prior Code, § 4-6-1)



APPENDIX A:  SCHEDULE OF FEES




   I.   Schedule of fees




I.  SCHEDULE OF FEES.



   (A)   Generally.   The inspection fee for any installation not in
conjunction with a new residential home or addition on commercial building
will be as follows:



 



For the installation or relocation of each forced-air or gravity-type furnace
or burner, including ducts and vents attached to such appliance, up to and
including 100,000 BTU/h
 

$6



For the installation or relocation of each forced-air or gravity-type furnace
or burner, including ducts and vents attached to such appliance, over 100,000
BTU/h
 

$7.50



For the installation or relocation of each floor furnace, including vent
 

$6



For the installation or relocation of each suspended heater, recessed wall
heater, or floor-mounted unit heater
 

$6



For the installation or relocation of each appliance vent installed, not
included in an appliance permit
 

$3



For the alteration of or addition to each heating appliance, refrigeration
unit, cooling unit, absorption unit, or each heating, cooling, absorption, or
evaporative cooling system, including installation of controls regulated by
this code
 

$6



For the installation or relocation of each boiler or compressor to end,
including three horsepower, or each absorption system, to and including
100,000 BTU/h
 

$6



For the installation or relocation of each boiler or compressor over three
horsepower, to and including 15 horsepower, or each absorption system over
100,000 BTU/h, and including 500,000 BTU/h
 

$11



For the installation or relocation of each boiler or compressor over 15
horsepower, to and including 30 horsepower, or each absorption system over
500,000 BTU/h, to and including 1,000 BTU/h
 

$15



For the installation or relocation of each boiler or compressor over 30
horsepower, to and including 50 horsepower, or for each absorption system
over 1,000,000 BTU/h, to and including 1,750,000 BTU/h
 

$22.50



For the installation or relocation of each boiler or refrigeration compressor
over 50 horsepower, or each absorption system over 1,750,000 BTU/h
 

$37.50



For each air-heating unit, to and including 10,000 cubic feet per minutes
including ducts attached thereto
 

$4.50



NOTE:  This fee shall not apply to an air-handling unit which is a portion
of a factory-assembled appliance, cooling unit, evaporative cooler or
absorption unit for which a permit is required elsewhere in this code.


For each air-handling unit over 10,000 cfm
 

$7.50



For each ventilation fan connected to a single duct
 

$4.50



For each ventilation system which is not a portion of any heating or
air-conditioning system authorized above
 

$4.50



For the installation of each hood which is served by mechanical exhaust,
including the ducts for such hood
 

$4.50



For the installation or relocation of each domestic-type incinerator
 

$7.50



For the  installation or relocation of  each commercial or industrial-type
incinerator
 

$30



For each appliance or piece of equipment regulated by this code but not
classed in other appliance categories, or for which no other fee is listed in
this code
 

$4.50





 



(Prior Code, § 4-6-2)



   (B)   Inspection fees.



 

Inspection outside of normal business hours (minimum charge, two hours)
 

$15



Reinspection fee assessed under provisions of § 305(f)
 

each $15



Additional plan review required by changes, additions, or revisions to
approved plans (minimum charge, one-half hour)
 

per hour $15




 



(Prior Code, § 4-6-3)



CHAPTER 156:  DEVELOPMENT IN FLOODPLAIN AREAS



Section



   156.01   Purpose



   156.02   Definitions



   156.03   Base flood elevation



   156.04   Duties of the local Building Inspector



   156.05   Development permit



   156.06   Preventing increased flood heights and resulting damages



   156.07   Protecting buildings



   156.08   Subdivision requirements



   156.09   Public health and other standards



   156.10   Carrying capacity and notification



   156.11   Variances



   156.12   Disclaimer of liability



   156.13   Abrogation and greater restrictions



 



   156.99   Penalty



§ 156.01  PURPOSE.



   This chapter is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to
Geneseo by the Illinois Municipal Code (ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-2-1; Ch. 65,
Act 5, § 11-12-12; Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-30-2; Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-30-8 and
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-31-2) in order to accomplish the following purposes:



   (A)   To prevent unwise developments from increasing flood or
drainage hazards to others;



   (B)   Protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from
flood damage;



   (C)   To promote and protect the public health, safety, and general
welfare of the citizens from the hazards of flooding;



   (D)   To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control,
repairs to public facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and relief
operations;



   (E)   Maintain property values and a stable tax base by minimizing
the potential for creating blight areas;



   (F)   Make federally subsidized flood insurance available; and



   (G)   To preserve the natural characteristics and functions of
watercourses and floodplains in order to moderate flood and storm water
impacts, improve water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and
riparian habitat, provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic
benefits and enhance community and economic development.



(Ord. O-11-011, passed 3-8-2011)



§ 156.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions are adopted:



   BASE FLOOD.  The flood having a 1% probability of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.  The BASE FLOOD is also known as the 100-year
flood. The base flood elevation at any location is as defined in § 156.03.



   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE).  The elevation in relation to mean sea
level of the crest of the base flood.



   BASEMENT.  That portion of a building having its floor sub-grade
(below ground level) on all sides.



   BUILDING.  A walled and roofed structure, including gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above ground, including manufactured homes,
prefabricated buildings and gas or liquid storage tanks. The term also
includes recreational vehicles and travel trailers installed on a site for
more than 180 days per year.



   CRITICAL FACILITY.  Any facility which is critical to the health and
welfare of the population and, if flooded, would create an added dimension to
the disaster. Damage to these critical facilities can impact the delivery of
vital services, can cause greater damage to other sectors of the community,
or can put special populations at risk.



   Examples of CRITICAL FACILITIES where flood protection should be
required include:  emergency services facilities (such as fire and police
stations), schools, hospitals retirement homes and senior care facilities,
major roads and bridges, critical utility sites (telephone switching stations
or electrical transformers, and hazardous material storage facilities
(chemicals, petrochemicals, hazardous or toxic substances).



   DEVELOPMENT.  Any man-made change to real estate including, but not
necessarily limited to:



      (1)   Demolition, construction, reconstruction, repair,
placement of a building, or any structural alteration to a building;



      (2)   Substantial improvement of an existing building;



      (3)   Installation of a manufactured home on a site, preparing
a site for a manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer on a site for
more than 180 days per year;



      (4)   Installation of utilities, construction of roads,
bridges, culverts or similar projects;



      (5)   Construction or erection of levees, dams, walls or
fences;



      (6)   Drilling, mining, filling, dredging, grading,
excavating, paving, or other alterations of the ground surface;



      (7)   Storage of materials including the placement of gas and
liquid storage tanks, and channel modifications or any other activity that
might change the direction, height, or velocity of flood or surface waters.



      DEVELOPMENT does not include routine maintenance of existing
buildings and facilities, resurfacing roads, or gardening, plowing, and
similar practices that do not involve filing, grading, or construction of
levees.



   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.  A manufactured home
park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to be
constructed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.



   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.  The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).



   FEMA.  Federal Emergency Management Agency.



   FLOOD.  A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and
rapid accumulation, or the runoff of surface waters from any source.



   FLOOD FRINGE.  That portion of the floodplain outside of the
regulatory floodway.



   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP.  A map prepared by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency that depicts the floodplain or special flood hazard area
(SFHA) within a community. This map includes insurance rate zones and may or
may not depict floodways and show base flood elevations.



   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY.  An examination, evaluation and determination
of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.



   FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE).  The elevation of the base flood
plus one foot of freeboard at any given location in the floodplain.



   FLOODPLAIN and SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA).  These two terms are
synonymous. Those lands within the jurisdiction of the city, the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city or that may be annexed into the
city that are subject to inundation by the base flood. The floodplains of the
Geneseo Creek are generally identified as such on panel number(s) 183 of 575,
184 of 575, 191 of 575, and 192 of 575 of the county-wide Flood Insurance
Rate Map of Henry County, dated June 2, 2011 and prepared by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency.  FLOODPLAIN also includes those areas of known
flooding as identified by the community.



      The floodplains of those parts of unincorporated Henry County
that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city or that may be
annexed into the city are generally identified as such on the Flood Insurance
Rate Map prepared for Henry County by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
and dated June 2, 2011.



   FLOODPROOFING.  Any combination of structural or nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate, property and their contents.



   FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE.  A form published by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency that is used to certify that a building has been designed
and constructed to be structurally dry floodproofed to the flood protection
elevation.



   FLOODWAY.  That portion of the floodplain required to store and convey
the base flood. The FLOODWAY shall be according to the best data available
from federal, state or other sources.



   FREEBOARD.  An increment of elevation added to the base flood
elevation to provide a factor of safety for uncertainties in calculations,
future watershed development, unknown localized conditions, wave actions and
unpredictable effects such as those caused by ice or debris jams.



   HISTORIC STRUCTURE.  Any structure that is:



      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic
Places or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register.



      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary
of the Interior as contributing to the historic district or a district
preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic
district.



      (3)   Individually listed on the state inventory of historic
places by the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency.



      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic
places that has been certified by the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency.



   IDNR/OWR.  Illinois Department of Natural Resources/Office of Water
Resources.



   IDNR/OWR JURISDICTIONAL STREAM.  Illinois Department of Natural
Resource Office of Water Resources has jurisdiction over any stream serving a
tributary area of 640 acres or more in an urban area, or in the floodway of
any stream serving a tributary area of 6,400 acres or more in a rural area.
Construction on these streams requires a permit from the Department. (Ill.
Admin. Code tit. 17, pt. 3700.30). The Department may grant approval for
specific types of activities by issuance of a state-wide permit which meets
the standards defined in § 156.06.



   LOWEST FLOOR.  The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's LOWEST FLOOR. Provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements of § 156.07.



   MANUFACTURED HOME.  A structure transportable in one or more sections
that is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or
without a permanent foundation when connected to required utilities.



   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.  A parcel (or contiguous
parcels) of land divided into two or more lots for rent or sale.



   NEW CONSTRUCTION.  Structures for which the start of construction
commenced or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations
adopted by a community, and includes any subsequent improvements of such
structures.



   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.  A manufactured home park
or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the
lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to be
constructed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.



   NFIP.  National Flood Insurance Program.



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE or TRAVEL TRAILER.  A vehicle which is:



      (1)   Built on a single chassis;



      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less in size;



      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by
a light duty truck and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling
but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or
seasonal use.



   REPETITIVE LOSS.  Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on
two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs
at the time of each such flood event on the average equals or exceeds 25% of
the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.



   SFHA.  See definition of FLOODPLAIN and SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA
(SFHA).



   START OF CONSTRUCTION.  Includes substantial improvement and means the
date the building permit was issued. This, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement or
other improvement, was within 180 days of the permit date. The ACTUAL START
means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on
a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles,
the construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation or
placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. For a substantial
improvement, ACTUAL START OF CONSTRUCTION means the first alteration of any
wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building whether or not
that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.



   STRUCTURE.  See BUILDING.



   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE.  Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cumulative percentage of damage during the life of the building
equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred regardless of actual repair work performed. Volunteer labor and
materials must be included in this determination. The term includes
"Repetitive Loss" (see definition).



   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.  Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition
or improvement of a structure taking place during the life of the building in
which the cumulative percentage of improvements equals or exceeds 50% of the
market value of the structure before the improvement or repair is started, or
increases the floor area by more than 20%.  SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT is
considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or
other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that
alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. This term
includes structures which have incurred repetitive loss or substantial
damage, regardless of the actual repair work done. The term does not include:



      (1)   Any project for improvement of a structure to comply
with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or



      (2)   Any alteration of a structure listed on the National
Register of Historic Places or the Illinois Register of Historic Places.



   VIOLATION.  The failure of a structure or other development to be
fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the required federal, state, and/or
local permits and elevation certification is presumed to be in violation
until such time as the documentation is provided.



(Ord. O-11-011, passed 3-8-2011)



§ 156.03  BASE FLOOD ELEVATION.



   This chapter’s protection standard is the base flood. The best
available base flood data are listed below. Whenever a party disagrees with
the best available data, the party shall finance the detailed engineering
study needed to replace the existing data with better data and submit it to
the FEMA and IDNR/OWR for approval prior to any development of the site.



   (A)   The base flood elevation for the floodplains of Geneseo Creek
shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the county-wide
Flood Insurance Study of Henry County prepared by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency and dated April 6, 2010.



   (B)   The base flood elevation for each floodplain delineated as an
"AH Zone" or “AO Zone" shall be that elevation (or depth) delineated on the
county-wide Flood Insurance Rate Map of Henry County.



   (C)   The base flood elevation for each of the remaining floodplains
delineated as an "A Zone" on the county-wide Flood Insurance Rate Map of
Henry County shall be according to the best data available from federal,
state or sources. Should no other data exist, an engineering study must be
financed by the applicant to determine base flood elevations.



   (D)   The base flood elevation for the floodplains of those parts of
unincorporated Henry County that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction
of the city or that may be annexed into the city shall be as delineated on
the 100-year flood profiles in the Flood Insurance Study of Henry County
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated April 6, 2010.



(Ord. O-11-011, passed 3-8-2011)



§ 156.04  DUTIES OF THE LOCAL BUILDING INSPECTOR.



   The Building Inspector shall be responsible for the general
administration of this chapter and ensure that all development activities
within the floodplains under the jurisdiction of the city meet the
requirements of this chapter. Specifically, the Building Inspector shall:



   (A)   Process development permits in accordance with § 156.05;



   (B)   Ensure that all development in a floodway (or a floodplain
with no delineated floodway) meets the damage prevention requirements of §
156.06;



   (C)   Ensure that the building protection requirements for all
buildings subject to § 156.07 are met and maintain a record of the
"as-built" elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) or floodproof
certificate;



   (D)   Assure that all subdivisions and annexations meet the
requirements of § 156.08;



   (E)   Ensure that water supply and waste disposal systems meet the
public health standards of § 156.09;



   (F)   If a variance is requested, ensure that the requirements of §
156.11 are met and maintain documentation of any variances granted;



   (G)   Inspect all development projects and take any and all penalty
actions outlined in § 156.99 as a necessary to ensure compliance with this
chapter;



   (H)   Assure that applicants are aware of and obtain any and all
other required local, state, and federal permits;



   (I)   Notify IDNR/OWR and any neighboring communities prior to any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse;



   (J)   Provide information and assistance to citizens upon request
about permit procedures and floodplain construction techniques;



   (K)   Cooperate with state and federal floodplain management
agencies to coordinate base flood data and to improve the administration of
this chapter;



   (L)   Maintain for public inspection base flood data, floodplain
maps, copies of state and federal permits, and documentation of compliance
for development activities subject to this chapter;



   (M)   Perform site inspections to ensure compliance with this
chapter and make substantial damage determinations for structures within the
floodplain; and



   (N)   Maintain the accuracy of floodplain maps including notifying
IDNR/OWR and/or submitting information to FEMA within six months whenever a
modification of the floodplain may change the base flood elevation or result
in a change to the floodplain map.



(Ord. O-11-011, passed 3-8-2011)



§ 156.05  DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.



   No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body not exempted by law
shall commence any development in the floodplain without first obtaining a
development permit from the Building Inspector, who shall not issue a
development permit if the proposed development does not meet the requirements
of this chapter.



   (A)   The application for development permit shall be accompanied by:



      (1)   Drawings of the site, drawn to scale showing property
line dimensions;



      (2)   Existing grade elevations and all changes in grade
resulting from excavation or filling;



      (3)   The location and dimensions of all buildings and
additions to buildings;



      (4)   The elevation of the lowest floor (including basement)
of all proposed buildings subject to the requirements of § 156.07; and



      (5)   Cost of project or improvements as estimated by a
licensed engineer or architect. A signed estimate by a contractor may also
meet this requirement.



   (B)   Upon receipt of an application for a development permit, the
Building Inspector shall compare the elevation of the site to the base flood
elevation. Any development located on land that can be shown by survey
elevation to be below the base flood elevation. Any development located on
land that can be shown by survey data to be higher than the current base
flood elevation and which has not been filled after the date of the site's
first Flood Insurance Rate Map is not in the floodplain and therefore not
subject to the requirements of this chapter. In addition, any development
located on land shown to be below the base flood elevation and hydraulically
connected to a flood source, but not identified as floodplain on the current
Flood Insurance Rate Map, is subject to the provisions of this chapter.



   (C)   The Building Inspector shall maintain documentation of the
existing ground elevation at the development site and certification that this
ground elevation existed prior to the date of the site's first Flood
Insurance Rate Map identification.



   (D)   The Building Inspector shall be responsible for obtaining from
the applicant copies of all other federal, state, and local permits,
approvals or permit-not-required letters that may be required for this type
of activity. The Building Inspector shall not issue a permit unless all other
federal, state, and local permits have been obtained.



(Ord. O-11-011, passed 3-8-2011)



§ 156.06  PREVENTING INCREASED FLOOD HEIGHTS AND RESULTING DAMAGES.



   Within any floodway identified on the county-wide Flood Insurance Rate
Map, and within all other floodplains where a floodway has not been
delineated, the following standards shall apply:



   (A)   Except as provided in § 156.06(B), no development shall be
allowed which, acting in combination with existing and anticipated
development will cause any increase in flood heights or velocities or threat
to public health and safety. The following specific development activities
shall be considered as meeting this requirement:



      (1)   Bridge and culvert crossings of streams in rural areas
meeting the conditions of the Illinois Department of Natural Resources,
Office of Water Resources Statewide Permit Number 2;



      (2)   Barge fleeting facilities meeting the conditions of
IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 3;



      (3)   Aerial utility crossings meeting the conditions of
IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 4;



      (4)   Minor boat docks meeting the following conditions of
IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 5;



      (5)   Minor, non-obstructive activities such as underground
utility lines, light poles, sign posts, driveways, athletic fields, patios,
playground equipment, minor storage buildings not exceeding 70 square feet
and raising buildings on the same footprint which does not involve fill and
any other activity meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number
6;



      (6)   Outfall structures and drainage ditch outlets meeting
the following conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 7;



      (7)   Underground pipeline and utility crossings meeting the
conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 8;



      (8)   Bank stabilization projects meeting the conditions of
IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 9;



      (9)   Accessory structures and additions to existing
residential buildings meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit
Number 10;



      (10)   Minor maintenance dredging activities meeting the
following conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 11;



      (11)   Bridge and culvert replacement structures and bridge
widening meeting the following conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number
12;



      (12)   Temporary construction activities meeting the following
conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 13;



      (13)   Any development determined by IDNR/OWR to be located
entirely within a flood fringe area shall be exempt from state floodway
permit requirements.



   (B)   Other development activities not listed in division (A) of
this section may be permitted only if:



      (1)   Permit has been issued for the work by IDNR/OWR (or
written documentation is provided that an IDNR/OWR permit is not required); or



      (2)   Sufficient data has been provided to FEMA when
necessary, and approval obtained from FEMA for a revision of the regulatory
map and base flood elevation.



(Ord. O-11-011, passed 3-8-2011)



§ 156.07  PROTECTING BUILDINGS.



   (A)   In addition to the state permit and damage prevention
requirements of § 156.06, all buildings located in the floodplain shall be
protected from flood damage below the flood protection elevation. This
building protection requirement applies to the following situations:



      (1)   Construction or placement of a new building or
alteration or addition to an existing building valued at more than $1,000 or
70 square feet.



      (2)   Substantial improvements or structural alterations made
to an existing building that increase the floor area by more than 20% or
equal or exceed the market value by 50%. Alteration shall be figured
cumulatively during the life of the building. If substantially improved, the
existing structure and the addition must meet the flood protection standards
of this section.



      (3)   Repairs made to a substantially damaged building. These
repairs shall be figured cumulatively during the life of the building. If
substantially damaged the entire structure must meet the flood protection
standards of this section within 24 months of the date the damage occurred.



      (4)   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new
manufactured home on an existing site. (The building protection requirements
do not apply to returning a manufactured home to the same site it lawfully
occupied before it was removed to avoid flood damage).



      (5)   Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a
site for more than 180 days per year.



      (6)   Repetitive loss to an existing building as defined in §
156.02.



   (B)   Residential or nonresidential buildings can meet the building
protection requirements by one of the following methods:



      (1)   The building may be constructed on permanent land fill
in accordance with the following:



         (a)   The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at
or above the flood protection elevation;



         (b)   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than
six inches before compaction and should extend at least ten feet beyond the
foundation before sloping below the flood protection elevation;



         (c)   The fill shall be protected against erosion and
scour during flooding by vegetative cover, riprap, or other structural
measure;



         (d)   The fill shall be composed of rock or soil and not
incorporated debris or refuse material; and



         (e)   Shall not adversely affect the flow of surface
drainage from or onto neighboring properties, and when necessary storm water
management techniques such as swales or basins shall be incorporated.



      (2)   The building may be elevated on solid walls in
accordance with the following:



         (a)   The building or improvements shall be elevated on
stilts, piles, walls, crawlspace, or other foundation that is permanently
open to flood waters;



         (b)   The lowest floor and all electrical, heating,
ventilating, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and utility meters
shall be located at or above the flood protection elevation;



         (c)   If walls are used, all enclosed areas below the
flood protection elevation shall address hydrostatic pressures by allowing
the automatic entry and exit of flood waters. Designs must either be
certified by a licensed professional engineer or by having a minimum of one
permanent opening on each wall no more than one foot above grade with a
minimum of two openings. The openings shall provide a total net area of not
less than one square inch for every one square foot of enclosed area subject
to flooding below the base flood elevation; and



         (d)   The foundation and supporting members shall be
anchored, designed, and certified so as to minimize exposure to hydrodynamic
forces such as current, waves, ice, and floating debris.



            1.   All structural components below the flood
protection elevation shall be constructed of materials resistant to flood
damage;



            2.   Water and sewer pipes, electrical and
telephone lines, submersible pumps, and other service facilities may be
located below the flood protection elevation provided they are waterproofed;



            3.   The area below the flood protection elevation
shall be used solely for parking or building access and not later modified or
occupied as habitable space; or



            4.   In lieu of the above criteria, the design
methods to comply with these requirements may be certified by a licensed
professional engineer or architect.



      (3)   The building may be constructed with a crawlspace
located below the flood protection elevation provided that the following
conditions are met:



         (a)   The building must be designed and adequately
anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure
resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of
buoyancy;



         (b)   Any enclosed area below the flood protection
elevation shall have openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing
for the automatic entry and exit of flood waters. A minimum of one opening on
each wall having a total net area of not less than one square inch per one
square foot of enclosed area. The openings shall be no more than one foot
above grade;



         (c)   The interior grade of the crawlspace below the
flood protection elevation must not be more than two feet below the lowest
adjacent exterior grade;



         (d)   The interior height of the crawlspace measured
from the interior grade of the crawl to the top of the foundations wall must
not exceed four feet at any point;



         (e)   An adequate drainage system must be installed to
remove flood waters from the interior area of the crawlspace within a
reasonable period of time after a flood event;



         (f)   Portions of the building below the flood
protection elevation must be constructed with materials resistant to flood
damage; and



         (g)   Utility systems within the crawlspace must be
elevated above the flood protection elevation.



   (C)   Nonresidential buildings may be structurally dry floodproofed
(in lieu of elevation) provided a licensed professional engineer or architect
certifies that:



      (1)   Below the flood protection elevation the structure and
attendant utility facilities are watertight and capable of resisting the
effects of the base flood.



      (2)   The building design accounts for flood velocities,
duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of
buoyancy, and the impact from debris and ice.



      (3)   Floodproofing measures will be incorporated into the
building design and operable without human intervention and without an
outside source of electricity.



      (4)   Levees, berms, floodwalls and similar works are not
considered floodproofing for the purpose of this division.



   (D)   Manufactured homes or travel trailers to be permanently
installed on site shall be:



      (1)   Elevated to or above the flood protection elevation in
accordance with § 156.07(B); and



      (2)   Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement by being tied down in accordance with the rules and regulations for
the Illinois Mobile Home Tie-Down Act issued pursuant to 77 Ill. Adm. Code §
870.



   (E)   Travel trailers and recreational vehicles on site for more
than 180 days per year shall meet the elevation requirements of § 156.07(D)
unless the following conditions are met:



      (1)   The vehicle must be either self-propelled or towable by
a light duty truck;



      (2)   The hitch must remain on the vehicle at all times;



      (3)   The vehicle must not be attached to external structures
such as decks and porches;



      (4)   The vehicle must be designed solely for recreation,
camping, travel, or seasonal use rather than as a permanent dwelling;



      (5)   The vehicles largest horizontal projections must be no
larger than 400 square feet;



      (6)   The vehicle’s wheels must remain on axles and inflated;



      (7)   Air conditioning units must be attached to the frame so
as to be safe for movement of the floodplain;



      (8)   Propane tanks as well as electrical and sewage
connections must be quick-disconnect;



      (9)   The vehicle must be licensed and titled as a
recreational vehicle or park model; and



      (10)   The vehicle must either:



         (a)   Be entirely supported by jacks; or



         (b)   Have a hitch jack permanently mounted, have the
tires touching the ground and be supported by block in a manner that will
allow the block to be easily removed by used of the hitch jack.



   (F)   Garages, sheds or other minor accessory structures constructed
ancillary to an existing residential use may be permitted, provided the
following conditions are met:



      (1)   The garage of shed must be non-habitable;



      (2)   The garage or shed must be used only for the storage of
vehicles and tools and cannot be modified later into another use;



      (3)   The garage or shed must be located outside of the
floodway or have the appropriate state and/or federal permits;



      (4)   The garage or shed must be on a single family lot and be
accessory to an existing principal structure on the same lot;



      (5)   Below the base flood elevation, the garage or shed must
be built of materials not susceptible to flood damage;



      (6)   All utilities, plumbing, heating, air conditioning and
electrical must be elevated above the flood protection elevation;



      (7)   The garage or shed must have at least one permanent
opening on each wall not more than one foot above grade with one square inch
of opening for every one square foot of floor area;



      (8)   The garage or shed must be less than $15,000 in market
value or replacement cost of 576 square feet (24 feet by 24 feet);



      (9)   The structure shall be anchored to resist flotation and
overturning;



      (10)   All flammable or toxic materials (gasoline, paint,
insecticides, fertilizers, and the like) shall be stored above the flood
protection elevation; and



      (11)   The lowest floor elevation should be documented and the
owner advised of the flood insurance implications.



(Ord. O-11-011, passed 3-8-2011)



§ 156.08  SUBDIVISION REQUIREMENTS.



   The city shall take into account hazards, to the extent that they are
known, in all official actions related to land management use and development.



   (A)   New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation
agreements, planned unit developments, and additions to manufactured home
parks and subdivisions shall meet the damage prevention and building
protections standards of §§ 156.06 and 156.07. Any proposal for such
development shall include the following data:



      (1)   The base flood elevation and the boundary of the
floodplain, where the base flood elevation is not available from an existing
study, the applicant shall be responsible for calculating the base flood
elevation;



      (2)   The boundary of the floodway when applicable; and



      (3)   A signed statement by a licensed professional engineer
that the proposed plat or plan accounts for changes in the drainage of
surface waters in accordance with the Plat Act (ILCS Ch. 765, Act 205, § 2).



      Streets, blocks lots, parks and other public grounds shall be
located and laid out in such a manner as to preserve and utilize natural
streams and channels. Wherever possible the floodplains shall be included
within parks or other public grounds.



(Ord. O-11-011, passed 3-8-2011)



§ 156.09  PUBLIC HEALTH AND OTHER STANDARDS.



   (A)   Public health standards must be met for all floodplain
development. In addition to the requirements of §§ 156.06 and 156.07, the
following standards apply:



      (1)   No development in the floodplain shall include locating
or storing chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, flammable liquids,
pollutants, or other hazardous or toxic materials below the flood protection
elevation unless such materials are stored in a floodproofed and anchored
storage tank and certified by a professional engineer or floodproofed
building constructed according to the requirements of § 156.07.



      (2)   Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas and
electric shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage.



      (3)   Public sanitary sewer systems and water supply systems
shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of
flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood
waters.



      (4)   New and replacement on-site sanitary sewer lines or
waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment
to them or contamination from them during flooding. Manholes or other
above-ground openings located below the flood protection elevation shall be
watertight.



      (5)   Construction of new or substantially improved critical
facilities shall be located outside the limits of the floodplain.
Construction of new critical facilities shall be permissible within the
floodplain if no feasible alternative site is available. Critical facilities
constructed within the SFHA shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated or structurally dry floodproofed to the 500-year flood frequency
elevation or three feet above the level of the 100-year flood frequency
elevation, whichever is greater. Floodproofing and sealing measures must be
taken to ensure that toxic substances will not be displaced by or released
into flood waters. Access routes elevated to or above the level of the base
flood elevation shall be provided to all critical facilities.



   (B)   All other activities defined as development shall be designed
so as not to alter flood flows or increase potential flood damages.



(Ord. O-11-011, passed 3-8-2011)



§ 156.10  CARRYING CAPACITY AND NOTIFICATION.



   For all projects involving channel modification, fill, or stream
maintenance (including levees), the flood carrying capacity of the
watercourse shall be maintained.  In addition, the city shall notify
adjacent communities in writing 30 days prior to the issuance of a permit for
the alteration or relocation of the watercourse.



(Ord. O-11-011, passed 3-8-2011)



§ 156.11  VARIANCES.



   Whenever the standards of this chapter place undue hardship on a
specific development proposal, the applicant may apply to the Zoning Board of
Appeals for a variance. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall review the
applicant's request for a variance and shall submit its recommendation to the
City Council. The City Council may attach such conditions to granting of a
variance as it deems necessary to further the intent of this chapter.



   (A)   No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates
that all of the following conditions are met:



      (1)   The development activity cannot be located outside the
floodplain;



      (2)   An exceptional hardship would result if the variance
were not granted;



      (3)   The relief requested is the minimum necessary;



      (4)   There will be no additional threat to public health,
safety or creation of a nuisance;



      (5)   There will be no additional public expense for flood
protection, rescue or relief operations, policing, or repairs to roads,
utilities, or other public facilities;



      (6)   The applicant's circumstances are unique and do not
establish a pattern inconsistent with the intent of the NFIP; and



      (7)   All other state and federal permits have been obtained.



   (B)   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall notify an applicant in
writing that a variance from the requirements of the building protections
standards of § 156.07 that would lessen the degree of protection to a
building will:



      (1)   Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up
to $25 per $100 of insurance coverage;



      (2)   Increase the risk to life and property; and



      (3)   Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of
these risks and that the applicant acknowledge in writing the assumption of
the risk and liability.



   (C)   Historic structures.  Variances to the building protection
requirements of § 156.07 which are requested in connection with
reconstruction, repair, or alteration of a historic site or historic
structure as defined in § 156.02, "historic structures", may be granted
using criteria more permissive than the requirements of §§ 156.06 and
156.07 subject to the conditions that:



      (1)   The repair or rehabilitation is the minimum necessary to
preserve the historic character and design of the structure.



      (2)   The repair or rehabilitation will not result in the
structure being removed as a certified historic structure.



   (D)   Agriculture.  Any variance granted for an agricultural
structure shall be decided individually based on a case-by-case analysis of
the building's unique circumstances. Variances granted shall meet the
following conditions as well as those criteria and conditions set forth in
this chapter. In order to minimize flood damages during the 100-year flood
and the threat to public health and safety, the following conditions shall be
included for any variance issued for agricultural structures that are
constructed at-grade and wet-floodproofed.



      (1)   All agricultural structures considered for a variance
from the floodplain management regulations of this chapter shall demonstrate
that the varied structure is located in wide, expansive floodplain areas and
no other alternate location outside of the special flood hazard area exists
for the agricultural structure. Residential structures or animal confinement
facilities, such as farm houses, cannot be considered agricultural structures.



      (2)   Use of the varied structures must be limited to
agricultural purposes in Zone A only as identified on the community's Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).



      (3)   For any new or substantially damaged agricultural
structures, the exterior and interior building components and elements (i.e.,
foundation, wall framing, exterior and interior finishes, flooring, and the
like) below the base flood elevation, must be built with flood-resistant
materials in accordance with § 156.07.



      (4)   The agricultural structures must be adequately anchored
to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structures in
accordance with § 156.07. All of the building's structural components must
be capable of resisting specific flood-related forces, including hydrostatic,
buoyancy, and hydrodynamic and debris impact forces.



      (5)   Any mechanical, electrical, or other utility equipment
must be located above the base flood elevation or floodproofed so that they
are contained within a watertight, floodproofed enclosure that is capable of
resisting damage during flood conditions in accordance with § 156.07.



      (6)   The NFIP requires that enclosure or foundation walls,
subject to the 100-year flood, contain openings that will permit the
automatic entry and exit of flood waters in accordance with § 156.07(B).



      (7)   The agricultural structures must comply with the
floodplain management floodway provisions of § 156.06. No variances may be
issued for agricultural structures within any designated floodway.



      (8)   Wet-floodproofing construction techniques must be
reviewed and approved by the Floodplain Administrator and a registered
professional engineer or architect prior to the issuance of any floodplain
development permit for construction.



(Ord. O-11-011, passed 3-8-2011)



§ 156.12  DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.



   The degree of protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available information
derived from engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may
occur or flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This
chapter does not imply that development either inside or outside of the
floodplain will be free from flooding or damage. This chapter does not create
liability on the part of the city or any officer or employee thereof for any
flood damage that results from proper reliance on this chapter or any
administrative decision made lawfully thereunder.



(Ord. O-11-011, passed 3-8-2011)



§ 156.13  ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.



   This chapter repeals and replaces other ordinances adopted by the City
Council to fulfill the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program
including: October, 1992. However, this chapter does not repeal the original
resolution or ordinance adopted to achieve eligibility in the program. Nor
does this chapter repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements,
covenants, or deed restrictions. Where this chapter and other ordinance
easements, covenants or deed restrictions conflict or overlap, whichever
imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.



(Ord. O-11-011, passed 3-8-2011)



§ 156.99  PENALTY.



   Failure to obtain a permit for development in the floodplain or failure
to comply with the conditions of a permit or a variance shall be deemed to be
a violation of this chapter. Upon due investigation, the Municipal Attorney
may determine that a violation of the minimum standards of this chapter
exists. The Municipal Attorney shall notify the owner in writing of such
violation.



   (A)   If such owner fails after ten days notice to correct the
violation:



      (1)   The city shall make application to the circuit court for
an injunction requiring conformance with this chapter or make such other
order as the court deems necessary to secure compliance with this chapter;



      (2)   Any person who violates this chapter shall upon
conviction thereof be fined not less than $50 or more than $750 for each
offense;



      (3)   A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each
day during or on which a violation occurs or continues; and



      (4)   The city shall record a notice of violation on the title
of the property.



   (B)   The Municipal Attorney shall inform the owner that any such
violation is considered a willful act to increase flood damages and therefore
may cause coverage by a Standard Flood Insurance Policy to be suspended. The
Municipal Attorney is authorized to issue an order requiring the suspension
of the subject development. The stop-work order shall be in writing, indicate
the reason for the issuance, and shall order the action, if necessary, to
resolve the circumstances requiring the stop-work order. The stop- work order
constitutes a suspension of the permit.  No site development permit shall be
permanently suspended or revoked until a hearing is held by the Zoning Board
of Appeals. Written notice of such hearing shall be served on the permittee
and shall state:



      (1)   The grounds for the complaint, reasons for suspension or
revocation; and



      (2)   The time and place of the hearing. At such hearing the
permittee shall be given an opportunity to present evidence on their behalf.
At the conclusion of the hearing, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall determine
whether the permit shall be suspended or revoked.



   (C)   Nothing herein shall prevent the city from taking such other
lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected
therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible.



(Ord. O-11-011, passed 3-8-2011)



TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES




[Reserved]




PARALLEL REFERENCES




References to Illinois Compiled Statutes





References to Prior Code





References to Ordinances




REFERENCES TO ILLINOIS COMPILED STATUTES



 

ILCS Cite
 
Code Section




Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.01
 
10.04


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.02
 
10.04


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.03
 
10.04


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.04
 
10.04


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.05
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.07
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.08
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.09
 
10.04


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.10
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.11
 
10.04


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.12
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.15
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.16
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.17
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.20
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.24
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.28
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.29
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 2
 
10.04


Ch. 5, Act 120 § 1
 
38.02, 38.03


Ch. 5, Act 175, §§ 1-101 et seq.
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 430, §§ 1-1 et seq.
 
11.01


Ch. 5, Act 430, § 50-5
 
11.01


Ch. 5, Act 430, § 70-5(a)
 
11.01


Ch. 5, Act 430, § 70-5(c)
 
11.01


Ch. 20, Act 3305
 
34.01


Ch. 30, Act 235,§ 0.01-8
 
31.036


Ch. 35, Act 120, §§ 1 et seq.
 
118.01


Ch. 35, Act 120, § 2-27
 
33.46


Ch. 35, Act 630, §§ 1 et seq.
 
33.46


Ch. 35, Act 635, §§ 1 et seq.
 
33.46


Ch. 40, Act 5, § 3-127
 
31.036


Ch. 50, Act 45, §§ 1 et seq.
 
121.07


Ch. 65, Act 5
 
10.02


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-1-2
 
10.02


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-2-1
 
156.01


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-2.2-1 et seq.
 
36.04


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 7-4-2
 
53.20


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-2-9
 
37.05


Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 8-2-9.1 - 8-2-9.10
 
37.01


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-2-9.2
 
37.03


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-2-9.3
 
37.03, 37.04


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-2-9.5
 
37.06


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 10-2.1-4
 
31.143


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-12-12
 
156.01


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-15.1
 
93.02


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-30-2
 
156.01


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-30-8
 
156.01


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-31-2
 
156.01


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-31-1
 
150.15


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-31.1-1 et seq.
 
36.04


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-42-11
 
121.01, 121.02


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-42-11.05
 
121.06


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-125-4
 
53.20


Ch.220, Act 5, § 3-105
 
33.26


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 9-221
 
33.26


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 9-222
 
33.26, 33.46


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 9-222.1
 
33.46


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-301(c)
 
121.02


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-401
 
121.01


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-501
 
121.10


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-501(r)(1)
 
121.99


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-501(s)
 
121.12


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801
 
121.01


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801(a)
 
121.02


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801(b)
 
121.01


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801(c)(1)(vi)
 
121.01


Ch. 230, Act 15, §§ 0.01 et seq.
 
115.41


Chapter 235
 
110.01


Ch. 415, Act 5, §§ 1 et seq.
 
53.21


Ch. 415, Act 5, § 14.2
 
53.20


Ch. 415, Act 5, § 14.3
 
53.20


Ch. 415, Act 55, §§ 1 et seq.
 
53.21


Ch. 510, Act 5
 
90.15


Ch. 510, Act 70, §§ 1 et seq.
 
90.40


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-101.8
 
73.061


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-123.9
 
73.061


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-140.7
 
73.061


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-148.3m
 
73.061


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-153.1
 
73.061


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-168.8
 
73.061


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-188
 
10.02


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 3-616
 
72.05


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-306.5
 
36.05


Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 7-601 et seq.
 
71.009


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11
 
71.009


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-208.3
 
36.04, 36.05, 36.10


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-301
 
71.009


Ch. 720, Act 550, §§ 100 et seq.
 
131.060


Ch. 720, Act 550, § 3
 
131.065


Ch. 720, Act 570, §§ 1 et seq.
 
131.060


Ch. 720, Act 600, § 3
 
115.05


Ch. 735, Act 5, § 3-101 et seq.
 
36.08, 38.02, 38.03


Ch. 735, Act 5, § 3-109
 
36.08


Ch. 735, Act 5, § 12-101 et seq.
 
36.09


Ch. 765, Act 205, § 2
 
156.08


Ch. 805, Act 405, §§ 0.01 et seq.
 
110.15


Ch. 810, Act 5, § 1-101 et seq.
 
36.09


Ch. 820, Act 320, § 1
 
38.01


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE



 

Prior Code Section
 
2009 Code Section




1-4-2
 
10.02


1-5-2
 
30.01


1-6-1
 
92.01


1-7-1
 
92.02


1-7-2
 
92.03


1-7-3
 
92.04


1-7-4
 
92.05


1-7-5
 
92.06


1-7-6
 
92.99


1-8-1
 
92.20


1-8-2
 
92.21


1-8-3
 
Ch. 92, App. A


1-8-4
 
92.21


1-8-5
 
92.99


1-9-1
 
11.01


1-10-1
 
33.01


1-10-2
 
33.02


1-10-3
 
33.03


1-10-4
 
33.04


1-10-5
 
33.04


1-10-6
 
33.05


1-10-7
 
33.06


1-10-8
 
33.07


1-10-9
 
33.08


1-10-10
 
33.09


1-10-11
 
33.09


1-10-12
 
33.10


1-10-13
 
33.11


1-10-14
 
33.12


1-10-15
 
33.14


1-10-16
 
33.13


2-8-1
 
31.020


2-8-2
 
31.021


2-8-3
 
31.023


2-8-4
 
31.024


2-8-5
 
31.022


2-8-6
 
31.025


2-8-7
 
31.026


2-9-1
 
31.030


2-9-2
 
31.031


2-9-3
 
31.034


2-9-4
 
31.035


2-9-5
 
31.036


2-9-6
 
31.035


2-9-7
 
31.032


2-9-8
 
31.033


2-9-9
 
31.037


2-10-1
 
31.050


2-10-2
 
31.051


2-10-3
 
31.052


2-10-4
 
31.055


2-10-5
 
31.056


2-10-6
 
31.057


2-10-7
 
31.055


2-10-8
 
31.053


2-10-9
 
31.054


2-10-10
 
31.058


3-1-1
 
31.080


3-1-2
 
31.080


3-1-3
 
31.081


3-1-4
 
31.088


3-1-5
 
31.082


3-1-6
 
31.083


3-1-7
 
31.084


3-1-8
 
31.087


3-1-9
 
31.086


3-1-10
 
31.086


3-1-11
 
31.085


3-1-12
 
31.089


3-2-1
 
31.100


3-2-2
 
31.100


3-2-3
 
31.101


3-2-4
 
31.107


3-2-5
 
31.102


3-2-6
 
31.103


3-2-7
 
31.104


3-2-8
 
31.106


3-2-9
 
31.105


3-2-10
 
31.108


3-4-1
 
34.01


3-4-2
 
34.02


3-4-3
 
34.06


3-4-4
 
34.09


3-4-5
 
34.10


3-4-6
 
34.11


3-4-7
 
34.07


3-4-8
 
34.08


3-4-9
 
34.12


3-4-10
 
34.03


3-4-11
 
34.04


3-4-12
 
34.05


4-1-1
 
152.01


4-1-2
 
152.02


4-1-3
 
152.03


4-1-4
 
152.04


4-1-5
 
Ch. 152, App. A, Sch I


4-1-6
 
152.05


4-1-7
 
152.06


4-1-8
 
53.10


4-1-9
 
53.11


4-1-10
 
51.037.5


4-2-1
 
153.01


4-2-2
 
153.02


4-2-3
 
153.03


4-2-4
 
153.04


4-2-5
 
Ch. 153, App. A, Sch. I


4-2-6
 
153.05


4-2-7
 
153.05


4-2-8
 
153.06


4-2-9
 
153.07


4-2-10
 
153.08


4-2-11
 
153.09


4-2-12
 
153.12


4-2-13
 
153.11


4-2-14
 
153.10


4-2-15
 
153.99


4-3-1
 
151.01


4-3-2
 
151.02


4-3-3
 
151.03


4-3-4
 
151.04


4-3-5
 
Ch. 151, App. A., Sch. I


4-3-6
 
151.05


4-3-8
 
151.99


4-4-1
 
150.15


4-4-2
 
150.99


4-5-1
 
154.01


4-5-2
 
154.99


4-6-1
 
155.01


4-6-2
 
155.01


4-6-3
 
Ch. 155, App. A, Sch. I


4-7-1
 
92.35


4-7-2
 
92.36


4-7-3
 
92.37


4-7-4
 
92.40


4-7-5
 
92.39


4-7-6
 
92.38


4-7-7
 
92.41


4-7-8
 
92.99


4-8-1
 
150.30


4-8-2
 
150.31


4-8-3
 
150.99


5-1-1
 
110.01


5-1-2
 
110.02


5-1-3
 
110.15


5-1-4
 
110.16


5-1-5
 
110.17


5-1-6
 
110.18


5-1-7
 
110.19


5-1-8
 
110.20


5-1-9
 
110.21


5-1-10
 
110.35


5-1-11
 
110.22


5-1-12
 
110.23


5-1-13
 
110.24


5-1-14
 
110.36


5-1-15
 
110.37


5-1-16
 
110.38


5-1-17
 
110.38


5-1-18
 
110.39


5-1-19
 
110.38


5-1-20
 
110.40


5-1-21
 
110.41


5-1-22
 
110.43


5-1-23
 
110.42


5-1-24
 
110.43


5-1-25
 
110.44


5-1-26
 
110.99


5-1-27
 
110.03


5-2-1
 
115.01


5-2-2
 
115.02


5-2-3
 
115.03


5-2-4
 
115.04


5-2-5
 
115.05


5-2-6
 
115.08


5-2-7
 
115.09


5-2-8
 
115.06


5-2-9
 
115.10


5-2-10
 
115.07


5-3-1
 
115.25


5-3-2
 
115.26


5-3-3
 
115.27


5-4-1
 
114.01


5-4-2
 
114.02


5-4-3
 
114.03


5-4-4
 
114.99


5-5-1
 
115.40


5-5-2
 
115.41


5-5-3
 
115.42


5-5-4
 
115.43


5-6-1
 
113.01


5-6-2
 
113.02


5-6-3
 
113.03


5-6-4
 
113.04


5-6-5
 
113.06


5-6-6
 
113.05


5-6-7
 
113.08


5-6-8
 
113.07


5-6-9
 
113.09


5-6-10
 
113.10


5-6-11
 
113.11


5-9-1
 
111.01


5-9-2
 
111.02


5-9-3
 
111.03


5-9-4
 
111.03


5-9-5
 
111.04


5-9-6
 
111.05


5-9-7
 
111.06


5-9-8
 
111.07


5-9-9
 
111.99


5-10-1
 
116.01


5-10-2
 
116.02


5-10-3
 
116.03


5-10-4
 
116.04


5-10-5
 
116.20


5-10-6
 
116.21


5-10-7
 
116.22


5-10-8
 
116.23


5-10-9
 
116.24


5-10-10
 
116.25


5-10-11
 
116.26


5-10-12
 
116.27


5-10-13
 
116.28


5-10-14
 
116.29


5-10-15
 
116.05


5-10-16
 
116.30


5-11-1
 
115.55


5-11-2
 
115.56


5-11-3
 
115.57


5-11-4
 
115.58


5-12-1
 
112.01


5-12-2
 
112.02


5-12-3
 
112.03


5-13-1
 
112.15


5-13-2
 
112.16


5-13-3
 
112.17


5-13-4
 
112.18


5-13-5
 
112.19


6-1-1
 
54.01, Ch. 54, App. A, Sch. I, II, App. B, Sch. I, II, App. C, Sch. I, II,
App. D, Sch. I, App. E, Sch. I, App. F, Sch. I, App. G, Sch. I


6-2-1
 
53.06


6-2-2
 
53.06


6-2-3
 
53.01


6-2-4
 
53.07


6-2-5
 
53.02


6-2-6
 
53.03


6-2-7
 
53.04


6-2-8
 
53.08


6-2-9
 
53.09


6-2-10
 
53.21—53.24


6-2-11
 
53.35, 53.36


6-3-4
 
Ch. 53, App. A, Sch. IV


6-4-1
 
51.001


6-4-2
 
51.002


6-4-3
 
51.003


6-4-4
 
51.020


6-4-5
 
51.021


6-4-6
 
51.035—51.037


6-4-7
 
51.065


6-4-8
 
51.066


6-4-9
 
51.067


6-4-10
 
51.038


6-4-11
 
51.050—51.053


6-4-12
 
51.004, 51.999


6-4-13
 
51.005


6-4-14
 
51.999


6-5-1
 
51.080


6-5-2
 
51.081


6-5-3
 
51.082


6-5-4
 
51.083


6-5-5
 
51.084


6-5-6
 
51.085


6-5-8
 
51.086


6-5-9
 
Ch. 51, App. A, Sch. I


6-5-10
 
Ch. 51, App. A, Sch. II


6-5-11
 
Ch. 51, App. A, Sch. III


6-5-12
 
Ch. 51, App. A, Sch. IV


6-6-1
 
52.15


6-6-2
 
52.16


6-6-3
 
52.17


6-6-4
 
52.18


6-6-5
 
52.03


6-6-5
 
52.19


6-6-6
 
52.20


6-6-7
 
52.21


6-6-8
 
52.22


6-6-9
 
52.22


6-6-10
 
52.23


6-6-11
 
52.24


6-6-12
 
52.25


6-6-13
 
52.26


6-6-14
 
52.02


6-6-15
 
52.01


6-7-1
 
31.140


6-7-2
 
31.141


6-7-3
 
31.141


6-7-4
 
31.142


6-7-5
 
31.143


6-7-6
 
31.144


6-7-7
 
31.145


6-7-8
 
31.146


6-7-9
 
31.147


6-8-1
 
94.01


6-8-2
 
94.02


6-8-3
 
94.02


6-8-4
 
94.03


6-8-5
 
94.99


6-9-1
 
95.01


6-9-2
 
95.02


6-9-3
 
95.99


6-10-1
 
50.30


6-10-2
 
50.31


6-10-3
 
50.32


6-10-4
 
50.33


6-10-5
 
50.34


6-10-6
 
50.35


6-11-1
 
33.25


6-11-2
 
33.26


6-11-3
 
33.27


6-11-4
 
33.28


6-11-5
 
33.29


6-11-6
 
33.30, 33.99


6-11-7
 
33.31


6-11-8
 
33.32


6-11-9
 
33.33


6-11-10
 
33.34


6-12-1
 
33.45


6-12-2
 
33.46


6-12-3
 
33.47


6-12-4
 
33.49


6-12-5
 
33.50


6-12-6
 
33.48


6-12-7
 
33.51


6-12-8
 
33.52


6-12-9
 
33.53


6-12-10
 
33.54


6-12-11
 
33.55


6-12-12
 
33.99


7-1-1
 
93.01, 93.99


7-1-2
 
131.001, 131.999


7-1-3
 
131.015—131.017, 131.999


7-1-4
 
93.02, 93.99


7-1-5
 
93.03, 93.99


7-1-6
 
93.04


7-2-1
 
90.01


7-2-2
 
90.02


7-2-3
 
90.03


7-2-4
 
90.99


7-2-5
 
90.04


7-3-1
 
90.15


7-3-2
 
90.16


7-3-3
 
90.17


7-3-4
 
90.18


7-3-5
 
90.19


7-3-6
 
90.20


7-3-7
 
90.20


7-3-8
 
90.21


7-3-9
 
90.22


7-3-10
 
90.23


7-3-11
 
90.24


7-3-12
 
90.24


7-3-13
 
90.24


7-3-14
 
90.25, 90.99


7-3-15
 
90.26


7-3-16
 
90.99


7-4-1
 
93.15


7-4-2
 
93.16


7-4-3
 
93.17


7-4-4
 
93.18


7-4-5
 
93.19


7-4-6
 
93.99


7-5-1
 
92.55


7-5-2
 
92.56


7-5-3
 
92.57


7-5-4
 
92.58


7-5-5
 
92.99


7-6-1
 
34.25


7-6-2
 
34.27


7-6-3
 
34.28


7-6-4
 
34.29


7-6-5
 
34.30


7-6-6
 
34.31


7-6-7
 
34.26


7-7-1
 
130.01


7-7-2
 
130.02


7-7-3
 
131.030—131.032


7-7-4
 
130.99, 131.999


7-8-1
 
50.01


7-8-2
 
50.02


7-8-3
 
50.03


7-8-4
 
50.10


7-8-5
 
50.16


7-8-6
 
50.11


7-8-7
 
50.12


7-8-8
 
50.13


7-8-9
 
50.14


7-8-10
 
50.09


7-8-11
 
50.05


7-8-12
 
50.08


7-8-13
 
50.06


7-8-14
 
50.07


7-8-15
 
50.08


7-8-16
 
50.04


7-8-17
 
50.15


7-8-19
 
50.17


7-9-1
 
131.045


7-9-2
 
131.046


7-9-3
 
131.047


7-9-4
 
131.048


7-9-5
 
131.999


7-10-1
 
131.060


7-10-2
 
131.061


7-10-3
 
131.062


7-10-4
 
131.063


7-10-5
 
131.999


7-11-1
 
131.075


7-11-2
 
131.076


7-11-3
 
131.077


7-11-4
 
131.078


7-11-5
 
131.999


7-12-1
 
117.01


7-12-2
 
117.02


7-12-3
 
117.03


7-12-4
 
117.04


7-12-5
 
117.05


7-12-6
 
117.06


7-12-7
 
117.08


7-12-8
 
117.09


7-12-9
 
117.10


7-12-10
 
117.99


7-12-11
 
117.07


8-1-1
 
70.01


8-2-1
 
71.001


8-2-2
 
71.002


8-2-3
 
71.002


8-2-4
 
71.003


8-2-5
 
71.004


8-2-6
 
71.005


8-2-7
 
71.006


8-2-8
 
71.020


8-2-9
 
71.020


8-2-10
 
71.020


8-2-11
 
71.022


8-2-12
 
71.021


8-2-13
 
71.022


8-2-14
 
71.023


8-2-15
 
71.023


8-2-16
 
71.023


8-2-17
 
71.023


8-2-18
 
71.025


8-2-19
 
71.024


8-2-20
 
71.026


8-2-21
 
71.027


8-2-22
 
71.028


8-2-23
 
71.029


8-2-24
 
71.040


8-2-25
 
71.043


8-2-26
 
71.044


8-2-27
 
71.044


8-2-28
 
71.041


8-2-29
 
71.042


8-2-30
 
71.045


8-2-31
 
71.046


8-2-32
 
71.046


8-2-33
 
71.047


8-2-34
 
71.048


8-2-35
 
71.049


8-2-36
 
71.051


8-2-37
 
71.050


8-2-38
 
71.065


8-2-39
 
71.066


8-2-40
 
71.067


8-2-41
 
71.068


8-2-42
 
71.069


8-2-43
 
71.070


8-2-44
 
71.068


8-2-45
 
71.071


8-2-46
 
71.072


8-2-47
 
71.073


8-2-48
 
71.074


8-2-49
 
71.073


8-2-50
 
71.074


8-2-51
 
71.007


8-2-52
 
71.075, 71.999


8-2-53
 
71.999


8-3-1
 
Ch. 74, Sch. I


8-3-2
 
Ch. 74, Sch. II


8-3-3
 
72.01


8-3-4
 
Ch. 74, Sch. III


8-3-5
 
72.02


8-3-6
 
72.03


8-3-7
 
Ch. 74, Sch. IV


8-3-8
 
72.04


8-3-9
 
72.05


8-3-10
 
72.06, 72.99


8-3-11
 
72.07


8-3-12
 
Ch. 74, Sch. V


8-3-13
 
72.08


8-3-14
 
72.09


8-3-15
 
72.99


8-4-1
 
73.001


8-4-2
 
73.002


8-4-3
 
73.003


8-4-4
 
73.004


8-4-5
 
73.005


8-4-6
 
73.006


8-4-7
 
73.003


8-4-8
 
73.007


8-4-9
 
73.008


8-4-10
 
73.009


8-4-11
 
73.010


8-4-12
 
73.011


8-4-13
 
73.011


8-4-14
 
73.012


8-4-15
 
73.013


8-4-16
 
73.013


8-4-17
 
73.014


8-4-18
 
73.014


8-4-19
 
73.999


8-5-1
 
73.025


8-5-2
 
73.026


8-5-3
 
73.027


8-5-4
 
73.028


8-5-5
 
73.029


8-5-6
 
73.030


8-5-7
 
73.031


8-5-8
 
73.999


8-6-1
 
96.01


8-6-2
 
96.02


8-6-3
 
96.99


8-7-1
 
91.01


8-7-2
 
91.02


8-7-3
 
91.03


8-7-4
 
91.04


8-7-5
 
91.05


8-7-6
 
91.06


8-7-7
 
91.07


8-7-8
 
91.08


8-7-9
 
91.08


8-7-10
 
91.09


8-7-11
 
91.10


8-7-12
 
91.12


8-7-13
 
91.99


8-8-1
 
73.045


8-8-2
 
73.046


8-8-3
 
73.047


8-8-4
 
73.048


8-8-5
 
73.049


8-8-6
 
73.049


8-8-7
 
73.999


8-9-1
 
73.060


8-9-2
 
73.061


8-9-3
 
73.062


8-9-4
 
73.062


Title 9
 
150.02


Title 10
 
150.03


Title 11
 
150.01


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




1464
 
1-1-1990
 
Charter, Art. III, Sec. 8


1518
 
- -
 
30.02


1656
 
1-14-1999
 
30.02


1929
 
1-13-2009
 
53.10, 152.01


1931
 
2-10-2009
 
95.01


1932
 
3-10-2009
 
93.02, 93.99


1934
 
4-14-2009
 
91.11


1936
 
4-14-2009
 
52.15—52.18, 52.20, 52.22, 52.23, 52.26, 54.01


1939
 
5-11-2009
 
55.06


1950
 
8-11-2009
 
10.99


1951
 
9-8-2009
 
30.03


1953
 
10-13-2009
 
Adopting Ordinance, Ch. 114, App. A


1956
 
11-10-2009
 
71.076


1957
 
11-10-2009
 
90.40


1961
 
2-9-2010
 
Ch. 151, App. A


1962
 
2-9-2010
 
93.02


1963
 
2-9-2010
 
110.20


1965
 
3-9-2010
 
33.35, 33.56


1966
 
4-13-2010
 
110.20


1967
 
4-13-2010
 
52.27—52.30, Ch. 54, App. H, Sch. I, II


1970
 
5-11-2010
 
93.01


1974
 
7-13-2010
 
153.03


1975
 
7-3-2010
 
110.20


1976
 
9-14-2010
 
151.02


1980
 
12-14-2010
 
95.01


1983
 
12-14-2010
 
73.060 - 73.062, 73.999


O-11-009
 
6-22-2011
 
31.001 - 31.005, 31.020  - 31.026, 31.030 - 31.037, 31.050 - 31.058, 31.060
- 31.066, 31.080 - 31.089, 31.100 - 31.108, 31.140 - 31.147, 52.01, 110.03,
112.17, 112.18, 115.03 - 115.05, 115.07, 115.10, 117.07, 130.02, 153.10


O-11-011
 
3-8-2011
 
156.01 - 156.13, 156.99


O-11-013
 
6-23-2011
 
11.10


O-11-014
 
2-8-2011
 
71.008


O-11-020
 
8-9-2011
 
Adopting Ordinance


O-11-23
 
8-24-2011
 
12.01 - 12.05


O-11-024
 
9-13-2011
 
112.30


O-11-25
 
10-11-2011
 
112.30


O-11-017
 
8-4-2011
 
150.02


O-11-021
 
9-13-2011
 
150.02


O-11-029
 
12-14-2011
 
115.43


O-11-030
 
12-14-2011
 
31.002


O-12-034
 
2-14-2012
 
130.03


O-12-035
 
2-14-2012
 
131.064


O-12-032
 
3-13-2012
 
93.02


O-12-033
 
2-14-2012
 
110.20


O-12-036
 
3-13-2012
 
50.35


O-12-037
 
5-8-2012
 
150.02


O-12-038
 
5-8-2012
 
150.02


O-12-039
 
5-8-2012
 
11.10


O-12-047
 
6-12-2012
 
150.02


O-12-050
 
7-10-2012
 
53.05


O-12-051
 
7-10-2012
 
30.04, 30.05


O-12-052
 
7-10-2012
 
Ch. 53, App. A, Sch. I


O-12-053
 
7-10-2012
 
Ch. 51, App. A, Ch. 53, App. A, Sch. I


O-12-054
 
7-10-2012
 
51.085


O-12-057
 
8-14-2012
 
10.99


O-12-060
 
9-11-2012
 
54.01


O-12-061
 
9-11-2012
 
36.01 - 36.14, Ch. 36, App. A


O-12-062
 
9-25-2012
 
50.02


O-12-066
 
11-13-2012
 
71.073


O-12-068
 
12-11-2012
 
50.01 - 50.04, 50.06, 50.07, 50.30 - 50.32, 50.34


O-12-069
 
12-11-2012
 
50.15


O-13-070
 
2-12-2013
 
150.02


O-13-072
 
2-12-2013
 
113.03


O-13-075
 
3-12-2013
 
93.15 - 93.20


O-13-076
 
3-12-2013
 
51.002


O-13-077
 
3-12-2013
 
73.060 - 73.062


O-13-078
 
3-12-2013
 
110.19, 110.20


O-13-083
 
4-23-2013
 
50.15


O-13-084
 
5-14-2013
 
10.99


O-13-085
 
6-25-2013
 
113.03


O-13-086
 
7-9-2013
 
150.02


O-13-088
 
6-11-2013
 
93.01


O-13-091
 
6-25-2013
 
Ch. 36, App. A


O-13-092
 
8-13-2013
 
50.99


O-13-099
 
11-13-2013
 
150.02


O-14-101
 
3-11-2014
 
92.55 , 92.99


O-14-103
 
6-10-2014
 
30.02


O-14-108
 
8-12-2014
 
92.21


O-14-109
 
8-12-2014
 
118.01 - 118.03


O-14-112
 
10-14-2014
 
53.04


O-14-114
 
11-11-2014
 
71.009


O-14-122
 
11-11-2014
 
52.16, 52.17


O-14-124
 
11-11-2014
 
113.03, 113.05


O-15-131
 
3-10-2015
 
30.06


O-15-132
 
3-10-2015
 
114.01, 114.02


O-15-133
 
3-10-2015
 
110.19, 110.35, 110.38


O-15-134
 
3-10-2015
 
31.005


O-15-135
 
3-10-2015
 
131.075, 131.076, 131.077


O-15-138
 
8-11-2015
 
51.037.5, 53.10, 53.11, 152.01, 152.05


O-15-140
 
5-12-2015
 
110.01 - 110.03, 110.15 - 110.24, 110.35 - 110.44, 110.99


O-15-141
 
5-12-2015
 
131.046


O-15-142
 
5-12-2015
 
92.35 - 92.38


O-15-145
 
6-9-2015
 
93.16, 93.17


O-15-147
 
6-9-2015
 
150.02


O-15-149
 
8-11-2015
 
130.04


O-15-151
 
11-10-2015
 
92.55


O-15-152
 
12-8-2015
 
92.57, 92.58


O-16-162
 
1-12-2016
 
153.04


O-16-163
 
1-12-2016
 
Repealing 31.120 - 31.126


O-16-164
 
1-12-2016
 
153.01


O-16-165
 
6-14- 2016
 
110.01 - 110.03, 110.15 - 110.24, 110.35 - 110.44, 110.99


O-16-169
 
7-12-2016
 
119.01 - 119.05, 119.99


O-16-170
 
6-14- 2016
 
Ch. 151, App. A


O-16-175
 
9-27- 2016
 
53.12, Ch. 53, App. A, Sch. I


O-16-176
 
10-11- 2016
 
71.073, 150.02


O-16-177
 
10-11- 2016
 
131.065


O-16-187
 
12-13-2016
 
92.55


O-16-188
 
12-13-2016
 
50.31, 50.32


O-17-01
 
2-14-2017
 
52.16


O-17-03
 
1-10-2017
 
52.17


O-17-04
 
2-14-2017
 
110.38, 110.39


O-17-05
 
2-14-2017
 
150.02


O-17-06
 
2-14-2017
 
Repeal Chapter 32


O-17-07
 
2-14-2017
 
32.01 - 32.08, 32.20 - 32.24, 32.30 - 32.32


O-17-09
 
3-14-2017
 
52.23


O-17-11
 
4-11-2017
 
Repeal Chapter 35


O-17-12
 
4-11-2017
 
120.01 - 120.07, 120.99


O-17-13
 
4-11-2017
 
92.20, 92.45 - 92.48


O-17-16
 
5-9-2017
 
37.01 - 37.10


O-17-20
 
8-8-2017
 
38.01 - 38.03


O-17-22
 
9-12-2017
 
Ch. 74, Schs. III, IV, VI


O-17-25
 
10-10-2017
 
38.03


O-17-26
 
10-10-2017
 
121.01 - 121.07, 121.10 - 121.12, 121.99


O-17-27
 
10-10-2017
 
150.02


O-17-30
 
12-12-2017
 
52.31


O-17-31
 
12-12-2017
 
52.16 - 52.26


O-17-32
 
11-14-2017
 
53.36


O-18-03
 
4-10-2018
 
55.01 - 55.08, 55.99


O-18-04
 
3-27-2018
 
31.143


O-18-05
 
6-12-2018
 
52.17, 52.32


O-18-07
 
6-12-2018
 
71.020


O-18-09
 
7-10-2018
 
150.02


O-18-11
 
7-10-2018
 
150.02


O-18-12
 
7-10-2018
 
150.03


O-18-13
 
8-14-2018
 
92.01


O-18-17
 
11-13-2018
 
151.06


O-18-24
 
12-11-2018
 
Ch. 51, App. A


O-18-25
 
12-11-2018
 
Ch. 152, App. A


O-19-02
 
3-12-2019
 
150.02


O-19-03
 
4-9-2019
 
120.05


ZONING ORDINANCE
(INCLUDING AMENDMENTS THERETO)
ADOPTED FEBRUARY, 1981
Amended May, 2010, Ordinance No. 1969
Amended September, 2010, Ordinance No. 1977
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter Page Number
1 Title and Purpose 1
2 Definitions 3
3 Zoning Districts; Maps 16
4 General Provisions 18
5 Zoning Districts: Use of Premises 23
6 Height, Yard, Lot and Area Requirements 78
7 Off Street Parking and Loading Spaces 83
8 Signs 89
9 Wireless Communication Facilities 94
10 Nonconforming Uses 110
11 Zoning Board of Appeals 112
12 Enforcement of Title 117
13 Amendments 118
14 Violation and Penalty 120
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
INDEX
-i-
SUBJECT PAGE
"A" Agriculture District 24
"A" Agriculture District, Signs 90
"B" Business District, Signs 90
"B-1" Business District 40
"B-2" Business District 42
"B-3" Business District 45
"B-4" Business District 49
“CUD” Planned Unit Development 57
"F" Floodplain Overlay District 51
"H" Historic Preservation District 53
“HCOD” Highway Commercial Overlay District 58
"PUD" Planned United Development 51
"R-1" Residential District 26
"R-2" Residential District 27
"R-3" Residential District 31
"R-4" Residential District 33
"R-5" Residential District 36
Accessory Buildings 19
Accessory Buildings, considered a part of main building 80
Administrative Changes 118
Adult Bookstore, General Provisions 22
Adult Bookstore, location restriction 45
Adult Live Entertainment, General Provisions 22
Amendment of Zoning Regulations 118
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
INDEX
-ii-
Annexed Territory 17
Appeals, Historic Preservation 57
Authority 2
Barber/Beauty Shop, regulations 27
Bed and Breakfast House, regulations 30
Boarding House, regulations 29
Buildings, number per lot 18
Business Districts 39
Conditional Use 23
Conditional Use, Discontinuance 23
Conditional Use Permits 114
Conversion of Dwellings 19
Conversion of Dwelling, required living space 29
Corner Lots, front yard 78
Definitions 3
District Boundaries Interpretation 17
Districts, listing 16
Dust and Other Particulate Matter 39
Enforcement of Title 117
Essential Services 20
Fences 21
Flood Hazard 20
Front Yard Setback Greater Than Minimum 82
Front Yard, corner lots 78
General Provisions 18
Glare and Heat 40
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
INDEX
-iii-
Height, Yard, Lot and Area Requirements 59
Height, Yard, Lot and Area Requirements, exceptions 79
Height, Yard, Lot and Area Requirements, table 81
Height, Yard, Lot and Area Requirements, lots of record 79
Historic Preservation District, signs 92
Interpretation 3
Lodging/Rooming House, regulations 30
Lot of Record 18
Lots Unserved by Sewer and/or Water 18
Minimum Street Frontage 18
Mobile Home Court, requirements 38
Mobile Homes 20
Nature 2
Noise 39
Nonconforming Uses 110
Nonresidential District, Signs 90
Number of Buildings on a Lot 18
Obstruction of Water Course Channel 20
Odor 40
Off Street Parking and Loading Spaces 83
Parking Space, size 83
Parking Spaces Required 85
Parking Spaces, surfacing 83
Porches, front yard 80
Provisions of Off Street Loading Spaces 88
Purpose 1
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
INDEX
-iv-
Recreational Vehicles 84
Residential Use of Basements 20
Satellite Dishes 19
Signs 89
Signs, "A" Agriculture District 90
Signs, Additional Regulations 91
Signs, "B" Districts 90
Signs, "B-4" District 91
Signs, General Provisions 89
Signs, Historic Preservation District 92
Signs, Residence Districts 89
Signs, Size 93
Smoke 39
Swimming Pool, fences 21
Title 1
Traffic Visibility 20
Validity of Existing Building Permits 20
Variances 114
Violation and Penalty 120
Water/Sewer, Lots Unserved 18
Wireless Communication Facilities 94
Zoning Board of Appeals 112
Zoning Districts 23
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
INDEX
Chapter 1
TITLE AND PURPOSE
9-1-1: Title
9-1-2: Purpose
9-1-3: Nature
9-1-4: Authority
9-1-1: Title
This Title shall be known as the Zoning Title of the City.
9-1-2: Purpose
The chapters, sections, and use districts created by this Title are adopted for the purpose, among
others, of:
Promoting the public health, safety, morals, comfort, and general welfare;
Helping to achieve greater efficiency and economy of land development by promoting the
grouping of those activities which have similar needs and are compatible;
Encouraging such distribution of population, land use, and land development that will facilitate
adequate and economic provisions of transportation, communication, water supply, drainage,
sanitation, education, recreation, and other public requirements;
Lessening or avoiding congestions in the public streets and highways;
Protecting against fire, explosion, noxious fumes, and other hazards in the interest of the public
health, safety, comfort, and general welfare;
Hazards to people and damage to property from the accumulation or run off of storm water;
Helping to insure that all residential, commercial, and manufacturing structures, as well as other
types of structures, will be accessible to firefighting and other emergency equipment;
Prohibiting the formation or expansion of nonconforming uses of land, buildings, and structures
adversely affecting the character and value of desirable development in each district;
Promoting the development of residential neighborhoods which are free of noise, dust, fumes,
and heavy traffic volumes in which each dwelling unit is assured of light, air, and open spaces;
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-2-
Helping to prevent land development activities which lead to roadside blight and to minimize the
effects of nuisance-producing activities;
Conserving the taxable value of land and buildings throughout the City;
Defining and limiting the powers and duties of the Zoning Officer and bodies as provided herein;
Preserving for the citizens of Geneseo the valuable and unique architectural character of the City
by preventing construction, alteration, demolition, or other activities which would detrimentally
affect the architectural unity of buildings of historic significance in the Historic Preservation
District and thereby protecting property values and economic property of the City; and
Preserving the architectural features and general architectural character of the City as stated in
the Chipman Design study and accompanying manual.
9-1-3: Nature
This Section classifies and regulates the use of land, buildings, and structures within the
corporate limits of the City of Geneseo, Illinois. The regulations contained herein are necessary
to promote the health, safety, convenience, and welfare of the inhabitants by dividing the City
into zoning districts and regulating the use of land and the use and size of buildings as to height
and number of stories, the coverage of the land by buildings, the size of yards and open spaces,
the location of buildings and the density of population, and the historic preservation and design
of buildings.
9-1-4: Authority
This Section is adopted in pursuance of the authority granted by the 1973 Revised Statutes of the
State of Illinois, Chapter 24, Article 11, Division 13, and the Illinois Historic Preservation Act
{IL Compiled Statutes (65 ILCS 5/11-48-2.1, et. seq.)}.
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-3-
Chapter 2
DEFINITIONS
9-2-1: Interpretation
9-2-2: Definitions
9-2-1: INTERPRETATION
For the purpose of this Title and in order to carry out the provisions contained herein, certain
words, terms, and phrases are to be interpreted as defined herein.
Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense; the singular number includes the
plural and the plural number the singular. The word "lot" includes the word "plot" or "parcel".
The word "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is permissive.
The following words, terms, and phrases are hereby defined as follows and shall be interpreted
as such throughout this regulation. Terms not herein defined shall have the meaning customarily
assigned to them.
9-2-2: DEFINITIONS
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this Title, they shall have such meaning as
ascribed to them below unless the context specifically indicates otherwise.
ACCESSORY BUILDING, STRUCTURE, OR USE: A subordinate building, structure, or
use which is customarily and incidental to the principal building or use and which is located on
the same lot or parcel of land with the principal building or use. Parking lots or spaces shall not
be considered as accessory uses under this definition. Accessory buildings shall not be used for
dwelling purposes.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER: The individual designated by this Title to administer the
provisions of this Zoning Title.
ADULT BOOKSTORE: An establishment having as a substantial portion of its stock in trade,
books, magazines, films, or other electronically recorded materials for sale or viewing on
premises by use of motion picture devices or any other means, and other periodicals which are
distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to
"specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities" as defined below including
instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for use in connection with specified
sexual activities, or an establishment having more than fifty percent (50%) of its shelf and/or
floor space devoted to the sale or display of such material.
ADULT LIVE ENTERTAINMENT: Any activity involving the presentation of live models
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-4-
displaying lingerie, or otherwise presenting live artistic modeling with said modeling displaying
the human body in a nude or semi-nude state, distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
"specific anatomical areas" for observation by patrons therein and including, but not limited to,
topless dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators, or similar entertainments.
ADULT MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATERS: An enclosed building with a capacity for
less than fifty (50) persons, predominantly used for presenting materials distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to "specific anatomical
areas" or "specific sexual activities" for observation by paying patrons therein. Predominantly
shall mean more than fifty percent (50%) of all presentations.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATERS: An enclosed building with a capacity for fifty
(50) or more persons, predominantly used for presenting materials distinguished or characterized
by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to "specific anatomical areas" or
"specific sexual activities" for observation by paying patrons therein. Predominantly shall mean
more than fifty percent (50%) of all presentations.
ADVERTISING DEVICE: Banners affixed on poles, wires, or ropes; and streamers, windoperated
devices; flashing lights; and other similar devices.
AIRCRAFT: Any contrivance now known, or hereafter invented, used or designed for
navigation of or flight in the air.
AIRPORT: Any area of land, water, or both which is designed for the landing and take off of
aircraft, whether or not facilities are provided for the shelter, servicing, or repair of aircraft or for
receiving or discharging passengers or cargo; all appurtenant areas used or suitable for airport
buildings or other airport facilities; and all appurtenant rights-of-way.
ALLEY: A traffic way dedicated to public use which affords a secondary means of vehicular
access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting a street.
ALTERATION: Any appreciable change in the external architectural features of any structure
or building, visible from a public way or from adjoining property.
APARTMENT: A room or suite of rooms in a multiple or two-family dwelling or where more
than one living unit is established above nonresidential uses, intended or designed for use as a
residence by a single family, as defined herein, and providing essential housekeeping facilities,
kitchen and cooking facilities, bath, and sleeping quarters.
APARTMENT HOUSE: See Dwelling, Multiple-family.
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-5-
AUTO LAUNDRY: A building, or portion thereof, containing facilities for washing
automobiles using production line methods with a chain conveyor, blower, steam cleaning device
or other mechanical devices; or providing space, water, equipment, or soap for the complete or
partial hand washing of such automobiles whether by operator or by customer.
AUTO PARTS RECYCLER: A person who is in the business of acquiring previously owned
vehicles for parts for the primary purpose of disposing of vehicle parts for re-use, in a manner
other than by shredding or melting.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION: One or more buildings or premises where gasoline,
oil, and grease may be supplied and dispensed at retail and incidental repair, batteries, tires,
accessories, and maintenance may be obtained. Uses permissible at a service station do not
include major mechanical and body work, straightening or replacement of body parts, painting,
welding, storage of automobiles not in operating condition, or other work involving greater than
normally found in service stations. A service station is not a repair garage or a body shop. All
activities incidental to the sale of gasoline or oil shall be conducted within a building and there
shall be no storage or accumulation of equipment or motor vehicles outside of the principal
structure.
BASEMENT: A story having part, but not more than, fifty percent (50%) of its height below
the average grade of the adjoining ground (as distinguished from a "cellar"). A basement shall
be counted as a story for the purpose of height measurement.
BED AND BREAKFAST HOUSE: An operator-occupied building providing accommodations
for a charge to the public and by prearrangement for definite periods. Only one meal--breakfast-
-shall be served to guests.
BILLBOARD: A type of sign having more than one hundred (100) square feet of display
surface which is either erected on the ground or attached to or supported by a building or
structure.
BOARDING HOUSE: An operator-occupied building providing accommodations and guest
rooms for a charge to the public and by prearrangement for definite periods; meals are provided
for guests only; not open to transient guests in contradistinction to hotels, motels, and camps
which are open to transient guests.
BOARD OF APPEALS: The Zoning Board of Appeals of the City.
BUILDING: Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls built for the support,
shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind, but not including any
vehicles, trailer, or mobile home (with or without wheels), or any movable device such as
furniture, machinery or equipment, or portable hog houses.
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-6-
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance from the average grade to the highest point of the
coping of a flat roof, or the deck line of a mansard roof, or the mean height level between eaves
and ridge for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE: A line within a lot or other parcel of land so designated on the
plat or as required by this Title which denotes the area between such line and the adjacent street
right-of-way line where structures are prohibited, except those that are permitted by the Zoning
Title.
BULK STORAGE: As set forth in the rules and regulations of the Illinois State Fire Marshall.
CELLAR: A story having more than one half (1/2) of its height below grade. A cellar is not
included in computing the number of stories for the purpose of height measurement.
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS: The official document issued by the Community
Development Board approving and/or concurring in the construction, erection, alteration,
removal, moving, or demolition of any exterior architectural feature of a structure or building in
the Historic Preservation District.
CHILD CARE CENTER: Any place, home, or institution which receives three (3) or more
children under the age of sixteen (16) years and not of common parentage for care apart from
their natural parents, legal guardian, or custodians when received for regular periods of time for
compensation.
CITY: The City of Geneseo
CITY CLERK: The City Clerk of the City.
CITY COUNCIL: The City Council of the City.
CITY ENGINEER: The City Engineer of the City or person designated to act in the capacity of
City Engineer in the review of engineering data, as outlined herein, where the services of a City
Engineer are specifically mentioned.
CLINIC: An establishment used for the care, diagnosis, and treatment of sick, ailing, infirm, or
injured persons (those who are in need of medical, psychiatric, chiropractic, or surgical attention,
but who are not provided with board or room or kept over night on the premises). A clinic may
include an apothecary, pharmacy, or drug store as an integral part of the clinic.
CLUB OR LODGE, PRIVATE: Building and facilities owned or operated by a corporation,
association, person, or persons for a social, educational, or recreational purpose, but not
primarily for profit or to render a service which is customarily carried on as a business.
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-7-
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT BOARD: The Community Development Board of the
City.
DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT OR REFRESHMENT STAND: Any place or premises
principally used for the sale, dispensing, or serving of food, refreshments, or beverages in
automobiles, including those establishments where customers may serve themselves and may eat
or drink the food, refreshments, or beverages on or off the premises.
DWELLING: A building, or portion thereof, designed or used exclusively for residential
occupancy but not including home trailers, mobile homes, hotels, motels, boarding and lodging
homes, tourist courts or tourist homes.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY: A residential building designed for occupancy by three
(3) or more families.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A detached residential dwelling unit other than a mobile
home designed for occupancy by one family only.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A detached residential building containing two (2) dwelling
units designed for occupancy by not more than two (2) families (duplex).
DWELLING UNIT: Residential living area which consists of one or more rooms which are
arranged, designed, or used as living quarters for one family only.
EASEMENT, ACCESS: The vested right to use property for the purpose of access by abutting
property, such right being held by someone other than the owner who holds title to the land over
which the easement of access is granted.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES: Includes the erection, alteration, or maintenance by public utilities
or municipal or other governmental agencies of underground or overhead gas, electrical
communications, supply or disposal systems, retention ponds, including poles, wires, mains,
drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, traffic signals, hydrants, and other similar equipment and
accessories in connection therewith, reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service
by such public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies or for the public health or
safety or general welfare, but not including buildings.
EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL FEATURE: The architectural style, color, and general
arrangement of the exterior of the structure, including the type and texture of building materials,
all windows, doors, lights, signs, and other fixtures appurtenant thereto.
FAMILY/HOUSEHOLD: One or more persons occupying a premises and living as a single
housekeeping unit, related to each other by blood, adoption, or marriage. Unrelated groups
consisting of not more than five (5) persons occupying a premises and living as a single
housekeeping unit shall be known as a household. These are distinguished from a boarding
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-8-
house, lodging house, or hotel, as herein defined.
FARM: An area which is used for the growing of the usual farm products such as vegetables,
fruit trees, and grain and their storage on the area, as well as for the raising thereon of the usual
farm poultry and farm animals such as horses, cattle, and sheep (in accordance with applicable
City ordinance). The term "farming" includes the operation of such an area for one or more of
the above uses, including dairy farms with the necessary accessory uses for treating or storing the
products; provided, however, that the operation of any such accessory uses shall be secondary to
that of the normal farming activities. A "farm" shall contain an area of five (5) acres or more.
FARMSTEAD: The buildings and adjacent service areas of a farm, including one dwelling unit
whose occupants earn a substantial part of their livelihood from the farm operation, plus a second
dwelling unit if used by farm help whose livelihood is derived in substantial part from the farm
operation.
FENCE: Structure which is a barrier used to mark a boundary or as a means of protection,
confinement, screening, or decoration.
FLOODPLAIN OR SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA): Those lands within the
jurisdiction of the City that are subject to inundation by the flood having a one percent (1%)
probability of being equalled or exceeded in any given year (also known as the one hundred
(100) year flood).
FRONTAGE: All property on one side of the street between two (2) intersecting streets
(crossing or terminating) measured along the line of the street, or, if the street is dead-ended, then
all of the property abutting on one side between an intersection street and the dead end of the
street.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: An accessory building housing motor driven vehicles which are the
property of and for the private use of the occupants of the lot on which the private garage is
located and not more than one of the vehicles may be a commercial vehicle of not more than
three (3) ton capacity. Space may be rented for the occupancy of a private vehicle in accordance
with this definition.
GARAGE, PUBLIC: Any building or premises except those used as a private or storage garage
used for equipping, hiring, selling, or storing motor driven vehicles.
GARAGE, STORAGE: Any building or premises used for housing only motor driven vehicles
other than trucks and commercial vehicles pursuant to previous arrangements and not to
transients and at which automobile fuels and oils are not sold and motor driven vehicles are not
equipped, repaired, hired, or sold.
GASOLINE: As set forth in the rules and regulations of the Illinois State Fire Marshal.
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-9-
GRADE: The average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls
of the building, except when any nonconforming wall approximately parallels and is not more
than five feet (5') road line, then the elevation of the road at the corner of the wall adjoining the
road shall be the grade.
GUEST ROOM: A sleeping room intended to serve no more than two guests per night.
HELIPORT: Any area of land or water, or both, except a helistop, which is designed and
designated for the landing and takeoff of helicopters, whether or not facilities are provided for
the sheltering, servicing, or repair of helicopters, or for receiving or discharging passengers or
cargo, and all appurtenant areas used or suitable for heliport buildings or other heliport facilities,
and all appurtenant rights-of-way.
HELISTOP: Any area of land or water, or both, which is certified by the Illinois Department of
Transportation, Division of Aeronautics, for the landing and takeoff of helicopters on an
infrequent basis. An "infrequent basis" shall mean six (6) or less landing or takeoffs per month.
HISTORIC AND/OR ARCHITECTURAL SIGNIFICANCE: That which has a special
historic or aesthetic interest or value as part of the development, heritage, or cultural character of
the municipality, region, state, or nation.
HOME OCCUPATION: Any occupation or activity incidental to residential use when carried
on in the main building by immediate family residing on the premises in connection with which
there is used not other than a nonilluminated name plate not more than one (1) square foot in area
and no display used that will indicate from the exterior that the building is being used for any
purpose other than that of a dwelling. No person is employed other than a member of the
immediate family residing on the premises.
HOTEL: A building in which lodging and possible food services are provided and offered to
the public for compensation and in which ingress and egress to and from all rooms is made
through an inside lobby or office supervised by a person in charge at all hours. As such, it is
open to the public in contradistinction to the boarding house or multiple-family dwelling as
herein separately defined.
INSTITUTION: A building occupied by a nonprofit corporation or nonprofit establishment for
public use.
JUNK YARD: A lot, land, or structure, or part thereof, used primarily for the collection,
storage, and sale of waste paper, rags, scrap metal, or discarded materials or for the collection,
storage, dismantling and salvaging of machinery or vehicles not in running condition, and for the
sale of parts thereof. The term "junk yard" shall include auto wrecking yards.
KENNEL: Any lot or premises on which are kept four (4) or more dogs more than six (6)
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-10-
months of age for compensation or sale.
LAUNDROMAT: An establishment providing home-type washing, drying, or ironing
machines for hire to be used by customers on the premises.
LIQUIFIED PETROLEUM GAS: As set forth in the rules of the Illinois State Fire Marshall.
LODGING AND ROOMING HOUSE: Operator-occupied building providing
accommodations for a charge to the public and by prearrangement for definite periods; meals are
not provided for guests, not open to transient guests in contradistinction to hotels, motels, and
camps, which are open to transient guests.
LODGING HOUSE: A building or place where lodging is provided (or which is equipped
regularly to provide lodging) by prearrangement for a definite period for compensation for three
(3) or more, but not exceeding usually twenty (20) individuals, not open to transient guests in
contradistinction to hotels, motels, tourist homes, and camps, which are open to transient guests.
LOT: A parcel of land occupied or intended for occupancy by a use permitted in this Title,
including one main building together with its accessory buildings, the open spaces and parking
spaces required by this Title, and having its principal frontage upon a street or upon an official
approved place.
LOT AREA: The total horizontal area included within lot lines.
LOT CORNER: A lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets at their intersection.
LOT, DEPTH OF: The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE: A lot having a frontage on two (2) nonintersecting streets as
distinguished from a corner lot.
LOT FRONTAGE: That dimension of a lot or portion of a lot abutting on a street, excluding
the side dimension of a corner lot.
LOT, INTERIOR: Any lot other than a corner lot with only one frontage street.
LOT OF RECORD: A lot which is part of a subdivision, the map of which has been recorded
in the office of the Recorder of Deeds for Henry County, Illinois, prior to June 13, 1972.
LOT WIDTH: The distance between straight lines connecting front and rear lot lines at each
side of the lot. Where side lot lines are not continuously parallel or at right angles to the abutting
street, the average of the rear and front widths shall be used.
MOBILE HOME: A portable or mobile living unit (either single or double width) used or
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-11-
designed for human occupancy on a permanent basis. A travel trailer is not to be considered a
mobile home.
MOBILE HOME PARK: A parcel of land under single ownership which has been designed or
improved or is intended to be used or rented for occupancy by one or more mobile homes or
house trailers on a relatively permanent basis and in contradistinction to a transient trailer or
camper park.
MOTEL: A motel primarily for transients travelling by motor driven vehicles with parking
space on the premises for each lodging unit and with access to each such unit directly from the
outside.
NEIGHBORING STRUCTURE: As used in this Chapter, shall be defined as any existing
structure or any structure for which a building permit has been issued which is situated on any
one of the following lots:
1. Any lot within one (l) lot on the same side of the street on either side of the
proposed construction, without regard to intersecting street lines; or
2. Any lot within one (1) lot of the property directly across from the proposed
construction on the opposite side of the street, without regard to intersecting street
lines; or
3. Any lot within one (1) lot of the proposed construction providing such lot is
abutting a street intersecting the street upon which the proposed construction will
be located and that the front elevations of the subject structures will be
approximately ninety degrees (90̊) to each other.
NONCONFORMING USE, ILLEGAL: Buildings or premises whose use is changed after
adoption of this Zoning Title for purposes which do not meet the requirements of the district in
which said building or premises are located. Such nonconforming uses are violations of the
zoning Title (see Chapter 14).
NONCONFORMING USE, LEGAL: Continued use of buildings or premises for purposes
which, prior to adoption of this Zoning Title, do not meet the requirements of the Zoning District
in which such building or premises are located.
URSING HOME INCLUDING CONVALESCENT HOME, REST HOME AND HOME
FOR THE AGED: An establishment used as a dwelling place by the aged, infirm, chronically
ill or incurably afflicted persons in which not less than three (3) persons live or are kept or
provided for on the premises for compensation excluding clinics and hospitals and similar
institutions devoted to the diagnosis, treatment, or care of the sick or injured.
OPERATOR-OCCUPIED: The owner or the owner's manager of an establishment who is
required to reside within the main building of the establishment.
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-12-
OVERLAY DISTRICT: These districts do not change the zoning of the underlying area, but
impose additional regulations because of location in the flood plain and historic preservation
district or grant relief from certain zoning requirements for mutual benefit of the City and
development for a planned unit development (PUD).
PARKING LOT: An unenclosed area providing space for the storage or parking of two (2) or
more automobiles with the necessary access driveways and aisle space to permit ingress and
egress of automobiles to the lot and individual designated parking spaces without moving other
automobiles. Each parking space therein shall be at least nine feet wide by twenty feet long (9' x
20') and contain one hundred eighty (180) square feet per parking space. The same shall be
paved in accordance with Chapter 7, Section 9-7-1(F.).
PARKING SPACE: A durably surfaced area enclosed in the main building, in an accessory
building, or unenclosed, sufficient in size to store one (1) standard automobile and, if the space is
unenclosed, comprising an area of not less that one hundred eighty (180) square feet, exclusive
of a driveway, connecting the parking space with the street or alley and permitting satisfactory
ingress and egress of any automobile.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: A development which may involve the creative location
and intermixing of various types of residential housing and a limited amount of business use, if
desired, on one (1) tract of land.
PREMISES: A lot, together with all buildings and structures thereon.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING, STRUCTURE, OR USE: A building, structure, or use which
comprises the main or primary occupation and focus of a lot. Although the size of a building
shall be a factor in determining whether it is the principal building, size shall be considered in
conjunction with all other factors, including the actual use and intent of the occupant in making
the determination.
ROADSIDE STAND: A temporary structure with a floor area of not more than four hundred
(400) square feet enclosed and so designated and constructed that is easily portable and can be
readily removed.
SATELLITE DISH: A signal receiving device, characteristically shaped like a saucer or dish,
the purpose of which is to receive communication or other signals from orbiting satellites.
SERVICE STATION: See Automobile Service Station.
SIGN: An identification, description, illustration, or device which is affixed to or represented
directly or indirectly upon a building, structure, or land and which directs attention to a product,
place, activity, person, institution, or business.
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-13-
SIGN AREA: The total area of the space to be used for advertising matter, including the spaces
between open-type letters and figures, including the background structure or other decoration or
addition which is an integral part of the sign. Sign supports shall be excluded in determining the
area of a sign. A double-faced sign shall have twice the total area of a single-faced sign.
SIGN, FRONTAGE: The dimension and feet off the ground floor level of a building front or of
a side which faces the street which a business occupies. A single building can have more than
one (1) sign frontage; corner sites must have separate frontages.
SIGN, GROUND: Any sign erected, constructed, or maintained for the purpose of displaying
outdoor advertising by means of posters, pictures, pictorial, and reading matter when such sign is
supported by uprights, posts, or braces placed upon or affixed in the ground and not attached to
any part of a building; includes billboards.
SIGN, MARQUEE: Any sign affixed to a marquee over the entrance to a building and
supported from the building.
SIGN, OFF-SITE: A sign other than an on-site sign.
SIGN, ON-SITE: A sign relating in its subject matter to the premises on which it is located or
to products, accommodation services, or activities on the premises. On-site signs do not include
billboards.
SIGN, PORTABLE: Any ground sign which is not affixed or imbedded into the ground and is
capable of being moved or transported from one site to another.
SIGN, ROOF: Any sign erected, constructed, or maintained upon the roof of any building.
SIGN, WALL: Any painted sign or poster on any surface or plane that may be affixed to the
front, side, or rear wall of any building.
SIGN, WINDOW: A sign placed inside a building next to a window so as to be visible to the
outside of the building.
SPECIFIC ANATOMICAL AREAS: are defined as less than completely and opaquely
covered human genitals, pubic region, buttock, and female breast below a point immediately
above the top of the areola and human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered, displayed or depicted in such a manner as to appeal to the
prurient interest of the viewer.
SPECIFIC SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: are defined as human genitals in a state of sexual
stimulation or arousal, acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy, fondling or
other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic regions, buttocks, or female breasts, displayed or
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-14-
depicted in such a manner as to appeal to the prurient interest of the viewer.
STORY: That portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the
upper surface of the floor next above or the ceiling or roof next above such floor; provided that,
for the purpose of determining the required dimensions of yards and courts, when the average
story height of a building exceeds twelve feet (12'), each twelve feet (12') or fraction thereof of
the total building height shall be considered a separate full story or fractional story respectively,
except the first story, which may be fifteen feet (15') high.
STORY, HALF: A partial story under a gable, hip, or gambrel roof, the wall plates of which on
at least two (2) opposite exterior walls are not more than five feet (5') above the floor of such
story; provided, however, that any partial story used for residential purposes shall be deemed a
full story. A half story may be used for occupancy only in conjunction with and by the
occupancy of the story immediately below.
STREET: A general term used to describe a public right-of-way which provides designated
improved areas for vehicular and pedestrian movement and may provide for vehicular and
pedestrian access to properties adjacent to it and which may also provide space for the location
of utilities (both above and below ground).
STREET LINE: The line separating the public right-of-way from property abutting thereon.
STREET, MAJOR: A traffic way connecting communities or connecting to limited access
traffic ways which, in turn, connect to other communities.
STREET, THOROUGHFARE: A limited access traffic way connecting two (2) or more
communities.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires permanent location
on the ground or attached to something having a permanent location on the ground including, but
not limiting, the generality of the foregoing, advertising signs, billboards, backstops for tennis
courts, and pergolas.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION: Any changes that would prolong the life of the supporting
members of a building or structure such as the bearing walls, columns, beams, or girders, not
including openings in bearing walls as permitted by other chapters.
TOURIST OR TRAILER CAMPS: An area designated or designed and equipped to
accommodate two (2) or more trailers, tents, or other temporary living or dwelling units and
intended to service automobile transients in contradistinction to a mobile home park or court,
which is intended for a more permanent occupancy.
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-15-
TRAVEL TRAILER: A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis, designed to be used as
a temporary dwelling for travel and recreational purposes, having a body width not exceeding
eight feet (8').
VOLATILE OILS: As set forth in the rules and regulations of the Illinois State Fire Marshall.
YARD: Required open space at grade unoccupied and unobstructed by any structure or portion
of a structure other than projections of uncovered steps, uncovered balconies or uncovered
porches; provided, however, that fences, walls, poles, posts, and other customary yard
accessories, ornaments, and furniture may be permitted in any yard subject to height and
visibility requirements. In measuring a yard for the purposes of determining the width of side
yard, depth of a front yard or rear yard, the minimum horizontal distance between the lot line and
the main building shall be used.
YARD, FRONT: Any open space extending the full width of a lot between a building and the
front lot line, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as hereinafter
specified.
YARD, REAR: An open space extending the full width of a lot between a building and the rear
lot lines, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as hereinafter specified.
YARD, SIDE: An open space extending the front yard to the rear yard between a building and
the side lot line, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as hereinafter
specified.
ZONING DISTRICT: Any area or areas within the limits of the City for which the regulations
and requirements governing use, lot, and bulk of buildings and premises are uniform.
ZONING MAP: See Chapter 3.
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-16-
Chapter 3
ZONING DISTRICTS; MAPS
9-3-1: Establishment of Districts
9-3-2: Zoning Map
9-3-3: Rules for Interpretation of District Boundaries
9-3-4: Annexed Territory
9-3-1: Establishment of Districts
In order to classify, regulate, and restrict the location of trades, businesses, industries, residences,
and other land uses and the location of buildings designed for specific uses; to regulate and limit
the height and bulk of buildings hereafter erected or structurally altered; to regulate and limit the
intensity of the use of the lot areas and to regulate and determine the areas of yards, courts, and
other open spaces within and surrounding such buildings, the incorporated area of the City is
hereby divided into the following Zoning Districts:
"A" Agricultural District
Residential Districts
"R-1" Residential District (single-family)
"R-2" Residential District (single-family and duplex)
"R-3" Residential District (4 or less units)
"R-4" Residential District (8 or less units)
"R-5" Residential District (no unit restrictions)
Business Districts
"B-1" Business District (Local)
"B-2" Business District (Highway)
"B-3" Business District (Central)
"B-4" Business District (Special)
Overlay Districts
"F" Flood Plain District
"PUD" Planned Unit Development
"H" Historic Preservation District
9-3-2: Zoning Map
The location and boundaries of the zoning districts established by this Chapter are set forth on
the map entitled "Zoning Map" which is herein and hereby made a part of this Title. Said map,
together with everything shown thereon and all amendments thereto, shall be as much a part of
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-17-
this Title as though fully set forth and described herein.
9-3-3 Rules for Interpretation of District Boundaries
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the precise location of any of the aforesaid districts
shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply:
A. Boundaries shown as following or approximately following streets, highways, or alleys shall
be construed to follow the center lines of such streets, highways, or alleys.
B. Where the district boundaries are not otherwise indicated and where the property has
been or may hereafter be divided into blocks and lots, such boundaries shall be construed to be
the lot lines and, where the districts are bounded approximately by lot lines, lot lines shall be
construed to be the boundary of such districts unless said boundaries are otherwise indicated on
the zoning map.
C. Where a boundary line is shown as being located a specific distance from a street or road
line or other physical feature, this distance shall control.
D. Boundaries shown as following or approximately following the center lines of streams,
rivers, or other continuously flowing water courses shall be construed as following the channel
center line of such water courses taken at a mean low water mark.
E. Boundaries shown as following or closely following the City limits shall be construed as
following such limits.
F. In unsubdivided property, unless otherwise indicated, the district boundary line shall be
determined by the use of the scale contained on the zoning map.
G. Where the application of the aforesaid rules leaves a reasonable doubt as to the
boundaries between two (2) districts, the regulations of the more restrictive district shall govern
the entire parcel in question, unless otherwise determined by the Zoning Board of Appeals in
accordance with provisions contained in Chapter 11.
9-3-4: Annexed Territory
All territory which may hereafter be annexed to the City shall be classified automatically as
being in an "R-1" Residential District until such classification shall have been changed by
amendment of this Chapter as provided hereafter or as provided in a pre-annexation agreement.
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-18-
Chapter 4
GENERAL PROVISIONS
9-4-1: Zoning Affects Every Structure and Use
9-4-2: Minimum Street Frontage, Lot of Record, Number of Buildings on Lot, and Lots
Unserved by Sewer and Water
9-4-3: Accessory Buildings
9-4-4: Required Yard Cannot be Reduced or Used by Another Building
9-4-5: Conversion of Dwellings
9-4-6: Traffic Visibility
9-4-7: Essential Services
9-4-8: Mobile Homes
9-4-9: Validity of Existing Building Permits
9-4-10: Residential Use of Basements and Cellars
9-4-11: Flood Hazard and Obstruction of Water Course Channels
9-4-12: Fences
9-4-13: Adult Live Entertainment
9-4-14: Adult Bookstores
9-4-15: Severability Clause
9-4-1: Zoning Affects Every Structure and Use
Except as hereinafter provided, no building, structure, or land shall be erected, constructed,
reconstructed, occupied, moved, altered, repaired, or used except in conformity with the
regulations hereinafter specified for the class of district in which it is located.
9-4-2: Minimum Street Frontage, Lot of Record, Number of Buildings on Lot, and Lots
Unserved by Sewer and Water
A. Minimum Street Frontage. No lot shall be created after the adoption of this amendment of
this Title unless it abuts on a public street and has access thereto of that minimum frontage set
forth by Chapter 9-6-3 of this Ordinance.
B. Lot of Record. In any Residential District on a lot of record at the time of enactment of this
Title, one single-family dwelling may be established regardless of the size or width of the lot,
provided all other requirements of this Title are complied with.
C. Number of Buildings on a Lot. Except in the case of planned unit developments, motels, or
mobile home parks, not more than one principal detached building shall be located on a lot nor
shall a principal detached residential building be located on the same lot with any other principal
building.
D. Lots Unserved by Sewer and/or Water. In any residential district where neither central
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-19-
water supply nor central sewerage system is available within three hundred feet (300') of
proposed lot, one single-family detached dwelling may be constructed, provided the otherwise
specified lot area and width requirements shall be a minimum of one acre and two hundred feet
(200'), respectively.
9-4-3: Accessory Buildings
A. Time of Construction. No accessory buildings, structures, or uses shall be permitted on any
lot prior to the time of construction of the principal building to which it is accessory.
B. Percentage of Yard Occupied. No detached accessory building or buildings shall occupy
more than fifty percent (50%) of the area of a side or rear yard.
C. Height of Accessory Building. No detached accessory building or structure shall exceed
ninety percent (90%) of the height of the principal building or structure or seventeen feet (17'),
whichever is less.
D. Size of Accessory Building. A lot may contain more than one (1) accessory building, as
long as the terms of this and all other paragraphs of the Zoning Ordinance are complied with.
No single accessory building larger than nine hundred sixty (960) square feet of ground or floor
area shall be permitted in the R-1 through R-4 districts, except private garages may provide four
hundred eighty (480) square feet per unit on multi-family lots.
E. Location on Lot. No accessory building shall be erected in any front yard. Accessory
buildings shall be no closer than five feet (5') from all lot lines adjoining lots which are in any
residential district and at least ten feet (10') from alley lines. It shall not encroach upon the
required side yard. No accessory building is permitted on easement areas.
F. Satellite dishes shall be considered accessory buildings. In addition to the foregoing
provisions to which all accessory buildings are subject, satellite dishes shall be situated on the
ground in all residential districts, and either on the ground or on buildings or other antenna
structures in business districts.
9-4-4: Required Yard Cannot be Reduced or Used by Another Building
No lot, yard, or other open space shall be so reduced in area or dimension as to make any such
area or dimension less than the minimum required by this Chapter and, if already less than the
minimum required, it shall not be further reduced.
9-4-5: Conversion of Dwellings
The conversion of any building into a dwelling or the conversion of any dwelling so as to
accommodate an increased number of dwelling units or families shall be permitted only within a
district in which a new building for similar occupancy would be permitted under the title and
only when the resulting occupancy will comply with the requirements governing new
construction in such district with respect to minimum lot size, lot area per dwelling unit,
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-20-
dimensions of yards and other open space, and off-street parking. Each conversion shall be
subject also to such further requirements as may be specified hereinafter within the chapter
applying to such districts.
9-4-6: Traffic Visibility
In a residential district no fence, structure, or planting which obstructs vehicular visibility shall
be erected or maintained within a required front yard setback area.
9-4-7: Essential Services
Essential services shall be permitted as authorized and regulated by law and other ordinances of
the community, it being the intention hereof to exempt such essential services for the application
of this Title.
9-4-8: Mobile Homes
All inhabited mobile homes or house trailers shall be located in a mobile home court or park that
has received a conditional use permit as required by Chapter 11 hereof. No mobile home or
house trailer outside an approved mobile home court or park shall be connected to utilities except
those mobile homes or house trailers being offered for sale by a licensed dealer or manufacturer
and not inhabited which may be connected to electrical outlets on the dealer's sales lot.
9-4-9: Validity of Existing Building Permits
Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the overall layout, plans, construction, size,
or designated uses of any development, building structure or part thereof for which the official
approvals and required building permits have been granted before the enactment of this Title, the
construction of which, conforming with such plans, shall have been started prior to the effective
date of this Title and the completion thereof carried on in a normal manner within the subsequent
six (6) month period and not discontinued until completion except for reasons beyond the
builder's control.
9-4-10: Residential Use of Basements and Cellars
The residential use of buildings or structures consisting solely or primarily of a basement or
cellar which is part of a conventionally designed building shall comply with all other applicable
building, health, fire, safety, and housing regulations.
9-4-11: Flood Hazard and Obstruction of Water Course Channels
A. Flood Hazard. In any district which is subject to flood hazard, a building permit of any
structure shall be issued only when the construction meets the requirements of the Flood Plain
Ordinance.
B. Obstruction of Water Course Channel. To prevent encroachment upon or construction in
river or creek channels and thereby avoid obstruction to the natural conveyance of water flow in
such rivers, creeks, and other natural water courses, there shall not be placed, erected, or located
within the designated floodplain of such water courses any building or structure, pier, or marina,
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-21-
retaining or revetment wall, except authorized bridges of dams. In addition, there shall not be
placed any filling of earth, ashes, rubbish, rubble, concrete, masonry, or any other kind of fill,
except as provided in the Geneseo Flood Control Ordinance.
9-4-12: Fences
A. A fence is a structure which is a barrier used to mark a boundary or as a means of protection,
confinement, screening, or decoration.
B. Fences, walls, hedges, and other plantings are permitted in residential yards under the
following restrictions:
1. Front yard: up to the front boundary of the yard, subject to 2. below.
2. No hedges or other plantings (or any portion thereof) shall be permitted within
three feet (3') of any street or sidewalk. All hedges and other plantings shall be
maintained and trimmed so as to comply with this subsection.
3. Such fences, walls, hedges, and other plantings shall not exceed seven feet (7') at
the highest point including the post in height above the natural grade level in any
yard. No such fence, wall, hedge, or other planting shall be permitted to obstruct
traffic visibility on corner lots or other alley or driveway entrances.
4. All fences, walls, hedges, and other plantings shall specifically comply with any
State statutes regarding height and positioning along roads, streets, and highways
within the jurisdiction of the State of Illinois.
C. Security fences are permitted in nonresidential yards up to the property line of the lot. Such
fences shall not exceed ten feet (10') in height. No such fence shall be permitted which would
obstruct traffic visibility on corner lots or other alley or driveway entrances.
D. No fence consisting or made of barbed wire, or of which barbed wire is a part, or any wire
which is charged with electrical current, shall be built or used in residential zones. In business
and industrial zones, barbed wire may be placed seven feet (7') or more above the ground when
placed in conjunction with a woven wire security fence.
E. No fence, wall, or hedge shall be built or planted in such a location or at such a height as to
block the passage of sunlight to receptacles for solar heating units which are situated on
neighboring lots. This restriction shall apply only when the solar receptacles are in existence or
in the process of construction prior to the fence, wall, hedge, or other planting.
F. Swimming Pools. Every person who owns or is in possession of any premises on which
there is situated a swimming pool, either in ground or above ground, which has a water depth of
eighteen inches (18") or more in any portion thereof, shall maintain on the lot or premises upon
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-22-
which such swimming pool is situated a fence, wall, or other adequate structure completely
surrounding the pool and constructed so as to make it inaccessible to small children. The fence,
wall or other structure must be not less than four feet (4') in height, with no openings large
enough to admit a child except through doors or gates. However, this minimum height
requirement shall not be construed to permit swimming pool fences with a maximum height
higher than six feet (6'), as set forth in this Title. All doors or gates in fences surrounding
swimming pools shall be of such a size as to completely fill any opening in the fence, wall, or
other structure and shall be equipped with self-closing and self-latching devices capable of
keeping such gate or door securely closed. The closing or latching devices shall be located not
less than four feet (4') above grade or be otherwise inaccessible from the outside to small
children. In lieu of self-closing and self-latching devices, the doors and gates may be equipped
with locks which shall be kept locked at all times when the pool is not in actual use.
G. The provisions of this Section shall not be applicable to fences, walls, hedges, or other
plantings which are in existence on November 12, 1985 unless the Building Inspector of the City
of Geneseo determines that such fence, wall, hedge, or other planting constitutes a danger to
public health or safety. The determination of the Building Inspector shall be in writing and set
forth the reasons the fence, wall, hedge, or other planting constitutes such a danger. A copy of
the written determination shall be mailed to the owner of the premises on which the fence, wall,
hedge, or other planting is situated. Such owner may appeal the determination in accordance
with the provisions of Chapter 11 of the Geneseo Zoning Ordinance.
9-4-13: Adult Live Entertainment
No establishment or business shall permit adult live entertainment nor conduct business as an
adult mini-motion picture theater or adult motion picture theater within the boundaries of the
City of Geneseo.
9-4-14: Adult Bookstores
Adult bookstores shall be allowed as a conditional use in B-2 highway business zoning districts
only, and shall not be allowed as a conditional use or permissive use in any other district.
9-4-15: Severability Clause
If any provisions or part of this Title should be held unenforceable by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the remainder of the provisions herein contained shall be deemed to continue in full
force and effect.
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-23-
Chapter 5
ZONING DISTRICT: USE OF PREMISES
9-5-1: Uses
9-5-2: “A” Agricultural District
9-5-3: “R-1” Residential District
9-5-4: “R-2” Residential District
9-5-5: “R-3” Residential District
9-5-6: “R-4” Residential District
9-5-7: “R-5” Residential District
9-5-8: Business Districts
9-5-9: “B-1” Business District (Local)
9-5-10: “B-2” Business District (Highway)
9-5-11: “B-3” Business District (Central)
9-5-12: “B-4” Business District (Special)
9-5-13: “F” Flood Plain Overlay District
9-5-14: “PUD” Planned Unit Development
9-5-15: “H” Historical Preservation District
9-5-16: “CUD” Condominium Use District
9-5-17: “HCOD” Highway Corridor Overlay District
9-5-1: Uses
A. Permissive Uses. Those uses permitted in a particular zoning district without any special
action or approval.
B. Conditional Uses. Those uses in a particular zoning district which may be recommended by
the Zoning Board of Appeals and granted by the City Council in accordance with the procedures
and other conditions set forth in Chapter 11 of this Title.
1. When a conditional use permit is granted by the City Council, the usage for which
the conditional use was sought shall begin within one year of the meeting date or
be null and void unless a different date is specified in the permit. All permits
granted under the provisions of the previous chapters shall fall under the
provisions of this paragraph with the meeting date being the date of passage of
this Title.
2. Discontinuance of a conditional use. No building or premises used in whole or
part under a conditional use permit which remains idle or unused for a continuous
period of two (2) years, whether or not the equipment or fixtures are removed,
shall again be used for that purpose unless a new permit be granted.
Temporary buildings for construction purposes are permitted in any district during
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-24-
periods of construction.
3. The City shall not be obliged to grant a conditional use for a lodging and rooming
house, boarding house, or bed and breakfast house merely because the owner has
obtained a license from the Henry County Health Department, but shall consider
all pertinent factors as set forth in the Geneseo Zoning Ordinance with relation to
conditional uses. However, a conditional use may be granted to an owner who
has not yet obtained a license from the Henry County Health Department, subject
to such a license being obtained within a reasonable time approved by the City,
not to exceed two (2) weeks from the granting of the conditional use. In the event
that the owner does not obtain the license within the required period or any
extension thereof granted by the City, or in the event the owner's license is
revoked by the Henry County Health Department for any reason, the conditional
use shall be automatically revoked and terminated.
9-5-2: "A" Agricultural District
Intent. This District is intended to preserve a rural setting of very low density and high quality
for "estate" or gentlemen's farm" type development, while providing also for the continuance of
commercial agriculture on properties of sufficient area to permit compatibility with surrounding
residential development, in areas not served or immediately intended to be served by municipal
services, such as sewer and water systems.
A. Permissive Uses.
1. Farm of not less than five (5) acres in size.
2. Plant nursery and greenhouse.
3. Roadside stand offering for sale only farm products produced on the premises,
which stand shall be removed during any period when not in use or not in season.
4. Farmstead.
5. Publicly owned or operated park or playground.
6. Cemetery.
7. Accessory uses of an agricultural or farming nature.
B. Height, Yard, Lot Width and Area Regulations. The height, yard, lot width, and area
requirements as required in Chapter 6 of this Title.
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-25-
C. Off-street Parking and Loading Regulations. In accordance with Chapter 7 of this
Title.
D. Conditional Uses.
1. Railroad Trackage.
2. Country club or golf course, except miniature golf course or golf driving range for
commercial purposes.
3. Church and school, including college and junior college.
4. Home occupation.
5. Extraction of sand and gravel.
6. Privately operated outdoor recreational facility, including riding stable, lake,
swimming, trailer park, pool, tennis court, and golf course, provided they are located on
sites of five (5) acres or more.
7. Airport, heliport, and helistop, provided they comply with the regulations of the
Federal Aviation Administration Agency and the Illinois Department of Transportation,
Division of Aeronautics. No land or water, or both, within the City limits of Geneseo,
Illinois shall be used for the landing or takeoff of any aircraft except in compliance with
the terms of this provision. Nothing in this Chapter shall prohibit the evacuation of
disaster victims or removal and transportation of persons needing emergency medical
treatment when such transportation is required for the preservation of human life, and
such transportation is furnished by emergency air ambulance medical helicopter services,
the United States Government, National Guard, or qualified Civil Defense authorities.
8. Hospital, nursing home, and educational, religious and philanthropic institution on
sites of not less than five (5) acres, provided not more than twenty percent 20%) of the
site area may be occupied by the buildings and, provided further, that the buildings shall
be set back from all required yard lines an additional two feet (2') for each foot of
building height above that required of the "A" Agricultural District.
9. Kennel, veterinary hospital or clinic, and stable, provided that any building or
enclosure so used shall be located not less than one hundred feet (100') from any street or
lot line or residential district.
10. Single-family dwelling.
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-26-
9-5-3: "R-1" Residential District
Intent. The principal use of land is for single-family dwellings. These residential areas are
intended to be defined and protected from encroachment of uses which are not appropriate to a
residential environment. Internal stability, attractiveness, order, and efficiency are encouraged
by providing for adequate light, air, and open space for dwellings and related facilities.
A. Permissive Uses.
1. Single-family dwelling.
2. Farm of not less than five (5) acres in size.
3. Essential service.
4. Accessory building or use as follows:
a. Private garage and parking areas for the sole use of the occupants.
b. Vegetable and flower garden.
c. Tennis court, swimming pool, garden house, pergola, ornamental gate,
barbecue oven, fireplace, and similar uses customarily accessory to residential
use.
B. Height, Yard, Lot Width, and Area Regulations. In accordance with Chapter 6 of this
Title.
C. Off-street Parking and Loading Regulations. In accordance with Chapter 7 of this
Title.
D. Conditional Uses.
1. Church or temple.
2. Public school or school offering general educational courses the same as
ordinarily given in a public school, private preschool, play, special, and other
private school.
3. Public library and similar public culture uses, located not less than twenty feet
(20') from any side lot line in any residential district.
4. Community center.
5. Branch telephone exchange, transformer station, and booster or pressure
regulating station, without service yard storage.
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-27-
6. Country club with golf course, swimming pool, tennis courts, and similar
recreational uses, provided that any principal building or swimming pool shall be located
not less than one hundred feet (100') from any lot in any residential district.
7. Cemetery.
8. Home occupation.
9. Publicly owned or operated park or playground.
10. Barber or beauty shop. A barber or beauty shop shall be allowed as a
conditional use after public hearing of the Zoning Board of Appeals as provided
under this Chapter, and only after the following conditions have been met and
shall be maintained.
a. Only the person owning the premises or renting the premises for which the
conditional use is requested may operate and run the business requested.
Absolutely no employees whatsoever shall be allowed in the running and
operation of said business.
b. The business requested must meet all state licensing requirements and
must meet all local ordinance requirements pertaining to said business.
c. No sign designating the location of the business will be allowed on the
premises, other than a sign having no more than one square foot of area on any
surface.
d. The conditional use must terminate upon legal transfer of the property by
the person running the business, or relinquishment of possession of the property
by the person running the business, or upon discontinuance of the business for a
period of greater than ninety (90) days.
9-5-4: "R-2" Residential District
Intent. The principal use of land is for single-family dwellings and, under certain conditions,
new two-family dwellings and the conversion of older, larger dwellings into two-family and
multi-family dwellings. It is further the intent of this District to protect the value of existing
residential areas and insure the value of future residential development while providing for the
essential, supporting facilities, both public and private, of the residential areas. Internal stability,
attractiveness, order, and efficiency are encouraged by providing for adequate light, air, and open
space for dwellings and related facilities.
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-28-
A. Permissive Uses:
1. Single-family dwelling.
2. Farm of not less than five (5) acres in size
3. Essential service.
4. Accessory building or uses as follows:
a. Private garage and parking area for the sole use of the occupants.
b. Vegetable and flower garden.
c. Tennis court, swimming pool, garden house, pergola, ornamental gate,
barbecue oven, fireplace, and similar uses customarily accessory to residential
use.
B. Height, Yard, Lot Width, and Area Regulations. As required in Chapter 6 of this
Title.
C. Off Street Parking and Loading Regulations. In accordance with Chapter 7 of this
Title.
D. Conditional Uses:
1. Church or temple.
2. Public school or school offering general educational courses the same as
ordinarily given in a public school, private preschool, play, special, and other private
school.
3. Public library and similar public culture uses, located not less than twenty feet
(20') from any side lot line in any residential district.
4. Community center.
5. Branch telephone exchange, transformer station, and booster or pressure
regulating station, without service yard storage.
6. Country club with golf course, swimming pool, tennis courts and similar
recreational uses, provided that any principal building or swimming pool shall be located
not less than one hundred feet (100') from any lot in any residential district.
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-29-
7. Cemetery.
8. Home occupation.
9. Publicly owned or operated park or playground.
10. Barber or beauty shop in accordance with the provisions in Section 9-5-3.
11. Private club or lodge, except those whose chief activity is a service customarily
carried on as a business, provided any building is located not less than twenty feet (20')
from any lot in any Residential District.
12. Parking area accessory to a use in an adjoining, less restricted district when
abutting or directly across an alley, subject to the applicable conditions contained herein,
and such further conditions as may be stipulated by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
13. The conversion of existing older and large single-family dwellings shall be
subject to providing a minimum of six hundred (600) square feet of living space per
apartment and each apartment shall contain sleeping, cooking (kitchen), toilet, and
bathing facility, and comply with the current Uniform Housing Code. Off-street parking
shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 7 of this Title.
14. Studio including, but not limited to, artist, photographer, sculptor, or musician.
15. Two-family dwelling (duplex).
16. Boarding house, provided that:
a. Parking will meet the requirements within the zoning ordinance section
entitled "Off Street Parking and Loading Spaces," and must be visually screened
from the neighboring properties.
b. The establishment be operator-occupied.
c. Interior features are retained to allow reconversion to residential use upon
termination of the permit.
d. The kitchen shall not be remodeled to a commercial kitchen.
e. The establishment shall be operated entirely within the principal dwelling
and guest rooms shall not occupy more than fifty percent (50%) of the total living
area, excluding basement area, when determining total living area of the building
or more than ten (10) guest rooms, whichever is less.
f. The owner shall provide a copy of an annual license granted by the Henry
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-30-
County Heath Department's "Bed and Breakfast Ordinance."
17. Lodging and Rooming House, provided that:
a. Parking will meet the requirements within the zoning ordinance section
entitled "Off Street Parking and Loading Spaces," and must be visually screened
from the neighboring properties.
b. The establishment be operator-occupied.
c. Interior features are retained to allow reconversion to residential use upon
termination of the permit.
d. The establishment shall be operated entirely within the principal dwelling
and guest rooms shall not occupy more than fifty percent (50%) of the total living
area, excluding basement area, when determining total living area of the building
or more than ten (10) guest rooms, whichever is less.
e. The owner shall provide a copy of an annual license granted by the Henry
County Health Department's "Bed and Breakfast Ordinance."
18. Bed and Breakfast House, provided that:
a. Parking will meet the requirements within the zoning ordinance section
entitled "Off Street Parking and Loading Spaces," and must be visually screened
from the neighboring properties.
b. The establishment be operator-occupied.
c. Interior features are retained to allow conversion to residential use upon
termination of the permit.
d. The establishment shall be operated entirely within the principal dwelling
and guest rooms shall not occupy more than fifty percent (50%) of the total living
area, excluding basement area, when determining total living area of the building
or more than ten (10) guest rooms, whichever is less.
e. The owners shall provide a copy of an annual license granted by the Henry
County Health Department's "Bed and Breakfast Ordinance."
19. Hospital, clinic; nursing home; housing for the elderly; and educational,
philanthropic, and religious institution, provided not more than fifty percent (50%) of the site
area may be occupied by buildings.
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-31-
20. Child care center.
21. Civic theatre.
22. Physicians' and dentists' office and private clinic for human care; professional
office of architects, engineers, lawyers, and the like; office devoted to real estate, insurance,
management, and similar enterprises when not displaying or handling merchandise on the
premises. The buildings permitted under this subsection shall be of a design and location
compatible with the permitted residential use.
23. Greenhouse, florist shop, and nursery.
9-5-5: "R-3" Residential District
Intent. The principal use of land may range from single-family to medium density multi-family
units. Internal stability, attractiveness, order, and efficiency are encouraged by providing for
adequate light, air, and open space for dwellings and related facilities.
A. Permissive Uses:
1. Single-family dwelling.
2. Multi-family dwelling not to exceed four (4) units per building.
3. Farm of not less than five (5) acres in size.
4. Essential service.
5. Accessory building or uses as follows:
a. Private garage and parking areas for the sole use of the occupants.
b. Vegetable and flower garden.
c. Tennis court, swimming pool, garden house, pergola, ornamental gate,
barbecue oven, fireplace, and similar uses customarily accessory to residential
use.
B. Height, Yard, Lot Width and Area Regulations: As required in Chapter 6 of this Title.
C. Off Street Parking and Loading Regulations: In accordance with Chapter 7 of this
Title.
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-32-
D. Conditional Uses:
1. Church or temple.
2. Public school or school offering general educational courses the same as
ordinarily given in a public school, private preschool, play, special, and other private
school.
3. Public library and similar public culture uses, located not less than twenty feet
(20') from any side lot line in any residential district.
4. Community center.
5. Branch telephone exchange, transformer station, and booster or pressure
regulating station, without service yard storage.
6. Country club with golf course, swimming pool, tennis courts, and similar
recreational uses, provided that any principal building or swimming pool shall be located
not less than one hundred feet (100') from any lot in any residential district.
7. Cemetery.
8. Home occupation.
9. Publicly owned or operated park or playground.
10. Barber or beauty shop in accordance with the provisions in Section 9-5-3.
11. Private club or lodge, except those whose chief activity is a service customarily
carried on as a business, provided any building is located not less than twenty feet (20')
from any lot in any residential district.
12. Parking area accessory to a use in an adjoining less restricted district when
abutting or directly across an alley, subject to the applicable conditions contained herein
and such further conditions as may be stipulated by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
13. The conversion of existing older and large single-family dwellings shall be
subject to providing a minimum of six hundred (600) square feet of living space per
apartment and each apartment shall contain sleeping, cooking (kitchen), toilet, and
bathing facilities and comply with the current Uniform Housing Code. Off-street parking
shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 7 of this Title.
14. Studio including, but not limited to, artist, photographer, sculptor, or musician.
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-33-
15. Two-family dwelling (duplex).
16. Boarding House, in accordance with the provisions of Section 9-5-4.
17. Lodging and Rooming House, in accordance with the provisions of Section 9-5-4.
18. Bed and Breakfast House, in accordance with the provisions of Section 9-5-4.
19. Hospital; clinic; nursing home; housing for the elderly; and educational,
philanthropic, and religious institution, provided not more than fifty percent (50%) of the
site area may be occupied by buildings.
20. Child care center.
21. Civic theatre.
22. Physicians' and dentists' office and private clinic for human care; professional
office of architects, engineers, lawyers, and the like; office devoted to real estate,
insurance, management, and similar enterprises when not displaying or handling
merchandise on the premises. The buildings permitted under this subsection shall be of a
design and location compatible with the permitted residential use.
23. Greenhouse, florist shop, and nursery.
9-5-6: "R-4" Residential District
Intent. The principal use of land may range from single-family to high density multi-family
dwelling units. Internal stability, attractiveness, order, and efficiency are encouraged by
providing for adequate light, air, and open space for dwellings and related facilities.
A. Permissive Uses:
1. Single-family dwelling.
2. Multi-family dwelling not to exceed eight (8) units per building.
3. Farm of not less than five (5) acres in size.
4. Essential service.
5. Accessory building or uses as follows:
a. Private garage and parking areas for the sole use of the occupants.
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-34-
b. Vegetable and flower garden.
c. Tennis court, swimming pool, garden house, pergola, ornamental gate,
barbecue oven, fireplace, and similar uses customarily accessory to residential
use.
B. Height, Yard, Lot Width and Area Regulations: As required in Chapter 6 of this Title.
C. Off Street Parking and Loading Regulations: In accordance with Chapter 7 of this
Title.
D. Conditional Uses:
1. Church or temple.
2. Public school or school offering general educational courses the same as
ordinarily given in a public school, private preschool, play, special, and other private
school.
3. Public library and similar public culture uses, located not less than twenty feet
(20') from any side lot line in any residential district.
4. Community center.
5. Branch telephone exchange, transformer station, and booster or pressure
regulating station, without service yard storage.
6. Country club with golf course, swimming pool, tennis courts, and similar
recreational uses, provided that any principal building or swimming pool shall be located
not less than one hundred feet (100') from any lot in any residential district.
7. Cemetery.
8. Home occupation.
9. Publicly owned or operated park or playground.
10. Barber or beauty shop, in accordance with the provisions in Section 9-5-3.
11. Private club or lodge, except those whose chief activity is a service customarily
carried on as a business, provided any building is located not less than twenty feet (20')
from any lot in any residential district.
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-35-
12. Parking areas accessory to a use in an adjoining less restricted district when
abutting or directly across an alley, subject to the applicable conditions contained herein
and such further conditions as may be stipulated by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
13. The conversion of existing older and large single-family dwellings shall be
subject
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-36-
to providing a minimum of six hundred (600) square feet of living space per apartment
and each apartment shall contain sleeping, cooking (kitchen), toilet, and bathing facilities
and comply with the current Uniform Housing Code. Off street parking shall be provided
in accordance with Chapter 7 of this Title.
14. Studio including, but not limited to, artist, photographer, sculptor, or musician.
15. Two-family dwelling (duplex).
16. Boarding House, in accordance with the provisions of Section 9-5-4.
17. Lodging and Rooming House, in accordance with the provisions of Section 9-5-4.
18. Bed and Breakfast House, in accordance with the provisions of Section 9-5-4.
19. Hospital; clinic; nursing home; housing for the elderly; and educational,
philanthropic, and religious institution, provided not more than fifty percent (50%) of the
site area may be occupied by buildings.
20. Child care center.
21. Civic theatre.
22. Physicians' and dentists' office and private clinic for human care; professional
office of architects, engineers, lawyers, and the like; office devoted to real estate,
insurance, management, and similar enterprises when not displaying or handling
merchandise on the premises. The buildings permitted under this subsection shall be of a
design and location compatible with the permitted residential use.
23. Greenhouse, florist shop, and nursery.
9-5-7: "R-5" Residential District
Intent. The principal use of land is for high density residential development. Certain uses are
permitted which are more compatible with intensive residential use than with commercial uses.
Internal stability, attractiveness, order, and efficiency are encouraged by providing for adequate
light, air, and open space for dwelling and related facilities.
A. Permissive Uses.
1. Single-family dwelling.
2. Multi-family dwelling not to exceed eight (8) units per building.
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-37-
3. Farm of not less than five (5) acres in size.
4. Essential service.
5. Accessory building or uses as follows:
a. Private garage and parking areas for the sole use of the occupants.
b. Vegetable and flower garden.
c. Tennis court, swimming pool, garden house, pergola, ornamental gate,
barbecue oven, fireplace, and similar uses customarily accessory to residential
use.
B. Height, Yard, Lot Width and Area Regulations: As required in Chapter 6 of this Title.
C. Off Street Parking and Loading Regulations: In accordance with Chapter 7 of this
Title.
D. Conditional Uses:
1. Church or temple.
2. Public school or school offering general educational courses the same as
ordinarily given in a public school, private preschool, play, special, and other private
school.
3. Public library and similar public culture uses, located not less than twenty feet
(20') from any side lot line in any residential district.
4. Community center.
5. Branch telephone exchange, transformer station, and booster or pressure
regulating station, without service yard storage.
6. Country club with golf course, swimming pool, tennis courts, and similar
recreational uses, provided that any principal building or swimming pool shall be located
not less than one hundred feet (100') from any lot in any residential district.
7. Cemetery.
8. Home occupation.
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-38-
9. Publicly owned or operated park or playground.
10. Barber or beauty shop, in accordance with the provisions in Section 9-5-3.
11. Private club or lodge, except those whose chief activity is a service customarily
carried on as a business, provided any building is located not less than twenty feet (20')
from any lot in any residential district.
12. Parking areas accessory to a use in an adjoining less restricted district when
abutting or directly across an alley, subject to the applicable conditions contained herein
and such further conditions as may be stipulated by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
13. The conversion of existing older and large single-family dwellings shall be
subject to providing a minimum of six hundred (600) square feet of living space per
apartment and each apartment shall contain sleeping, cooking (kitchen), toilet, and
bathing facilities and comply with the current Uniform Housing Code. Off street parking
shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 7 of this Title.
14. Studio including, but not limited to, artist, photographer, sculptor, or musician.
15. Two-family dwelling (duplex).
16. Boarding House, in accordance with the provisions of Section 9-5-4.
17. Lodging and Rooming House, in accordance with the provisions of Section 9-5-4.
18. Bed and Breakfast House, in accordance with the provisions of Section 9-5-4.
19. Hospital; clinic; nursing home; housing for the elderly; and educational,
philanthropic, and religious institutions provided not more than fifty percent (50%) of the
site area may be occupied by buildings.
20. Child care center.
21. Civic theatre.
22. Physicians' and dentists' office and private clinic for human care; professional
office of architects, engineers, lawyers, and the like; office devoted to real estate,
insurance, management, and similar enterprises when not displaying or handling
merchandise on the
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-39-
premises. The buildings permitted under this subsection shall be of a design and location
compatible with the permitted residential use.
23. Greenhouse, florist shop, and nursery.
24. Small service-oriented business or retail store within a dwelling structure and
designed to serve only the occupants of the premises.
25. Mobile home court or park, provided that:
a. Each lot provided for occupancy of a single mobile home unit or house
trailer shall have an area of not less than four thousand five hundred (4,500)
square feet and a width of not less than forty five feet (45') and no court or park
shall be permitted a density of more than eight (8) units per acre and each mobile
home court or park shall contain a minimum of ten (10) acres and be served by
public sewer and water systems.
b. All mobile home courts or parks shall provide lots sufficient in size to
maintain the following requirements.
1. No mobile home or house trailer, any structure, addition, or
appurtenance thereto is located less than ten feet (10') from the adjacent
lot boundary.
2. Space between mobile homes or house trailers may be used for
parking of motor vehicles if the space is clearly designated and the vehicle
is parked at least ten feet (10') from the nearest adjacent lot boundary.
c. Each mobile home or house trailer site shall abut or face a clear
unoccupied space, driveway, roadway, or street of not less than twenty-eight feet
(28') in width, which shall have unobstructed access to a public highway or street.
d. All private streets or drives within the mobile home court or park must
have an improved all weather surface of not less than twenty-eight feet (28') in
width.
e. The mobile home court or park shall be surrounded by a landscaped strip
of open space fifty feet (50') wide along the public street frontage of a major street
and twenty-five feet (25') wide around the court or park of a minor street frontage.
f. No mobile home or trailer sales lot shall be connected with the mobile
home or house trailer court except that units may be displayed for sale upon any
of the approved sites as model units.
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-40-
g. All appropriate State and City health and sanitation regulations shall be
strictly observed.
h. A common space shall be provided within the mobile home court or park
for the storage of boats, campers, and other bulky equipment which shall not be
permitted on individual mobile home sites.
9-5-8: Business Districts
General. The following districts are intended to provide for a wide range of commercial
and light industrial uses. However, any commercial or industrial use shall observe the following
environmental performance standards:
A. Noise. All noise shall be muffled so as not to be objectionable due to intermittence, beat
frequency, or shrillness, and, as measured at any property line, shall not exceed the most current
noise regulations adopted by the Illinois Pollution Control Board.
B. Smoke. The emission of smoke by any use shall be controlled so to be less dark in
shade than that designated as No. 2 of the Ringelmann Chart, published and used by the
United States Bureau of Mines; provided, however, that smoke of a density equal to that
designated as No. 2 on the Ringelmann Chart may be permitted for not more than eight
(8) minutes during any thirty (30) minute period and smoke of a density not exceeding
that designated as No. 3 on the Ringelmann Chart may be permitted for not more than six
(6) minutes during any eight (8) hour period while starting or cleaning a fire.
C. Dust and Other Particulate Matter. The emission of dust, fly ash, and other
particulate matter shall not exceed eighty-five one hundredths (0.85) pounds per one
thousand (1,000) pounds of flue gas, measured at a convenient point in the stack and
under conditions not exceeding fifty percent (50%) of excess air. The amount of solids in
such gases shall be determined according to the test for dust separation apparatus of the
American Society of Mechanical Engineers, revised and amended to date.
D. Odor. The emission of odorous matter in such quantity as to be offensive at a point
along or outside any lot line shall not be permitted. In determining such quantities of
offensive odors, Table III (Odor Thresholds) in Chapter 5 of the "Air Pollution
Abatement Manual" (copyright 1951 by Manufacturing Chemists Association, Inc.,
Washington, D. C.) shall be used as a guide.
E. Glare and heat. Any operation producing intense heat and glare shall be conducted
within an enclosed building or with other effective screening in such manner as to be
completely imperceptible from any point along or outside the lot lines.
9-5-9: "B-1" Business District (Local)
Intent. This District is intended to provide for individual or small groups of retail and
customer service establishments serving primarily the convenience of an individual residential
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-41-
neighborhood and the character, appearance, and operation of which are compatible with the
character of the surrounding neighborhood. It is further intended to be incidental to the
neighborhood in which located.
A. Permissive Uses:
1. Bakery whose products are sold at retail on the premises.
2. Barber shop and beauty parlor.
3. Cleaner and laundry.
4. Store for sale of goods and products at retail, not to exceed two thousand five
hundred (2,500) square feet.
5. Apothecary and pharmacy.
6. Repair shop for household items, including clothing.
7. Bank and savings and loan institution.
8. Florist and greenhouse as a retail business.
9. Mortuary or funeral home.
10. Studio including, but not limited to, artist, photographer, sculptor, or musician.
11. Boarding House.
12. Lodging and Rooming House.
13. Bed and Breakfast House.
14. Hospital; clinic; nursing home; housing for the elderly; and educational,
philanthropic, and religious institution provided not more than fifty percent (50%) of the
site area may be occupied by buildings.
15. Public school or school offering general educational courses the same as
ordinarily given in a public school, private preschool, play, special, and other private
school.
16. Child care center.
17. Civic theatre.
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-42-
18. Physicians' and dentists' office and clinic for human care; professional office of
architects, engineers, lawyers, and the like; offices devoted to real estate, insurance,
management, and similar enterprises.
19. Accessory use of buildings as follows:
a. Parking lot.
b. Incidental storage and light industrial use of buildings; provided, however,
that these uses do not exceed forty percent (40%) of the floor space.
20. Single-family dwelling.
21. Farm of not less than five (5) acres.
22. Essential Service.
B. Height and Yard Regulations: As required in Chapter 6 of this Title.
C. Off Street Parking and Loading Regulations: In accordance with Chapter 7 of this
Title.
D. Conditional Uses:
1. Restaurant, except drive-in restaurant.
2. Animal hospital and animal clinic where there are no open kennels.
3. Commercial school.
4. Automobile service station.
5. Auto laundry.
9-5-10: "B-2" Business District (Highway)
Intent. This district is intended to provide for the total service needs of the motoring public using
the major highway system through and adjacent to Geneseo and to require adequate space
provisions to accommodate peculiar needs of the motorists. It is further intended to provide
areas in close proximity to the major highway network and discourage through traffic on minor,
local residential streets within the City.
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-43-
A. Permissive Uses:
1. Bakery whose products are sold at retail on the premises.
2. Barber shop and beauty parlor.
3. Cleaner and laundry.
4. Store for sale of goods and products at retail, not to exceed two thousand five
hundred (2,500) square feet.
5. Apothecary and pharmacy.
6. Repair shop for household items, including clothing.
7. Bank and savings and loan institution.
8. Florist and greenhouse as retail business.
9. Mortuary or funeral home.
10. Studio including, but not limited to, artist, photographer, sculptor, or musician.
11. Boarding House.
12. Lodging and Rooming House.
13. Bed and Breakfast House.
14. Hospital; clinic; nursing home; housing for the elderly; and educational,
philanthropic, and religious institution provided not more than fifty percent (50%) of the
site area may be occupied by buildings.
15. Public school or school offering general educational courses the same as
ordinarily given in a public school, private preschool, play, special, and other private
school.
16. Child care center.
17. Civic theatre.
18. Physicians' and dentists' office and clinic for human care; professional office of
architects, engineers, lawyers, and the like; offices devoted to real estate, insurance,
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-44-
management, and similar enterprises.
19. Accessory use of buildings as follows:
a. Parking lot.
b. Incidental storage and light industrial use of buildings; provided, however,
that these uses do not exceed forty percent (40%) of the floor space.
20. Restaurant, except drive-in restaurant.
21. Animal hospital and animal clinic where there are no open kennels.
22. Commercial school.
23. Automobile service station.
24. Auto laundry.
25. Store, shop, laundromat, and retail business or service.
26. Bowling alley, dance hall, skating rink, and other commercial recreational uses.
27. Automobile service station.
28. Farm implement sales, storage, and repair.
29. Hotel and motel.
30. Public garage, automobile repair shop, and parking lot or building.
31. New and used car sales lot.
32. Restaurant.
33. Restaurant, drive-in.
34. Theater and assembly hall.
35. Theater, drive-in.
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-45-
36. Office and office building.
37. Laboratory research, experimental or testing.
38. Mobile home or house trailer, boat, trailer (camper) sales or storage.
39. Bus passenger station.
B. Height and Yard Regulations: As required in Chapter 6 of this Title.
C. Off Street Parking and Loading Regulations: In accordance with Chapter 7 of this
Title.
D. Conditional Uses:
1. Wholesale merchandising or storage warehouse.
2. General service and repair establishment including, but not limited to, dying or
cleaning works or laundry, plumbing and heating, printing, painting, upholstering, tin
smithing, or appliance repair shop.
3. Compounding of cosmetics, toiletries, drug, and pharmaceutical products and
other similar products.
4. Manufacture or assembly of items including, but not limited to, medical and
dental equipment, drafting, optical, and musical instruments, watches, clocks, toys,
games, electrical or electronic equipment or apparatus.
5. Manufacture of storage of food products including, but not limited to, beverage
blending or bottling, bakery products, candy manufacture, fruit and vegetable processing
and canning, packing and processing of meat and poultry products, but not distilling of
beverages or slaughtering of poultry or animals.
6. Contractors' storage lot.
7. Sale and storage of liquid or solid fertilizer.
8. Welding and metal fabricating shop.
9. Multi-family dwelling not to exceed four (4) units per building.
10. Single-family dwelling.
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-46-
11. Farm of not less than five (5) acres in size.
12. Essential service.
13. Bulk storage of gasoline, liquefied petroleum gas and/or volatile oils, provided
such storage complies in all respects with the rules and regulations of the Illinois State
Fire Marshal and all other applicable state laws.
14. Recycling of paper, rubber, plastic, metal, and other similar products.
15. Adult Bookstore. No adult bookstore shall be permitted within one thousand feet
(1,000') of any residential district, public or private school or licensed day care center, church or
religious center, public park, or cemetery, or other adult bookstore. This section shall not be
used to require the abolition or removal of an adult bookstore already in existence under this
Ordinance due to the subsequent location of any residential district, public or private school or
licensed day care center, church or religious center, public park, or cemetery, or other adult
bookstore within one thousand feet (1,000') of such bookstore.
9-5-11: "B-3" Business District (Central)
Intent. This district is intended to recognize the existing main commercial complex of Geneseo
and the development normally associated with a "downtown" complex. It is intended to provide
a wide assortment of commercial and manufacturing activities and goods in a more concentrated
location, easily accessible to the whole community while preventing objectionable conditions
due to overly offensive noises, smoke, odor, dust, etc.
A. Permissive Uses:
1. Bakery whose products are sold at retail on the premises.
2. Barber shop and beauty parlor.
3. Cleaner and laundry.
4. Store for sale of goods and products at retail, not to exceed two thousand five
hundred (2,500) square feet.
5. Apothecary and pharmacy.
6. Repair shop for household items, including clothing.
7. Bank and savings and loan institution.
8. Florist and greenhouse as retail business.
9. Mortuary or funeral home.
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-47-
10. Studio including, but not limited to, artist, photographer, sculptor, or musician.
11. Boarding House.
12. Lodging and Rooming House.
13. Bed and Breakfast House
14. Hospital; clinic; nursing home; housing for the elderly; and educational,
philanthropic, and religious institution provided not more than fifty percent (50%) of the
site area may be occupied by buildings.
15. Public school or school offering general educational courses the same as
ordinarily given in a public school, private preschool, play, special, and other private
school.
16. Child care center.
17. Civic theater.
18. Physicians' and dentists' office and clinic for human care; professional office of
architects, engineers, lawyers, and the like; office devoted to real estate, insurance,
management, and similar enterprises.
19. Animal hospital and animal clinic where there are no open kennels.
20. Commercial school.
21. Auto laundry.
22. Store, shop, laundromat, and retail business or service.
23. Automobile service station.
24. Farm implement sales, storage, and repair.
25. Hotel and motel.
26. Public garage, automobile repair shop, and parking lot or building.
27. New and used car sales lot.
28. Restaurant.
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-48-
29. Theater and assembly hall.
30. Farm store and feed store.
31. Office and office building.
32. Laboratory research, experimental or testing.
33. Mobile home or house trailer, boat, trailer (camper) sales or storage.
34. Bus passenger station.
35. Multi-family dwelling not to exceed eight (8) units per building.
36. Single-family dwelling.
37. Farm of not less than five (5) acres in size.
38. Essential service.
39. Accessory use of buildings as follows:
a. Parking lot.
b. Incidental storage and light industrial uses of buildings; provided,
however, that these uses do not exceed forty percent (40%) of the floor space.
c. Lodge hall, temple, or private club.
d. Private music, dancing, business, vocational, or other school or college.
e. Police or fire station, library, post office, or other municipal, county, or
federal building.
f. Tavern.
g. Telephone exchange.
h. Milk, egg, and produce receiving station.
i. Store for the collection and distribution of laundry and dry cleaning
articles and for the treatment, cleaning, and processing of such articles.
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-49-
j. Painting and decorating shop establishment.
k. Public service building or use.
l. Printing establishment.
m. Pool hall.
n. Hardware, plumbing, and heating establishment.
o. Upholstering establishment.
p. Automobile salesroom and automobile accessory store.
B. Height and Yard Regulations: As required in Chapter 6 of this Title.
C. Off Street Parking and Loading Regulations: In accordance with Chapter 7 of this
Title.
D. Conditional Uses:
1. Wholesale merchandising or storage warehouse.
2. General service and repair establishment including, but not limited to, dying or
cleaning works or laundry, plumbing and heating, printing, painting, upholstering, tin
smithing, or appliance repair shop.
3. Compounding of cosmetics, toiletries, drugs, and pharmaceutical products and
other similar products.
4. Manufacturing or assembly of items including, but not limited to, medical and
dental equipment, drafting, optical, and musical instruments, watches, clocks, toys,
games, electrical or electronic equipment or apparatus.
5. Manufacture or storage of food products including, but not limited to, beverage
blending or bottling, bakery products, candy manufacture, fruit and vegetable processing
and canning, packing and processing of meat and poultry products, but not distilling of
beverages or slaughtering of poultry or animals.
6. Bulk storage of gasoline, liquefied petroleum gas and/or volatile oils, provided
such storage complies in all respects with the rules and regulations of the Illinois State
Fire Marshal and all other applicable state laws.
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-50-
9-5-12: "B-4" Business District (Special)
Intent. This district is intended to provide for those light industrial uses and existing grain and
lumber handling enterprises which are in keeping with the residential nature of the community.
Industrial uses should not be detrimental to the surrounding community on the basis of actual
physical and operational characteristics by virtue of traffic, physical appearance, or other
environmental factors.
A. Permissive Uses:
1. Grain elevator.
2. Feed mill.
3. Lumber yard.
4. Building for business, manufacturing, industrial, or railroad purposes.
5. Accessory storage shall be enclosed in a building or by a concrete or masonry
wall not less than six feet (6') in height.
6. Any commercial or industrial use may be allowed that observes the environmental
noise standards, except that:
a. No building shall be erected, converted, reconstructed, or structurally
altered for church, school, institutional, or residential except for resident
watchmen or caretakers employed on the premises.
b. No premises is used for auto wrecking, junk yard, and similar storage or
salvage.
c. No premises is used for extraction of raw materials.
d. No premises is used for bulk storage of oils, petroleum, or similar
flammable liquid and chemicals, or for the storage of explosives.
e. Fuel oil storage tanks are to be placed under ground.
B. Height and Yard Regulations: As required in Chapter 6 of this Title.
C. Off Street Parking and Loading Regulations: In accordance with Chapter 7 of this
Title.
D. Conditional Uses:
1. Bulk storage of gasoline, liquefied petroleum gas and/or volatile oils, provided
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-51-
such storage complies in all respects with the rules and regulations of the Illinois State
Fire Marshal and all other applicable State laws.
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-52-
2. Auto parts recycler, provided that all outdoor storage areas shall be screened by
the inclusion of a solid fence at least six feet but no more than eight feet in height, or be
enclosed with a dense evergreen growth at least six feet in height at time of installation.
Storage between the street and such fence or screen, or above the fence or screen, is
expressly prohibited. All gasoline, motor oils, brake and transmission fluids, antifreeze,
hydraulic fluids, battery acids, and other fluids shall be removed immediately from
salvaged vehicles. Such fluids shall be stored and disposed of in such a manner so as to
avoid soil and environmental contamination of the subject site and prevent contamination
of surrounding properties and waterways. All tires shall be disposed of or stored in such
a way so as to prevent their holding water or in any way harboring insects or other pests.
9-15-13: "F" Flood Plain Overlay District
Intent. This district is intended to provide a direct link between the Zoning Ordinance and the
Flood Control Ordinance by identifying those areas subject to flood hazard because of their
location within the one hundred (100) year flood year.
A. Permissive Uses:
Any use permitted in the underlying zone provided it complies with the Geneseo Flood
Control Ordinance.
B. Conditional Uses:
Any conditional use permitted in the underlying zone provided it complies with the
Geneseo Flood Control Ordinance.
9-5-14: "PUD" Planned Unit Development
Intent. The planned unit development provisions of this Chapter are intended to encourage land
development projects which would include a variety of housing types that will expand housing
opportunities and to provide an incentive to include within the project usable open space,
convenient shopping facilities, religious, and cultural facilities to an extent that they are designed
and incorporated within the project to serve the residents thereof. These provisions are further
intended to encourage a greater degree of creativity that would be practicable under the
underlying zoning districts and to promote efficient use of land. The district provides a
mechanism for which a developer can be given reasonable assurance of ultimate approval before
expending complete design moneys, while City officials are assured that the project will retain
the character envisioned.
A. Special Provisions for Planned Unit Development:
1. Minimum lot area, excluding common open space, shall be one acre.
2. The housing type, yard, height, and accessory uses shall be determined by the
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-53-
requirements and procedures set out below, which shall prevail over conflicting
requirements of this Chapter or any chapter governing the subdivision of land.
3. A preliminary development plan of the project showing the intended use or uses
of land; the dimensions and location of proposed structure, except for single-family
dwelling lots; location of areas to be reserved for vehicular and pedestrian circulation;
parking; public usages; and open spaces shall be submitted to the Geneseo Community
Development Board as if it were a preliminary plat as provided for in the subdivision
ordinance.
4. The Community Development Board shall conduct a public hearing and review
the proposed development as to its conformity with the Geneseo Land Use plan and
recognized standards of design, land use planning, and landscape architecture. The
Geneseo Community Development Board may impose conditions regarding the layout,
circulation, performance of a proposed development, including drainage and replacement
and sizing of utilities, and may require that appropriate deed restrictions be filed
enforceable by the City Council. The Geneseo Community Development Board shall,
after the public hearing and review, submit its report and recommendations to the City
Council for approval.
5. All residential land uses shall be exempt from yard requirements, except that a
front yard as required by the underlying district shall be required around the perimeter of
the Planned Unit Development and along all collector streets as determined by the
Community Development Director.
6. Upon approval of the preliminary development plan by the City Council, a final
development plan shall be prepared.
7. The final development plan shall use as a guide all applicable procedures,
standards, and requirements of this Title or any title of the City governing the subdivision
of land and comply with the approved preliminary development plan and approved
recommendations of the Community Development Board. The final development plan
shall be prepared by and have the seal of an engineer duly licensed to practice in Illinois.
8. If the final development plan does not comply with the approved preliminary
development plan and approved recommendations, the City Council may direct the
Community Development Board to hold a second public hearing and may require
additional changes to the planned unit development.
9. The final development plan will be approved by the City Council if it has not
been revised from the approved preliminary development plan except to incorporate
required changes. The developer may begin construction of the streets and utilities after
the Council approves the preliminary development plan but no building permits shall be
issued until the final development plan is approved and recorded.
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-54-
10. Each unit in the development shall be allotted the minimum lot area required in
the underlying district. The area dedicated for public streets shall be deleted from the
area of the development for calculating the maximum number of units to be allowed in
the development.
A reduction in the required lot area per unit may be permitted in the following ratios:
common open space/gross area (less streets) = minimum lot area
per unit/lot area per unit in zoning ordinance
No reduction will be allowed if the ratio is less than 5%.
11. Commercial land uses primarily serving the needs of the planned unit
development residents may be permitted in residential districts provided the commercial
uses do not comprise more than ten percent (10%) of the total area. Furthermore, no such
commercial uses shall be construed until fifty percent (50%) of the proposed residential
units are constructed and occupied.
12. Any changes in the approved final development plans either during construction
or any time after its completion must be reviewed by the Community Development
Board. The Community Development Board shall determine if it is a minor or major
change. Minor changes may be authorized by the Community Development Board after
notification is given to the City Council of that change. The Community Development
Board shall hold a public hearing on all major changes, make a determination on that
change, and pass its opinion on to the City Council for final approval.
9-5-15: "H" Historic Preservation District
Intent. The historic preservation district provisions of this Title are intended to restrict the
construction, erection, alteration, removal, moving, or demolition of buildings and structures in
the area of the historic preservation district and to encourage the preservation and enhancement
of the education, cultural, economic, and general welfare of the City of Geneseo.
A. Special Purposes of the Historic Preservation District.
1. Promotion of the use and preservation of historic buildings, structures, and sites
which reflect the cultural, social, economic, political, or architectural inheritance of the
municipality for the education and general welfare of the people of Geneseo.
2. Protection and enhancement of the attractiveness of the Municipality as it relates
to residents, tourists and visitors, serving as a support and stimulant to business, and
thereby strengthening the economy of the Municipality and its residents.
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-55-
3. Stabilization and increase of property values within the Municipality.
4. Compatibility of any and all construction of new improvements and buildings and
modifications of existing structures with the historic architectural character of the
Municipality.
5. Enhancement of the visual and aesthetic character, diversity, and interests of the
Municipality.
6. Preservation and further enhancement of civic pride of the residents of the
Municipality in the beauty of the Municipality and in the notable accomplishments of the
past.
7. Protection of the property rights of owners whose property lies within areas of
historic architectural significance.
B. Special Provisions of the Historic Preservation District:
1. The provisions of this District "H" shall apply to all buildings or structures within
the Historic Preservation District except schools, churches, grain elevators, service
stations, and buildings used strictly for residential purposes.
2. The owner must obtain a Certificate of Appropriateness, or determine that one is
not required, for all improvements requiring a building permit which affect the exterior
architectural features and for paint colors, signs, and awnings.
3. Anyone wishing to comply with the spirit of the Historic Preservation District
may request information or suggestions from the Community Development Board on an
informal basis.
4. The Community Development Board will be using the downtown design manual
prepared by Chipman Design as a guide in the review of exterior architectural features,
paints, and awnings.
5. The area of the Historic Preservation Overlay District shall be designated on the
included map by that name.
6. Along with the application for a Certificate of Appropriateness, applicable
supporting documents must be submitted to the Building Inspector in duplicate. The
Community Development Board may require any portion or all of the following
documents:
a. Drawings and specifications, prepared in accordance with good
architectural practice, indicating the building or structure exactly as it is proposed
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-56-
to be built, drawn accurately to scale and dimensioned.
b. A site plan or plot plan showing the plot configuration and its perimeter
dimensions, all structures on the site with locating dimensions, location of all
structures adjacent to the site within fifty feet (50') of the property line, and all
vehicular drives, roads, related parking areas, main walks, walls, fences, and
major parking areas, main walks, walls, fences, and major existing landscaping.
In addition, locations and names of adjacent streets, a north arrow, existing and
finished grade elevations and first floor level at each corner of new constructions,
and existing and finished grade elevations at each corner of the site shall be
indicated.
c. Four elevations including a front, rear, and two (2) side elevations,
together with additional views or cross sections, if necessary, to completely
indicate the exterior appearance of the structures. All elevations shall be drawn to
the same scale, which shall be not less than one quarter of an inch (1/4") to the
foot, except that the front elevation may be drawn to a larger scale. Each
elevation shall show the accurate location of windows, doors, shutters, chimneys,
porches, and other architectural features, all materials and finishes, and an
accurate finish grade line.
d. Additional details to show unusual construction.
e. Color samples of all major finish materials.
f. For new construction, drawings or photographs of 1) existing structures
that are to remain on the site and 2) of structures which are situated on any of the
lots. For additions to existing structures, drawings or photographs of all
elevations from which the addition can be seen.
C. The duties of the Community Development Board in regard to the Historic Preservation
District are as follows:
1. To issue Certificates of Appropriateness prior to the issuance of any
building permit pertaining to the construction, erection, alteration, removal,
moving, or demolition of any structure in the Historic Preservation District.
2. To propose from time to time to the Council the establishment or
disestablishment of structures and/or areas for historic preservation and of any
additions to or changes in the geographic boundaries of the Historic Preservation
District.
3. To advise the Council, the Building Inspector, other public agencies and
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-57-
property owners in matters involving structures and areas of historic and/or
architectural significance. Further, assemble and hand over to the Chamber of
Commerce available information pertaining to funds, from both public and private
sources, available for restoration, alteration, and preservation.
4. To hold a public hearing when requested after a Certificate of
Appropriateness has been denied.
5. To advise the Building Inspector whether a Certificate of Appropriateness
is required for a particular improvement.
D. Procedures for the issuance or denial of a Certificate of Appropriateness shall be
as follows:
1. No building permit for the construction, erection, alteration, removal,
moving, or demolition of any structure or building in the Historic Preservation
District shall be issued where such action will affect the exterior architectural
features of any such structure or building in the above categories. The building
inspector shall submit such application, together with the related plans and
specifications, to the Board for its consideration.
2. An application for a Certificate of Appropriateness must be filed with the
Building Inspector two (2) weeks prior to the scheduled Community Development
Board meeting. Two copies of all materials required for consideration must be
submitted to the Building Inspector.
The Building Inspector shall place a Notice of Meeting in a prominent place upon
the building for which a building permit and Certificate of Appropriateness has
been applied. Said notice shall be placed at least ten (10) days prior to the
meeting.
The Board shall approve or deny the Certificate of Appropriateness at its meeting
or set a later time to continue the review. The Board will work with the applicant
on finding any agreed upon changes which would secure the approval of the
Board. Findings of Fact shall be included in the minutes of each case, and the
reasons for approval or denial of the request shall be specified.
3. Before recommending approval of such a Certificate of Appropriateness,
the Board shall consider whether:
a. The proposed change will adversely affect or destroy any
significant historic or architectural feature of the structure.
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-58-
b. It is inappropriate or inconsistent with the spirit and purpose of the
ordinance.
c. It will affect adversely or destroy the general historic and
architectural significance of the district.
d. With respect to any proposed demolition, the Board shall
determine whether or not preservation is economically feasible for the
applicant, and shall issue a Certificate of Appropriateness if the denial of
such certificate would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship
that would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of the land or
building involved.
4. Appeals. Any appeal of a decision must be submitted in writing within
ten (10) days of the meeting to the City Clerk's office. The Chairman of the Board
shall then schedule a public hearing and the City Clerk shall notify the applicant and
the owners and occupants of neighboring structures by mail at least ten (10) days
prior to the hearing and place a legal notice in the local newspaper. The Board and
the applicant may invite such other persons or groups as desired to attend the hearing.
At the conclusion of the hearing the Board shall again decide to approve or deny a
certificate.
A party may appeal a decision of the Community Development Board after its public
hearing to the City Council. The City Council may issue or deny a Certificate of
Appropriateness after they review all of the facts, materials, and the decisions of the
Community Development Board.
9-5-16: “CUD” Condominium Use District
Intent. The Condominium Use District provisions of this Chapter are intended to encourage infill
development or redevelopment of existing lots of record for condominium development projects
which would allow multiple buildings on a single parcel of land. This will expand housing
opportunities and provide an incentive to include within the project useable open space to an extent
that it is designed and incorporated within the project to serve the residents thereof. These provisions
are further intended to encourage a greater degree of creativity than would be practicable under the
underlying zoning districts and to promote efficient use of land. The district provides a mechanism
for which a developer can be given reasonable assurance of ultimate approval before expending
complete design moneys, while City officials are assured that the project will retain the character
envisioned.
A. Special Provisions for the Condominium Use District:
1. The developer shall comply with all provisions of the Illinois Condominium Property
Act (765 ILCS 605/1 et seq.) or as may be hereinafter provided.
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-59-
1. The property shall be an existing lot of record which is zoned R-3 Residential (four
units or less).
B Minimum lot area shall be as specified by the height, yard, lot and area requirements for the
R-3 Residential zoning district, except as may otherwise be varied in accordance with
this ordinance.
1. The housing type, yard, height, and accessory uses shall be determined by the
requirements and procedures set out below, which shall prevail over conflicting
requirements of this Chapter or any chapter governing the subdivision of land.
Specifically, this District shall allow for the placement of more than one principal
building on the lot approved for this purpose.
C A Condominium Plat as required by the Illinois Condominium Property Act shall be
submitted to the Geneseo Community Development Board.
2. The Community Development Board shall conduct a public hearing and review
the proposed development as to its conformity with the Geneseo Comprehensive
Land Use plan and recognized standards of design, land use planning, and
landscape architecture. The Geneseo Community Development Board may
impose conditions regarding the layout, circulation, or performance of a
Condominium Plat, including storm water drainage and the replacement and resizing
of utilities, and may require that appropriate deed restrictions be filed
enforceable by the City Council. The Geneseo Community Development Board
shall, after the public hearing and review, submit its report and recommendations
to the City Council for approval.
3. The final Condominium Plat shall be approved by the City Council by
ordinance, and shall be signed by the Chairman of the Community Development
Board, the Mayor, and attested by the City Clerk.
4. The City Clerk shall record the final Condominium Plat with the Recorder
of Deeds of Henry County, provided that the owner/developer has paid the cost of
the recording fee.
5. Any changes in the approved final development plans either during construction
or at any time after approval by the City Council must be reviewed by the
Community Development Board. The Community Development Board shall
determine if it is a minor or major change. Minor changes may be authorized by
the Community Development Board after notification is given to the City Council
of that change. A major change would be constituted by, but not limited to, the
following: one which would increase the building to land density ratio of the
parcel, a change in the number of buildings, a change in building position that
encroached upon a building setback line, or a change in the number of parking
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-60-
spaces or change in the placement of the parking area. The Community
Development Board shall hold a public hearing on all major changes, make a
determination on that change, and pass its opinion on to the City Council for final
approval by ordinance.
9-5-17 Highway Corridor Overlay District
Performance Standards and Design Regulations.
A. Purpose
The Highway Corridor Overlay District (“HCOD”) performance standards and design
regulations are intended to encourage the goals set forward in the City’s 1997 Comprehensive
Plan to ensure that new developments in the City do not negatively impact the “small town”
character of the community. These standards and guidelines are designed to create development
standards which establish maximum building setbacks along commercial corridors to provide
continuity and scale to the roadway; to consolidate automobile entry points and driveways to
minimize traffic conflict; to place and create multiple distributed parking areas to the side or rear
of buildings along prominent road corridors to minimize the visual impact of large paved areas;
to maintain pedestrian connections between residential and commercial areas; to provide a
hierarchy of building sizes, roof types, and facade styles, and maintain continuity with building
materials and architectural details; to encourage new commercial buildings to reflect existing
architectural styles and community character; to discourage inappropriate and undesirable
generic corporate architecture and signs; to encourage continuity and quality of sign styles and
maintain an appropriate scale of signs along road corridors; and, to maintain a strong definition
of the public street corridor with street trees, lighting, and continuity of building facades.
B. General Description, Scope of Overlay District
The Highway Corridor Overlay District shall be in effect for all properties abutting Interstate 80,
Illinois Route 82, U.S. Route 6, Bestor Drive, H.K. Robinson Drive, Chicago Street, and Ogden
Avenue.
C. Applicability
This Ordinance shall apply to all non-residential development or re-development in or upon all
properties described above in “General Description, Scope of Overlay District” in effect for the
Highway Commercial Overlay District. Except as otherwise provided in this ordinance, no
person, firm or corporation, public or private; the State of Illinois and its agencies or political
subdivisions; the United States of America and its agencies or political subdivisions; any agent,
servant, officer or employee of any of the foregoing which meets the following provisions or is
otherwise exempted in this ordinance, shall commence any development activities as described
below without first having obtained a development permit from the Zoning Administrator.
1. Any new development or any redevelopment that affects the exterior architectural
features of a structure or alters the exterior of a structure by adding new footings
or structures which create new or additional interior space, or adds awnings, roof
structures, or new sign structures.
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-61-
2. Any conversion of residential units to commercial operations or operating a
business under a home occupation conditional use permit.
3. This Ordinance shall not apply to building permit applications for residential
construction or residential improvements, repairs, or maintenance.
4. This Ordinance shall not apply to building permit applications for any commercial
construction, improvements, repairs, or maintenance which does not change or
affect the exterior of a building or property.
D. Permitting
The Community Development Board shall conduct a public hearing for consideration of an
application for development permit in the HCOD in the manner prescribed by the statutes of the
State of Illinois to consider the proposal and its effect upon the City and the general health,
safety, morals, comfort, and welfare of its citizens. The Board shall report its findings to the
City Council, which shall have final authority on granting or denial of the application. No report
for an application for development permit shall be forwarded to the City Council within the same
week as the public hearing is completed. The standard fee for public hearings as set forth in this
Zoning Ordinance shall be paid upon application. The application and fee must be submitted to
the City Clerk’s office three weeks prior to the scheduled Community Development Board
meeting.
E. Exemptions
A development permit shall not be required for the following:
1. Any new development, redevelopment or other activity exempted herein.
2. The agricultural use of land, including the implementation of conservation
measures included in a farm conservation plan approved by the Natural Resources
Conservation Service, and including the construction of agricultural structures.
3. The maintenance of any existing storm water drainage/detention component or
structure or any existing soil erosion/sediment control component or structure;
including dredging, levee restoration, tree removal or other function which
maintains the original design capacities of the above.
4. The construction of, improvements to, or the maintenance of any street, road,
highway or interstate highway performed by any unit of government whose
powers grant such authority.
F. Variances
The Community Development Board, as part of the public hearing, may determine and vary the
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-62-
requirements and regulations of this ordinance in harmony with their general purpose and intent,
where the Community Development Board makes written finding of fact in accordance with the
standards herein after prescribed and, further, finds that there are practical difficulties or
particular hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of requirements and regulations of
this ordinance.
1. Application for variance shall be made by a petition of the applicant for the
development permit, stating fully the grounds of the petition and the facts relied
upon by the applicant. Such petition shall be filed with the development permit
application. The Zoning Administrator will review and transmit
recommendations to the Community Development Board, which shall review
such recommendations prior to granting or denying the variance.
2. Standards for variance. The Community Development Board shall not vary the
requirements and regulations of this ordinance as authorized in this section unless
there is evidence presented to it in each specific case that:
a. The land is of such shape or size, or is affected by such physical
conditions, or is subject to such title limitations or record that it is
impossible or impractical for the applicant to comply with all of the
requirements of this ordinance;
b. The variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a
substantial property right of the applicant;
c. The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public welfare,
environment or injurious to other property in the vicinity of the subject
property.
G. Expiration of Permit
Every development permit shall expire and become null and void if the work authorized by such
permit has not been commenced within 180 days or if not completed by a date which is specified
in the permit, except that the Zoning Administrator may, if the permittee presents satisfactory
evidence that unusual difficulties have prevented work being commenced or completed within
the specified time limits, grant a reasonable extension of time if written application is made
before the expiration of the permit.
H. Responsibility
The applicant shall not be relieved of responsibility for damage to persons or property otherwise
imposed by law, and the City or its officers or agents, will not be made liable for such damage
by, (1) the issuance of a development permit under this ordinance, (2) compliance with the
provisions of that development permit or conditions attached to it by the Zoning Administrator,
(3) failure of City of Geneseo officials to observe or recognize hazardous or unsightly
conditions, (4) failure of City officials to recommend denial or to deny a development permit, or
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-63-
(5) exemptions from development permit requirements of this ordinance.
I. Permitted Principal Uses
Permitted Uses shall be all uses allowed in the underlying zoning districts. This chapter shall not
apply to single family homes used solely for residential purposes.
J. Other Relevant Permitting
Before a Development Permit under this ordinance becomes effective, all required federal, state,
and local permits will have been received for the site subject to new development or
redevelopment. The acquisition of these permits shall be the sole responsibility of the applicant.
These may include, but are not limited to, the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Geneseo, the
Storm Water Control Ordinance of the City of Geneseo, the International Building Code, the
National Electrical Code, and the Illinois Plumbing Code, most recent editions adopted by the
City.
K. Applicable Regulations
All requirements of the underlying zoning district(s) concerning site planning, building height,
lot area, and yard depths shall remain applicable except where modified by the following
sections.
L. Development Incentives
1. For any two adjoining nonresidential properties (disregarding streets and alleys)
which combine access and reduce by at least one the number of existing access
points serving both properties along the roadway, the combined properties are
eligible for a ten percent reduction in total number of required off-street parking
spaces. This allowance shall apply to combined properties which would
otherwise not demand more than one hundred off-street parking spaces under the
requirements of this ordinance.
2. For any individual application which applies for a permit for a monument sign
instead of a pole-mounted freestanding sign conforming with the provisions of
this Ordinance, a 10 - 25% increase in the maximum total sign area for that
project shall be allowed.
M. Site Plan Requirements
All applicants for proposed uses in the Highway Corridor Overlay District shall be required to
submit a site plan for review and recommendation by the appropriate authority and approved by
the Community Development Board prior to, or in conjunction to a zoning change, Special Use
Permit, or Building Permit. The Community Development Board shall review site plans for
proposed uses requiring approval. The site plan shall include the following information:
A drawing at a scale of one hundred feet or less to the inch indicating:
1. The legal description of the property;
2. Existing topography and the proposed finished grade of the site, shown with
contour intervals of two feet;
3. Location and description of existing and proposed utility services on and adjacent
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-64-
to the development, including sanitary sewers, storm sewers, water mains, fire
hydrants, electric utilities, and other utilities.
4. All existing and proposed easements;
5. The location and size of each existing and proposed structure or use on the site;
6. The location and width of streets adjacent to or near the property;
7. The dimensions and capacities of parking areas and loading areas, including the
location and type of illumination and landscaping;
8. The types of surfacing, such as paving or turf to be used on the site;
9. A drainage plan for the site conforming with the requirements of the City’s storm
water regulations;
10. The location and height of all existing and proposed walls, fences, and screen
plantings, landscaping, existing trees, and buffer areas.
N. Traffic Analysis
A traffic study shall be required for developments that are expected to generate large volumes of
traffic to and from a site. The Zoning Administrator shall determine if a traffic study is required
for a site. The analysis shall be performed by a registered professional engineer. The analysis
shall include the anticipated or projected trip generation per day (ADT) and peak hourly traffic
resulting from the proposed use; access points and driveways to and from the site, parking areas
and number of parking spaces; stacking areas; sight distances from the access points; distance
from proposed access points to existing intersections and driveways within five hundred (500)
feet; and other information necessary for proper review by the City.
O. Performance Standards for Site Development of the Highway Corridor Overlay District.
1. Height, Yard, Lot Width and Setback Regulations.
The height, yard, lot width and setback regulations for the underlying zoning
district shall apply to the HCOD, except that the distance specified as the
minimum setback line shall be the build-to line; that is, the building’s street
facade shall be placed at the distance specified by the regulations, and not at a
greater distance. The build-to distance for zone lots located within a nonresidential
zoning district and along Illinois Route 82 or along U.S. Route 6 shall
be not less than eighty (80) feet nor more than one hundred (100) feet from the
centerline of the highway. Where non-residential zoning districts abut residential
zoning districts the minimum height, yard, lot width and setback regulations for
the residential zoning district shall apply to the business and commercial zoning
district wherever the properties share a common property line.
2. Parking and Loading Requirements.
The required number of parking spaces and loading dock bays for the underlying
zoning district shall apply to the HCOD, except where a parking development
incentive may apply for two properties which are reducing access points to the
road by their joint efforts to combine access points.
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-65-
a. Commercial Zoning Districts.
Parking spaces shall be limited at the front, or highway / street side of the building
to one tier of pull-in parking, with the remainder of the parking placed along one
side and/or the rear of the building.
Parking Lot Landscaping. An area equal to 10% of the total size of the parking
area shall be placed in landscaped islands, boulevards, or peninsulas in the interior
of the parking area. One shade tree shall be provided for each 200 square feet of
landscaped area. Seventy-five percent of each landscaped area shall be comprised
of live landscape materials. If planted in deep rooted native grasses, trees,
shrubbery, or other plantings approved as acceptable for offsetting new
impermeable surface as set forth in the City’s storm water regulations, parking lot
and perimeter planting beds may offset the new impermeable surfaces in the
calculation of storm water detention areas. All planting plans are subject to
approval from any utility provider or individual holding easement rights on the
property. Required plantings may be located within the public right-of-way with
the permission of the City of Geneseo or the Illinois Department of
Transportation, as is applicable.
b. Residential Zoning Districts.
For permitted conversions of single family homes or conditional use permits for
home use occupation, parking spaces are not permitted in any front yard or side
yard. Parking spaces shall be placed in the rear yard not closer to adjoining
properties or parcels than the side or rear yard building setback lines for the
underlying zoning district and shall be screened from the adjoining property by
means of a substantial landscape barrier consisting of shrubbery, evergreen trees,
or hedges not less than 5' in height. All planting plans are subject to approval
from any utility provider or individual holding easement rights on the property.
Alternatively, the appropriate authority may approve a solid wood and/or masonry
fence or wall of an acceptable design in the event that a landscaped buffer is not
practical.
3. Landscaping Requirements.
Native tree preservation. Reasonable efforts shall be taken to preserve desirable,
healthy native trees in the landscape plan. In the event that a tree is damaged or
must be removed, it shall be replaced with a minimum of two trees for each tree
damaged or removed.
Parkway trees. For all new development in the Highway Commercial Overlay
District, parkway trees shall be planted at a rate of one tree for each forty (40)
lineal feet of frontage located within the right-of-way, subject to approval by the
City of Geneseo or the Illinois Department of Transportation, as is applicable.
The spacing of individual trees may be altered to accommodate signs, drives, light
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-66-
poles, fire hydrants, sight distance, or other obstructions or hazards.
Buffer or Transition Areas. Supplementary to the landscaping requirements for
parking areas set forth above, a landscaped buffer shall be required when a use is
established in a more intensive district which is adjacent to a less intensive zoning
district. The owner or developer of the property within the more intensive district
shall install and maintain a landscaped buffer on said property, as set forth in this
section. The buffer shall be a minimum of ten - twenty ( 10 - 20) feet in depth,
and shall be planted with predominantly evergreen hedges, shrubs, or trees that
are normally expected to attain a minimum height of six (6) feet within three
years of planting. The buffer area may be planted in shrubs or trees or be
combined with a berm which will be normally expected to attain a minimum
height of six (6) feet within three years of planting. Alternatively, the Community
Development Board may approve a solid wood and/or masonry fence or wall of
an acceptable design in the event that a landscaped buffer is not practical.
Recommended Trees. A list of recommended trees is found in Appendix “B”,
“Desirable Trees Found in Northwestern Illinois”.
Recommended Native Plantings. A listing of recommended deep-rooted native
plantings can be found in the Native Plant Guide for Streams and Storm water
Facilities in Northeastern Illinois, USDA Natural Resources Conservation
Service’s Chicago Metro Urban and Community Assistance Office.
4. Parking Lot and Exterior Facilities Lighting.
Lighting standards shall not exceed 20' in height and shall provide for a light
cutoff angle being equal to or less than 90 degrees from vertical. In all zoning
districts, any lighting shall be arranged to reflect the light away from adjoining
property. A person shall not conduct a use that has a source of illumination that
produces glare clearly visible beyond a property line or creates a sense of
brightness within a visual field so as to cause annoyance, discomfort, or
impairment of vision. No wall or roof lighting shall be used to illuminate areas
for motor vehicle parking or access unless: the Community Development Board
find that the proposed lighting is not in conflict with the stated purpose of this
Ordinance; that the proposed lighting will not cause unreasonable harm or restrict
public health, safety and welfare or create a nuisance; and, that the proposed
luminary has a cutoff angle of less than or equal to 66 degrees. The amount of
illumination attributable to exterior lighting from a property shall not exceed one
(1) Footcandle of illumination when measured at any boundary line with an
adjoining property. All wiring for parking lot lighting shall be placed
underground. All parking lot and parking structure lighting may be illuminated
not more than one (1) hour before the start of business and shall be extinguished
within one (1) hour after the end of business except as approved by the police
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-67-
department after finding the following: That the property has been identified as an
area where the incidence or potential for crime warrant additional lighting; that
additional lighting is needed to increase the visibility of a property which is not
readily accessible to police for regular patrol; and, the use of timers, sensors, or
other devices that produce a reduced lighting level that does not conflict with the
stated purpose in this section.
5. Sign Requirements.
All signs shall be designed, constructed, and maintained in accordance with the
following standards: All signs shall comply with the applicable provisions of the
International Building Code and the Electrical Code of the City of Geneseo at all
times; except for banners, flags, temporary signs and window signs conforming in
all respects with the requirements of this ordinance, all signs shall be constructed
of permanent materials and shall be permanently attached to the ground, a
building or another structure by direct attachment to a rigid wall, frame, or
structure; all signs shall be maintained in good structural condition, in compliance
with all building and electrical codes, and in conformance with this code, at all
times.
Computation of Sign Area and Number. The sign area or a sign with more than
one face shall be computed by adding together the area of all sign faces visible
from any point. When two identical sign faces are put together back-to-back, and
when such sign faces are part of the same sign structure and not more than 42
inches apart, the sign area shall be computed by the measurement of one of the
faces. The permitted sum of the area of all individual signs on a zone lot shall be
computed by applying the formula contained in the table “Maximum Total Sign
Area per Zone Lot by District Type” to the lot frontage, or ground floor area, as
appropriate, for the zoning district in which the lot is located. Lots fronting on
two or more streets are allowed the permitted sign area for each street frontage.
However, the total sign area that is oriented toward a particular street may not
exceed the portion of the lot’s total sign area allocation that is derived from the lot
frontage or floor area on that street.
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-68-
Permitted Signs by Type and Zoning District Type
Sign Type Residential
Non-Residential
Adjoining
Residential
Non-Residential
Building
Wall S S S
Projecting N N N
Canopy N S S
Suspended N S S
Marquee N S S
Freestanding
Monument N S S
Pole N S S
S = Allowed with a sign permit.
N= Not allowed.
Maximum Total Sign Area Per Zone Lot by District Type
Residential
Non-Residential
Adjoining
Residential
Non-Residential
The maximum total area of signs on a zone lot except incidental, building marker, and identification signs and
flags shall not exceed the lesser of the following:
Max. Ttl. Sq. Feet 2 s.f. 100 - 400 s.f. 200 - 600 s.f.
% of bldg ground floor NA 4 - 8% 4 - 8%
Sq. Ft. of Signage per linear foot
of Street Frontage
NA 1.0 - 4.0 s.f. / l.f. 2.0 - 4.0 s.f./l.f.
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-69-
Number and Dimension of Individual Signs by District Type
Residential
Non-Residential
Adjoining
Residential
Non-
Residential
Adjoining
Interstate
Highway
Freestanding Signs
Area (Max. s.f.) NA 12 - 80 s.f. 40 - 100 s.f. 160 - 200 s.f.
Height (Max.
ft.)
NA 15 ft. 15 ft. 40 - 50 ft.
Number NA 1 per lot frontage 1 per lot frontage 1 per lot frontage
Building Signs
Area (Max. s.f.) 2 s.f. NA NA NA
Wall Area (%) NA 10 - 15% 10 - 20% 10 - 20%
Wall or Building Signs. In non-residential areas no wall or building sign shall
extend beyond the building more than twelve (12) inches from the building
surface. No wall or building sign shall be extended higher than the lower of the
following: twenty feet above grade, or the lowest point of the roof (for one-story
buildings with continuous horizontal parapet, a sign may extend as high as the
parapet; for buildings having roof gable ends, fronting on the street, a sign may
not extend beyond the edge of the roof line.) No sign may be installed on
chimneys, roofs, rooftop penthouses, or other similar features.
Sign Lighting and Illumination. Signs may be illuminated from within or from an
unobtrusively positioned remote light source. Where remote lights such as spot
lights are used, they are be designed so as to concentrate light only on the sign.
Flashing or moving lights are not allowed with the exception of one-time
temporary signs. If a registered trademark is used on a sign it may occupy no
more than 25 percent of the sign area unless the trademark is that of the sole
product at the location.
Architectural Standards.
The following design provisions are intended to help insure that redevelopment
occurs in a manner compatible with the existing character of the community, to
help insure that HCOD develops as a compact urban area, to integrate parking
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-70-
facilities into the design of developments, to provide a safe and attractive area for
pedestrian traffic, to preserve historic and residential traditions, to restrict fortresslike
facades at the street level, to avoid a monotonous environment and to insure
the character of the community is enhanced through excellence in design.
Visually preferred examples of development are provided in the City’s
Comprehensive Plan, August 12, 1997. The architectural building types of the
surrounding vicinity will be considered in site plans review. These may be Gothic
Revival, Queen Anne, Colonial Revival or other types of architecture. The
following design guidelines will be applied during the site plan review process in
addition to other applicable regulations. Alternative design solutions may be
approved if it is demonstrated that the alternatives meet the intent of this section.
a. All utilities and meters shall be located on side or rear elevations of
buildings, or shall be screened from view from public streets.
b. All utilities shall buried and screened from view from public streets.
c. Trash and refuse dumpsters and recycling bins shall be screened from
view from public streets and shall not be located in a public right-of-way.
d. Access to individual dwelling units shall be from enclosed lobbies or
corridors except for at grade level.
e. Stairways between residential floors shall be enclosed within the building.
f. Bicycle parking facilities shall be located so as not to impede pedestrian or
vehicular traffic.
g. Varied roof lines and or/heights shall be used to reduce the appearance of
the mass of buildings. Flat roofs are prohibited. Acceptable roofing styles
include, but are not limited to, gabled, hipped, and mansard. Rooftop
mechanical equipment shall be screened by parapet walls.
h. Techniques, such as varied setbacks, bay windows. Balconies and changes
in material, color and texture shall be used to articulate facades and side
wall elevations. Where rear walls are visible from the public right-of-way,
similar techniques shall be used.
i. Durable materials, such as masonry shall be used on the street level and
are encouraged for upper stories. Masonry does not include concrete
block and undressed poured concrete.
j. Areas of blank walls on the street frontage of a building shall be
minimized. At least forty (40) percent of the length of the street level
frontage shall be windows or doorways (not including garage entrances).
Loading and unloading facilities shall be located to the rear of a building.
k. The location and dimension of proposed signs shall be integrated into the
design of the overall development and shall be like in size, color, and
materials.
l. Sidewalks and pedestrian ways shall be installed within the right of way
adjoining the zone lot being developed. Sidewalks and pedestrian ways
shall provide access to buildings from the public right-of-way.
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-71-
m. Drive-through facilities shall not visually or audibly intrude upon
adjoining residential zoning districts.
P. Design Review.
1. Design Review Committee. Prior to the issuance of a building permit for the
construction within the HCOD of a building, structure, or sign, the plans shall be
reviewed and approved by the Community Development Board to ensure that the
building, structure, or sign complies with the guidelines herein. The Board
members may use for assessment of the plans and application the “SITE
ASSESSMENT FACTORS REVIEW SCORE SHEET FOR HIGHWAY
CORRIDOR OVERLAY DISTRICT (HCOD)” included as “APPENDIX A” of
this Section. Permit applications for single-family residential structures are
exempt from review.
2. Review and Approval. The Community Development Board shall:
a. Review the development plan application and required submissions for
conformance with the Performance Standards of this Section, and if it is
found to be in conformance, approve the development plan and authorize
the City’s Building Inspector to issue such building and storm water
permit(s) as required by law; or,
b. Approve the development plan subject to such reasonable conditions as
may be necessary to secure substantially the objectives of the HCOD
regulations and issue the approval subject to these conditions and
authorize the City’s Building Inspector to issue such building and storm
water permit(s) as required by law; or,
c. Disapprove the development plan, indicating the deficiencies and the
procedure for submitting a revised development plan application.
Q. General Provisions
1. Zoning Regulations Affect Every Structure and Use.
Except as hereinafter provided, no building, structure, or land affected by this
Article shall hereafter be used and no building or part thereof of structure shall be
erected, constructed, reconstructed, occupied, moved, altered, or repaired, except
in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the class of district in
which it is located.
2. Continued Existing Uses.
Any building, structure or use lawfully existing at the time of enactment of this
Article may be continued, except certain non-conforming uses as provided in
subsection 3 below. Nothing in this Article shall prevent the strengthening or
restoring to a safe condition any part of any building or structure declared unsafe
by the Building Inspector.
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-72-
3. Non-conforming Uses.
Any lawfully established use of a building or land, at the effective date of the
ordinance authorizing this Article ( date ), or of amendments thereto, that does not
conform to the use regulations for the class of district in which it is located shall
be deemed to be a legal non-conforming use and may be continued, except as
otherwise provided herein.
a. Any legal non-conforming building or structure may be continued in use
provided there is no physical change other than necessary maintenance
and repair, except as otherwise permitted herein.
b. Any building for which a permit has been lawfully granted prior to the
effective date of the ordinance authorizing this Article, or of amendments
thereto, may be completed in accordance with the approved plans;
provided construction is started within six (6) months and diligently
prosecuted to completion. Such building shall thereafter be deemed a
lawfully established building.
c. Any non-conforming building or structure which has been or may be
damaged by fire, flood, explosion, earthquake, war, riot, or other act of
God, may be reconstructed and uses as before if it be done within twelve
(12) months of such calamity unless damaged more than fifty (50) percent
of its fair market value, as determined by the Zoning Board of Appeals, at
the time of such damage, in which case, reconstruction shall be in
accordance with the provisions of this Article.
d. No building, structure, or premises where a non-conforming building or
structure has been or may be discontinued for more than one (1) year, or
has been or may be changed to a use permitted in the district in which it is
located, shall again be devoted to a non-conforming use.
e. Any building or structure devoted to a non-conforming use with a fair
market value of less than five hundred dollars ($500), as determined by
the Zoning Board of Appeals, may be continued for a period not to exceed
three (3) years after the effective date of the ordinance authorizing this
Article, whereupon such non-conforming use shall be removed or changed
to a conforming use.
f. Any legal, non-conforming use shall be enclosed on all sides by a solid
wall or tight board fence not less than eight (8) feet high if said use
includes storage, repair, or maintenance of vehicles, equipment, or
materials on the premises and not within the building. Said wall or fence
shall be maintained to the satisfaction of the Building Inspector. Any use
so described that is in existence at the time of the effective date of the
ordinance authorizing this Article, shall comply with said fencing
requirement within one hundred eighty (180) days of adoption of this
Article.
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-73-
g. A non-conforming building may be enlarged or extended only if the entire
building is thereafter devoted to a conforming use or meets all
performance regulations herein, and only if the required yards for the
district in which it is located are maintained for such enlargement, except
as provided for under variances to the Zoning Regulations.
h. No building partially occupied by a non-conforming use shall be altered in
such a way as to permit the enlargement or expansion of the space
occupied by such non-conforming use.
i. No non-conforming building in any residential district shall be so altered
as to increase the number of dwelling units therein.
j. No non-conforming use may be enlarged or extended in such a way as to
occupy any required usable open space, or any land beyond the boundaries
of the zoning lot as it existed at the effective date of the ordinance
authorizing this Article, or to displace any conforming use in the same
building or the same parcel.
4. Non-conforming Existing Signs.
A sign that was permitted and/or existed in conformance with the zoning and
building code regulations at the time of the effective date of the ordinance
authorizing this Article, but which by reason of its size, height, location, design or
construction is not in conformance with the requirements of this Article shall be
considered as a legal non-conforming use. Said status shall allow the sign(s)
which were made non-conforming by the adoption of the ordinance authorizing
this Article, to remain in place and be maintained for a period ending no later than
_____, _____,2013, provided that no action takes place which increases the
degree or extent of the nonconformity. A change in the information on the face of
an existing non-conforming sign is allowed. However, any non-conforming sign
shall either be eliminated or made to conform with the requirements of this
Article when any proposed change, repair, or maintenance would constitute an
expense of more than twenty-five (25) percent of the lesser of the original value
or replacement value of the sign.
R. Validity and Repeal
Should any section, subsection, clause or provision of this Ordinance be declared by the
courts to be invalid, the same shall not affect the validity of this Ordinance as a whole or
any part thereof, other than that which is so declared to be invalid. All other ordinances
or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby
repealed.
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-74-
APPENDIX A
Case: ___________________
Reviewer: ___________________
SITE ASSESSMENT
FACTORS REVIEW SCORE SHEET
FOR HIGHWAY CORRIDOR OVERLAY DISTRICT (HCOD)
SITE ASSESSMENT FACTORS
Factor Assessment Value
A. Completeness of Submittal
1. Required site plan material and information
included in submittal ________________
B. Adherence to Setback
2. Degree to which site development adheres to
required setbacks ________________
C. Sufficiency of Parking
3. Number of spaces provides for proposed use(s).
4. Degree to which parking site plan adheres to
landscaping/screening requirement.
________________
________________
D. Overall Landscaping
5. Degree to which overall project site plan adheres
to landscaping/screening requirements ________________
E. Facilities Lighting
6. Degree to which the affected local units of
government cannot bear the costs that the
proposed use may generate. ________________
F. Signage
7. Consistency of proposed site signage with intent
of HCOD regulations ________________
G. Architectural Standards
8. Consistency of proposed building design with
intent of HCOD regulations ________________
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-75-
________________
APPENDIX A (continued)
Case: ________________
Reviewer: ________________
HCOD SITE ASSESSMENT
Factors Review
Factor Rating (Choose One) Value Considerations Comments
1.
Completeness
of Submittal
91-100
71-90
51-70
31-50
11-30
10 or Less
10
8
6
4
2
0
̊ Percent of required
information that
was included in
submittal.
2. Adherence
to Setback
̊100% of setback
requirements are met
̊75-99% of setback
requirements are met
̊50-74% of setback
requirements are met
̊25-49% of setback
requirements are met
̊less than 25% of setback
requirements are met
20
15
10
5
0
̊Degree to which
setback
requirements are
met.
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-76-
3. Number of
Parking
Spaces
Provided
̊100% of required parking
spaces are provided
including shared parking if
applicable
̊100% of required parking
spaces are provided without
shared parking
̊75-99% of required parking
spaces are provided
̊50-74% of required parking
spaces are provided
̊less than 50% of required
parking spaces are provided
10
8
4
2
0
̊Degree to which the
required number of
parking spaces is
met.
Add two points to
scores below 8 if
shared parking is
included but total
number of required
spaces is not
provided.
4. Parking Site
Plan
̊100% of required parking
amenities are provided
̊80-99% of required parking
amenities are provided
̊60-79% of required parking
amenities are provided
̊40-59% of required parking
amenities are provided
̊less than 40% of required
amenities are provided
10
8
6
4
0
̊Degree to which the
required site plan
amenities for
parking are
included.
- landscaping
- screening
- parking location
Add two points to
the score of 10 if
more than required
amenities are
provided.
5. Overall
Landscaping
̊100% of required
landscaping is provided
̊80-99% of required
landscaping is provided
̊60-79% of required
landscaping is provided
̊40-59% of required
landscaping is provided
̊less than 40% of required
amenities are provided.
10
8
6
4
0
̊ Degree to which
the required
landscaping outside
of parking
landscaping is
provided.
Add two points to
the score of 10 if
more than required
landscaping is
provided.
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-77-
6. Facilities
Lighting
̊100% of lighting
requirements are met
̊75-99% of lighting
requirements are met
̊50-74% of lighting
requirements are met
̊less than 50% of lighting
requirements are met
20
15
10
0
̊Degree to which
lighting
requirements are
met.
APPENDIX A (continued)
Factor Rating (Choose One) Value Considerations Comments
7. Signage ̊100% of signage
requirements are met and no
freestanding signs are
included, sign faces area is
less than allowed
̊100% of signage
requirements are met sign
faces areas are extent
allowed, no free standing
signs are included
̊signage requirements are not
met but no free standing
signs are included
̊signage requirements are not
met and free standing signs
are included
20
15
10
0
̊Degree to which
signage
requirements are
met.
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-78-
8.
Architectural
Standards
̊100% of architectural
requirements are met
̊75-99% of architectural
requirements are met
̊50-74% of architectural
requirements are met
̊less than 50% of
architectural requirements
are met
20
15
10
0
̊ Degree to which
architectural
requirements.
-Utilities Placement
-Customer Access
-Facade
-Roofing
-Street Windows
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-79-
APPENDIX B
Desirable Trees Native to Northwestern Illinois
Ash, Blue, Fraxinus quadrangulata
Ash, Green, Fraxinus pennsylvanica
Ash, White, Fraxinus americana
Birch, River or Red, Betula nigra
Coffeetree, Kentucky, Gymnocladus diocia
Hackberry, Common, Celtis occidentalis
Hickory, Shagbark, Carya ovata
Ironwood (Hophornbeam), Ostrya virginiana
Larch, American (Tamarack), Larix laricina
Linden, American (Basswood), Tilia americana
Maple, Black, Acer nigrum
Maple, Red or Swamp, Acer rubrum
Maple, Sugar or Rock, Acer saccharum
Oak, Black, Quercus velutina
Oak, Bur, Quercus macrocarpa
Oak, Chinkapin, Quercus muehlenbergii
Oak, Pin or Swamp, Quercus palustris
Oak, Red, Quercus rubra
Oak, Swamp White, Quercus bicolor
Pecan, Carya illinoensis
Redbud, Cercis canadensis
Arborvitae, White Cedar, Thuja occidentalis
Juniper, Eastern Redcedar, Juniperus virginiana
Pine, Easter White, Pinus strobus
Desirable Trees Native to Areas South of Geneseo, Illinois. Additional planting is
encouraged.
Baldcypress, Taxodium distichum
Beech, European, Fagus sylvatica
Buckeye, Red, Aesculus pavia
Dogwood, Flowering, Cornus florida
Hickory, Shellbark, Carya laciniosa (for wet areas)
Persimmon, Common, Diospyros virginiana
Sassafras, Common, Sassafras albidum
Sourgum (Black Tupelo), Nyssa sylvatica
Sweetgum, Liquidambar styraciflua
Tuliptree, Liriodendron tulipifera
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-80-
Chapter 6
HEIGHT, YARD, LOT AND AREA REQUIREMENTS
9-6-1: Title
9-6-2: Exceptions to Height, Yard, Lot, and Area Requirements
9-6-3: Height, Yard, Lot, and Area Requirements
9-6-4: Front Yard Setback Greater Than Minimum
9-6-1: Title
The following height, yard, lot, and area requirements must be observed in addition to those
shown in Section 9-6-3.
A. On lots fronting on two nonintersecting streets, a front yard must be provided on both
streets.
B. On corner lots there must be a front yard on both streets. On corner lots of record at the
time of adoption of this Title, the buildable width shall not be reduced to less than twenty eight
feet (28') by the application of this Section, except that in the "B" districts the buildable width
shall not be reduced to less than forty feet (40'). There shall be a yard along the side street side
of such a lot of at least five feet (5').
C. Where a frontage is divided among districts with different front yard requirements, the
deepest front yard required shall apply to the entire frontage.
D. In the "B" districts there may be more than one commercial or industrial building on a lot
provided that the required yards be provided around the group of buildings.
E. Where two (2) or more related multi-family, hotel, motel, or institutional buildings are
permitted on a lot, the required yards must be maintained around the group of buildings and
buildings that are parallel or that are within forty-five degrees (45̊) of being parallel must be
separated by a horizontal distance that is at least equal to the height of the highest building.
F. Those parts of existing buildings that violate yard regulations may be repaired and
remodeled, but not reconstructed or structurally altered.
G. In any district not requiring a front yard, a loading dock shall be set back sufficiently so
that a truck backed in for loading or unloading shall not obstruct traffic on any sidewalk or street
area.
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-81-
9-6-2:Exceptions to Height, Yard, Lot, and Area Requirements
The following exemptions may be made to the height, yard, lot, and area requirements:
A. On existing lots less than seventy-five feet (75') wide the property owner may reduce a
side yard to ten percent (10%) of the lot width but not less than three feet (3').
B. On lots of record, a property owner may reduce his rear yard to not less than twenty
percent (20%) of the lot depth.
C. Where on the effective date of this Section (10-26-82) forty percent (40%) or more of a
frontage was occupied by two or more lots upon which buildings are situated, then the front yard
setback is established in the following manner:
1. Where the building farthest from the street provides a front yard setback not more
than ten feet (10') deeper than the building closest to the street, then the front yard
setback for the frontage is and remains an average of the then existing front yard.
2. Where this (1.) is not the case and a lot is within one hundred feet (100') of a
building on each side, then the front yard setback is a line drawn from the closest front
corners of these two adjacent buildings.
3. Where neither (1.) nor (2.) is the case and a lot is within one hundred feet (100')
of an existing building on one side only, then the front yard setback is the same as that of
the existing building.
D. Notwithstanding the provisions in (3.) above, a front yard setback greater than the
minimum as set forth in Section C. of this Chapter for residential zones shall be required where
sixty percent (60%) or more of a frontage is occupied by two or more lots upon which buildings
are situated. In that event, the front yard setback is and remains an average of the then existing
front yards.
This Section shall not apply to any subdivision, the plat of which sets forth specific front yard
setback lines and which has been approved by the City under the subdivision ordinance. In that
event, the restrictions of the subdivision plat shall be controlling.
E. Sills, belt course, cornices, and ornamental features may project not more than one foot
(1') into a required yard.
F. Open fire escapes, fireproof outside stairways, balconies opening upon fire towers, and
the projections of chimneys and flues into a rear yard for a distance of not more than three and
one half feet (3 1/2') when so placed as to not obstruct light and ventilation may be permitted.
G. Open, unclosed porches (not glassed in) may extend ten feet (10') into a front yard.
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-82-
H. No side yards are required for residential occupancy above commercial and industrial
buildings.
I. Any accessory building erected within ten feet (10') of a main building shall be
considered part of the main building and shall be provided with the same yards required of the
main building.
J. Any accessory building more than ten feet (10') from the main building shall be
considered a separate building and may be erected no closer than five feet (5') of a yard line, but
must be located at least sixty feet (60') back from the front yard line.
K. Where an unattached garage is entered from an alley, it must be kept ten feet (10') from
the alley line.
L. Wherever a "B" district adjoins an "R' district, the final development plan shall provide
for a suitable fence, wall, or evergreen shrub border at least five feet (5') high.
M. In the "R" districts, buildings constructed before the effective date of Ordinance No. 957
which have side yards of not less than five feet (5'), front yard of not less than twenty-five feet
(25'), and rear yard of not less than thirty feet (30'), may be reconstructed, added to, or altered
provided they do not reduce the yard measurements listed above.
9-6-3: Height, Yard, Lot, and Area Requirements
District
Minimum
Lot Area
Minimum
Area Per
Residential
Unit
Minimum
Lot Width
Minimum
Front
Yard
Setback
Minimum
Side Yard Minimum
Rear Yard
Maximum
Height
Stories
"A" Agriculture 6 5 acres 300 feet 80'from
center line
of road
20 feet 50 feet 2 ½1 351
"R-1" Residential District
5, 6
(single-family)
7,500 sq. ft. 7,500 sq. ft
per unit 7
5 feet
25 feet 10 feet 30 feet 2 ½ 35
"R-2" Residential District
5, 6, 8
(single-family & duplex)
7,500 sq. ft. 6,500 sq. ft
per unit
75 feet 25 feet 10 feet 30 feet 2 ½ 35
"R-3" Residential District
5, 6
(4 or less units)
6,500 sq. ft. 4,000 sq ft.
per unit
100 feet 25 feet 10 feet 30 feet 2 ½ 35
"R-4" Residential District
5, 6
(8 or less units)
10,000 sq. ft. 3,500 sq. ft
per unit
100 feet 35 feet 10 feet 30 feet 2 ½ 35
"R-5" Residential District
5, 6
(high density)
20,000 sq. ft. 3,000 sq. ft.
per unit
100 feet 35 feet 2 10 feet2 30 feet2 7 85
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-83-
"B-1" Business (Local) 3 50 feet 25 feet 4 30 feet 2 25
"B-2" Business
(Highway)
50 feet 40 feet 7 4 4 3 50
"B-3" Business (Central) 50 feet 7 85
"B-4" Business (Special) 50 feet 40 feet 4 4 85
"F" Flood Plain Overlay
See Underlying "PUD" District
Planned Unit Development
Historical Preservation
District
Highway Commercial Overlay
District
Notes 1 through 6 applicable to table on previous page:
1 Grain elevators, silos, barns, and other farm buildings are exempt from these
requirements.
2 For all buildings over thirty-five feet (35') high, add one foot (1') to all required yards for
each foot the building height exceeds thirty-five feet (35').
3 Required residential yard spaces have to be provided for residential uses.
4 Required residential yard spaces required for the abutting district are to be provided for
those yards abutting residentially zoned property.
5 All lots served by an individual subsurface sewerage treatment facility shall have a
minimum width of two hundred feet (200') and minimum area of one (1) acre per residential unit.
All lots served by individual water supply wells shall have a minimum area of one (1) acre.
6 Church steeples exempt.
7 Minimum setback eighty feet (80') from center line of U. S. 6 and Oakwood Avenue.
8 Conversion of existing older and large single-family dwellings shall be subject to
providing a minimum of five thousand (5,000) square feet of lot area per unit.
9-6-4: Front Yard Setback Greater Than Minimum
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, a front yard setback greater than the minimum as set
forth in Section 9-6-2 for residential zones shall be required where sixty percent (60%) or more
of a frontage is occupied by two or more lots upon which buildings are situated. In that event,
the front yard setback is and remains an average of the then existing front yard.
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-84-
This Section shall not apply to any subdivision, the plat of which sets forth specific front yard
setback lines and which has been approved by the City under the subdivision ordinance. In that
event, the restrictions of the subdivision plat shall be controlling.
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-85-
Chapter 7
OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACES
9-7-1: Provision of Off Street Parking Spaces
9-7-2: Provision of Off Street Loading Spaces
9-7-1: Provision of Off Street Parking Spaces
In all districts and in connection with every use, there shall be provided at the time any use or
building is erected, enlarged, or extended, off street parking for all vehicles in accordance with
the following:
A. Parking areas, whether open or enclosed, shall in residential districts be on the premises
intended to be served; and in all other districts shall be within one hundred feet (100') of said
premises in the same or a less restrictive district.
B. Adequate access to a public street shall be provided for each parking space and driveways
shall be a minimum of nine feet (9') wide for one (1) and two (2) family dwellings and a
minimum of twenty feet (20') wide for all other uses.
C. Size of each parking space shall be a minimum of one hundred eighty (180) square feet.
D. Curbs or barriers shall be installed where necessary to prevent parked vehicles from
extending over any lot lines.
E. Existing buildings not complying with parking requirements may be remodeled, repaired,
and structurally altered, but any increase in floor area, number of employees, dwelling units, or
seating capacity shall provide the number of spaces required by the change.
F. All spaces shall be graded, drained, and paved with a surface equal to the following
minimum standards:
1. Areas for carrying passenger cars only shall have two inches (2") of bituminous
concrete on a six inch (6") base of IDOT CA9 crushed stone; or concrete five inches (5")
thick.
2. Areas for carrying loaded trucks shall have two and one half inches (2 1/2") of
bituminous concrete on an eight inch (8") base of IDOT CA9 crushed stone; or concrete
five inches (5") thick.
3. Areas for storage only of vehicles shall have an IDOT A2 asphalt surface on a six
inch (6") base of IDOT CA9 crushed stone.
G. In the "R" district no off street parking shall be permitted in the front yard. In the B-1, BCITY
OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-86-
2, and B-4 districts, twenty percent (20%) of the required front yard shall be reserved and
devoted to permanent landscaping and no off street parking spaces or off street loading spaces
shall be permitted within this landscaping area.
H. Recreational vehicles and trucks shall not be parked or stored on any lot occupied by a
dwelling or any lot in any residential district except in accordance with the following provisions.
1. Recreational Vehicles.
No more than two (2) of the following types of vehicles shall be permitted for each
family living on a lot: campers, recreational vehicles, house cars, recreational trailers,
travel hauling trailers, boats on or off trailers, and private coaches. Such vehicles shall
further conform to the following regulations.
a. They shall conform to all length, height, and width restrictions imposed by
the statutes of the State of Illinois, as they may hereafter be amended.
b. No part of their length or width shall extend past the front yard building
set back line.
c. They shall not be occupied for a period longer than fifteen (15) days per
year while they are so parked or stored.
d. They shall not be in such a state of disrepair as to constitute a danger to
the public health or safety, nor shall they violate any of the terms of any ordinance
relating to abandoned vehicles.
e. They shall not be parked or stored within the minimum side and/or rear
yard applicable to the zoning district in which they are situated for a period longer
than ten (10) consecutive days, nor for a total period longer than fifty (50) days
per year, except as authorized by a variance granted by the Zoning Board of
Appeals.
f. They shall not be parked or stored so as to block or be on the public right
of way unless the Geneseo Police Department grants its consent. The Police
Department shall have discretion as to the length of time and the location of such
parking or storage on the public right of way.
2. Trucks.
No truck exceeding one and one half (1 1/2) ton capacity shall be parked or stored in any
residence district for longer than forty-eight (48) hours, unless the truck is parked or
stored in an enclosed garage.
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-87-
I. Where fractional spaces result, the parking spaces required shall be construed to be the
next whole number.
J. In the case of mixed uses, the parking spaces required shall equal the sum of the
requirements of the various uses computed separately.
K. The parking requirements for a use not specifically mentioned herein shall be the same as
required for a use of a similar nature.
L. The number of parking spaces required is shown in the following table:
Use Parking Spaces Required
Commercial, except those uses
listed below
One space for each two hundred
square feet of floor area plus one
space for each two (2) employees
on duty at the same time
Barber Shop Two (2) spaces for each chair plus
one space for each two (2)
employees on duty at the same time
Beauty Shop One space for each dryer plus one
space for each two employees on
duty at the same time
Bed & Breakfast One space per guest room, and
parking space must be at least five
feet (5') from property line, plus
parking space as required for either
residential districts or business
districts, whichever is applicable
Boarding House One space per guest room, and
parking space must be at least five
feet (5') from property line, plus
parking space as required for either
residential districts or business
districts, whichever is applicable
Bowling Alley Six (6) spaces for each alley
Dwelling Two (2) spaces for each dwelling
unit
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-88-
Funeral Home Six (6) spaces per chapel room or
parlor or one (1) space for every
fifty (50) square feet of floor area
used for services, whichever is less
Furniture or Appliance Store One (1) space for each five hundred
(500) square feet of floor area, plus
one space for each two (2)
employees at work at the same time
Home Occupation One (1) space in addition to that
required for the family residence
Hotel and Motel One (1) space for each sleeping
unit, plus one space for each two
(2) employees on duty at the same
time
Laundry and/or Dry Cleaning
Establishment
One (1) space for each three (3)
washers and/or cleaning machines,
plus one space for each two (2)
employees at work at the same time
Lodging and Rooming House One (1) space per guest room, and
parking space must be at least five
feet (5') from property line, plus
parking space as required for either
residential districts or business
districts, whichever is applicable
Manufacturing and Industrial One (1) space for each four
hundred (400) square feet of floor
space of the main building or one
space for each two (2) employees
on the maximum work shift,
whichever is greater
Medical or Dental Clinic Three (3) spaces for each doctor
plus one space for each two (2)
employees
Restaurant One space for each two (2) seats
plus one for each two (2)
employees on duty at the same time
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-89-
Tavern or Bar One space for each two (2) seats,
plus one for each two (2)
employees on duty at the same time
Wholesale One space for each four (4)
employees on the maximum work
shift
Public and semi-public building
and institution, except those uses
listed below:
One space for each five hundred
(500) square feet of floor area
Hospital One space for each two (2)
employees on the maximum work
shift, plus one space for each
medical staff member, plus one
space for each hospital bed, plus
three (3) spaces for each
emergency treatment room and/or
clinic examining room
Nursing Home for Extended Care One space for each three (3) beds
plus one space for each two (2)
employees on the maximum shift
School and College One space for each classroom, plus
one space for each four (4) students
over sixteen (16) years of age
Public Assembly with fixed
seating, including auditoriums,
churches, theaters, and stadiums
One space for each fifty (50) square
feet in the main fixed auditorium or
stadium
Public Assembly without fixed
seating, including meeting halls,
clubs, lodges, and organizations
One space for each fifty (50) square
feet of floor area in the main
assembly area
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-90-
9-7-2: Provisions of Off Street Loading Spaces
Off street loading spaces shall be provided as follows:
A. Spaces shall be located and designed as to accommodate trucks without blocking streets,
sidewalks, or other traffic ways.
B. No building requiring off street loading shall be increased in floor area unless off street
loading space is provided to service the increase in floor area.
C. Each space shall be a minimum of ten feet (10') wide, forty feet (40') in length, and
fourteen feet (14') in height, exclusive of access and turning areas.
D. The number of spaces required are as follows:
1. Office building, hotels, and public buildings receiving deliveries by truck:
One space for each fifty thousand (50,000) square feet of floor area up to two
hundred thousand (200,000) square feet, plus one space for each seventy-five
thousand (75,000) square feet above two hundred thousand (200,000) square feet.
2. Retail, service, wholesale, manufacturing, or industrial use:
One space for the first twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of floor area, plus
one space for each additional twenty thousand (20,000) square feet up to one
hundred thousand (100,000) square feet, plus one space for each seventy-five
thousand (75,000) square feet above one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet.
EXHIBIT A
Chapter 8
SIGNS
9-8-1: General Provisions
9-8-2: Residence Districts
9-8-3: Agricultural/Business Districts (1-4) Nonresidential District
9-8-4: "B" Districts (1-4)
9-8-5: "B-4" District
9-8-6: Additional Sign Regulations
9-8-7: Historic Preservation District Sign Regulations
9-8-8: Multiple Message Sign Regulations
9-8-9: Multiple Message Billboard Sign Regulations
9-8-10: Exempt Signs
9-8-11: Variances
9-8-12: Sign Permit Process
9-8-13: Administration and Enforcement
9-8-14: Insurance and Bond Requirements
9-8-1: General Provisions
A. No sign shall be erected or maintained at any location where by reasons of its position,
wording, illumination, size, shape, or color it may impair, obstruct, obscure, or be confused with
any authorized traffic control sign, signal or device, or obstruct traffic visibility.
B. No off-site signs are permitted. Existing off-site signs as of the effective date of this
ordinance are “grandfathered” in and allowed. If an off-site sign is damaged to an extent that the
cost of repair is equal to or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the value of an equivalent replacement
sign, then said sign shall not be replaced.
C. In the event that any sign interferes with emergency radio frequency, then said sign will
be repaired or disconnected to a point that the interference no longer exists.
D. Temporary professional service identification signs of no more than four (4) feet in area
shall be permitted in any district provided they comply with A. and B. above. These signs shall
be removed within five (5) days following the service.
E. Non-conforming signs
Any such signs that do not conform to the standards of the appropriate section in Chapter 8 of the
City of Geneseo Zoning Ordinance may remain in place as an existing non-conforming use. If a
non-conforming sign is repaired to an extent that the cost of repair is equal to or exceed fifty
percent (50%) of the value of an equivalent replacement sign, or if sign is replaced due to a
change of business or ownership, then said sign shall be repaired or replaced in conformance
with those standards.
F. Abandoned Signs: Any sign and sign support structure which has been abandoned shall be
removed; or have the face replaced with a weatherproof, blank face by the owner, agent or
person having the beneficial use of the building, structure or lot upon which such sign is located
within one hundred eighty (180) days after the business has abandoned the tenant space. Any
abandoned sign that does not comply with this provision is considered a nuisance and subject to
corrective actions by the City of Geneseo. The owner of the abandoned sign will be responsible
for reimbursement to the City of Geneseo for all costs relating to the correct action of the
nuisance.
9-8-2: Residential ZoningDistricts
A. Non-illuminated identification sign not exceeding one square foot in area shall be
permitted for each dwelling unit. Such sign shall indicate nothing other than name and/or
address of the occupants.
B. One temporary, non-illuminated, on-site sign not to exceed six (6) square feet in area for
the sale of real estate, which sign shall be removed within ten (10) days after sale of the real
estate.
C. Announcement of church, school, or other public buildings or uses, where permitted
bulletin boards or identification signs shall be permitted, not exceeding eighteen (18) square feet
in area.
D. Signs corresponding to that normal use permitted in the zoning district for uses given
conditional uses. Sign must comply with provision in 9-8-1 D.
E. All other signs are prohibited in residence districts.
F. No multiple message signs will be allowed in residential districts with the exception of
schools and churches.
9-8-3: Agriculture/Business (1-4) Zoning Districts
A. Temporary signs not exceeding thirty two (32) square feet in area advertising the sale or
lease of real property when located on the property to which the sign refers and when not located
closer than ten feet (10') to a lot line, which sign shall be removed within ten (10) days of the
sale or lease of the property.
B. Temporary ground signs advertising future use of development of property on which such
signs are located may be maintained subject to provisions of this section provided such signs do
not exceed thirty two (32) square feet in area or remain longer than six (6) months. "For Rent"
and "For Lease" signs in commercial and industrial districts for new buildings shall not exceed
thirty two (32) square feet in area or remain more than ninety (90) days after the building is
completed and when located not closer than ten feet (10') to a lot line
C. Church or public building bulletin boards not exceeding eighteen (18) square feet in area.
9-8-4: "B" Zoning Districts (1-4)
In the "B" Zoning Districts wall signs, projecting signs and awning signs when displaying no
advertising matter, except pertaining to the business conducted in the building or on the premises
on which such sign is placed are allowed. The total square foot area of wall signs, marquee
signs, and awning signs shall not exceed one fifth (1/5) of the total square foot area of the face of
the building on which they are placed. There shall not be more than one ground sign for each
one hundred feet (100') of street frontage. No ground sign shall extend closer than ten feet (10')
to a lot line.
9-8-5: "B-4"Zoning District
In the "B-4" district there may be any sign allowed in Section 9-8 and ground signs, provided
that no ground sign shall exceed one fifth (1/5) of the total square foot area of the face of the
building on which they are placed or one hundred (100) square feet in area whichever one is less;
not more than one ground sign shall be erected on any one lot or tract of land, or one sign for
each three hundred feet (300') of street frontage when located at least three hundred feet (300')
apart on such lot or tract of land; no ground sign when erected on a lot fronting or intersecting
streets shall be erected within fifty feet (50') of the intersection of the streets and no ground sign
may be erected within fifty feet (50') of the intersection of the state or federal highways.
9-8-6: Additional Sign Regulations
A. Ground (Monument or Ground) Signs.
No ground sign shall be, at any point, over twenty-five feet (25') above ground level. Every
ground sign shall be stoutly constructed in a secure and substantial manner. The ends of all such
ground signs shall be at least six feet (6') distant from any wall or fence or any obstruction that
would prevent a clear passage around the end and shall be at least ten feet (10') distant from any
lot line.
B. Wall Signs.
Wall signs shall not project above the top or ends of the wall surface on which they are placed.
No wall sign shall be so erected as to cover the doors or windows of any building or otherwise
prevent free ingress or egress to or from any window, door, or any fire escape of any building.
C. Projecting Signs.
Projecting signs may extend not more than four feet six inches (4'6") perpendicular from the
building.
D. Posters and Certain Signs or Devices Prohibited.
Posters and temporary signs applied directly to the wall, building, pole, stakes, fence or other
support and letters or pictures in the form of advertising printed or applied directly on the wall of
a building are prohibited. Temporary signs may be displayed in or attached to the inside of the
show or display windows provided the total sign area does not exceed twenty-five percent (25%)
of the show or display window area. Signs or devices which by color, location, or design
resemble or conflict with traffic control signs or devices are prohibited. No sign shall contain
flashers, animators, or mechanical movements or contrivances of any kind, excepting clocks.
E. Traffic or county signs, railroad crossing signs, danger, safety, temporary, emergency, nonadvertising
community service, or decorative signs as may be required by statute, authorized by
the Building Inspector. Including all signs referenced in the Uniform Traffic Control Devices
Manual.
9-8-7: Historic Preservation District Sign Regulations
A. Wall Signs
A wall sign attached parallel to the face of the building can project no more than twelve inches
(12") from the building surface. No sign may be extended higher than the lowest of the
following:
1. Twenty feet (20') above the grade.
2. Two inches (2") below the lower edge of the window sill pieces of the second floor
windows.
3. The lowest point of the roof (for one story buildings with continuous horizontal
parapet, a sign may extend as high as the parapet; for buildings having roof gable ends
fronting on the street, a sign may not extend beyond the edge of the roof line). No sign
may be installed on chimneys, roofs, rooftop penthouses, or other similar features.
B. Free Standing Signs.
Free standing signs are permitted only in the following cases:
1. For advertising for businesses which are set back on their lots; signs may not exceed
25 square feet in area and may not be closer than 10 feet from the property line.
2. For directional or advisory signs not exceeding five square feet in size and five feet in
height.
3. For temporary sandwich-board type advertising signs not exceeding five square feet
in size placed on the sidewalk in the front of businesses; not more than one such sign
may be placed per business store front. No permit is required for this type of sign.
Notwithstanding any other standard of this ordinance, nothing shall be erected or placed in such
a manner as to impede or obstruct a driver’s vision between a height of three feet (3’) and ten
feet(10’) above the road crown at the intersection of a driveway and street or two streets.
C. Window Signs.
Permanent signs on the inside of windows may not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the total
glass area of the windows or the portion of the store front in which they are installed. Their area
must be counted and calculated into the total area of signage for that particular sign frontage.
D. General Signs.
1. Signs may be illuminated from within or from an unobtrusively positioned remote light
source. Where remote lights such as spot lights are used, they are to be designated so as
to concentrate light only on the sign. These signs are to be dark sky compliant.
2. If a registered trademark is used on a sign it may occupy no more than twenty-five
percent (25%) of the sign area unless the trademark is that of the sole product at the
location.
E. Size of Signs.
The allowable signage area in square feet can be attained by multiplying the store front frontage
of a business by 1.5. Therefore, a business with a twenty-foot (20') frontage may have a sign
area of thirty (30) square feet. This may be in the form of a continuous twenty foot, eighteen
inch (20' 18") sign or a shorter or taller sign so long as the area is less than or equal to thirty (30)
square feet.
F. Non-conforming Signs.
Any such signs in the Historic Preservation District that do not conform to the standards in
section 9-8-8 of the Zoning Ordinance may remain in place as an existing non-conforming use.
If a non-conforming sign is repaired to an extent that the cost of repair is equal to or exceeds 50
percent of the value of an equivalent replacement sign, or if said sign is to be replaced due to a
change of business, then said sign shall be repaired or replaced in conformance with these
standards.
G. All billboards, multiple message signs and multiple message billboards in the Historic
Preservation District must be approved by the Geneseo Plan Commission
9-8-8: Multiple Message Sign (MMS) Regulations.
A. MMS are allowed in all zoning districts with the exception of residential districts (1-5),
provided they are oriented away from all residential districts to the extent possible. Schools and
religious institutions are exempt from this restriction; provided they meet the standards contained
elsewhere in the article. All multiple message signs must be reviewed and approved by Plan
Commission prior to getting permit.
B. Only one MMS is permitted per lot. The MMS may be two sided. Only one contiguous
MMS is allowed on a sign face. Only thirty (30) square feet per side of a sign can be multiple
messages.
C. A static MMS shall not change more than once every three (3) seconds. A MMS that scrolls
is permitted provided it does not operate as described in 9-8-9.
D. MMS shall utilize static images with no animation.MMS shall not be operated in a way that
flashes, blinks, flutters, mimics traffic control devices or emergency vehicles, or purposely is
designed to distract the public without providing content to the message.
E. MMS may use effects to transition from one static image to another. The effect may not last
more than one second.
F. MMS existing on Effective date must comply with the operational standards listed above to
the extent technically possible with their current equipment.
G. Where applicable, MMS shall meet the requirements of Chapter 5 Highway Corridor Overlay
District.
H. Brightness standards: The following standards shall apply to MMS and MMB and electronic
advertising signs.
1) The luminance of the sign shall not exceed 5,000 NITS during daytime hours and 500
NITS from dusk to dark. The sign manufacturer, vendor, or installer shall submit written
certification that the sign was manufactured with an automatic dimming sensor device that will
automatically adjust to ambient light conditions. The sign must also be manufactured with a
security feature that would limit the end users ability to manipulate the preset luminance levels.
2) The luminance of the electronic sign shall not increase ambient light levels by more
than 0.3 foot-candles when measured perpendicular to the sign at a distance of 250 feet.
Furthermore, when adjacent to a residential district, luminance shall not exceed one foot-candle
when measured at any boundary line with an adjoining property.
9-8-9: Multiple Message Billboard (MMB) Regulations.
Any sign over thirty (30 sq. ft.) shall be considered a Billboard and shall meet the requirements
of 9-8-10. Unless otherwise noted in this section, MMB shall meet the requirements of 9-8-9 as
well as billboard regulations listed elsewhere in this chapter.
A. MMB may incorporate one hundred percent (100%) of its sign face. Only one MMB is
allowed on a sign face.
B. MMB must be separated by a minimum of fifteen hundred feet (1500') from another MMB.
C. MMB shall not change more than once every ten (10) seconds.
D. MMB shall utilize static images with no animation. This transition shall be instantaneous
with no animation.
E. MMB shall provide public service announcements relative to Amber Alert/emergency service
messages on an as needed basis.
F. All billboards will conform to the Illinois Highway Advertising Control Act of 1971.
9-8-10: Exempt Signs: The following signs shall be exempt from the regulations of the
chapter and are not required to obtain a permit.
A. Governmental signs such as traffic control signs and legal notices.
B. Railroad crossing and signs of public utility companies indicating danger or which serve as
an aid to public safety or which show the location of underground facilities.
C. Directional, informational or public service signs, excluding public utilities, not exceeding
six (6) square feet in area, erected for the convenience of the public, such as signs identifying
entrances, exits, parking areas, restrooms, public telephones, walkways and similar features or
facilities.
D. House numbers, non-illuminated or directly illuminated, located on the lot to which the sign
is apparent and not exceeding four (4) square feet in area.
E. Signs located in the interior of any building or within an enclosed lobby or court of any
building or group of buildings, which signs are designated and located to be viewed exclusively
by patrons located within the interior of a building housing such use or uses.
F. Decorations and signs temporarily displayed in connection with a local festivity or not for
profit group.
G. No trespassing signs or other such signs regulating the use of property, such as no hunting, no
fishing, etc., of no more than two (2) square feet in area.
H. Flags of any country, state or unit of local government.
I. Real estate signs in residential area may not extend outside of the property line and not more
than six (6) square feet per face in area that indicate the sale, rental or lease of the premises upon
which said signs are located. No more than one real estate sign per lot except that a corner lot
may have one such real estate sign per street frontage.
J. Memorial signs and tablets, names of buildings and date of erection when cut into masonry
surface or inlaid so as to be part of the building or when constructed of bronze or other
noncombustible material.
K. Signs of historical societies containing no advertising and not more than five (5) square feet
in area.
L. Public signs and other signs incidental thereto for identification, information or directional
purposes erected or required by governmental bodies, or authorized for a public purpose by any
law, statute or ordinance.
M. A monument sign not more than twenty (20) square feet in area with a maximum height of
five (5) feet for a religious institution when the same is located on the premises of the institution
and is located in such a manner so as not to interfere with the vision of motorists. Monument
signs that exceed either the height or area in this provision are not exempt from permit and must
meet the regulations provided in this chapter.
N. Banners displayed in the public right of way installed by the City of Geneseo.
O. Help wanted signs placed in the window of a business, not to exceed six (6) square feet. The
“help wanted “sign text must be the predominant text of the sign. Signs in excess of six (6)
square feet follow the provisions for temporary signs. Help wanted signs may only be used if the
business is actively hiring.
P. Temporary window signs are exempt from permit provided the total area of permanent and
temporary window sign occupies no more than twenty five percent (25%) of the window surface
area per store front elevation.
Q. Hand held sign or people in costume adjacent to the business or organization being advertised
and a minimum of ten (10) feet from the street curb. In the central business district, hand held
signs or people in costume may be located adjacent to the business or organization being
advertised on the sidewalk only.
9-8-11: Variances: It is recognized that the regulations provided in this chapter cannot
handle all of the sign situations in the City of Geneseo. Therefore, the following procedures and
requirements shall be applicable to any request for a variance:
A. Request Form: The applicant shall file a written request for a variance on a form provided by
the City of Geneseo which shall include:
1. Site Plan: Depicting any existing structures, proposed structures, additions, signs, and/or
fences (drawn to scale) and the setbacks from lot lines to such improvements.
2. Elevation Plans: Drawing of proposed sign or signs drawn to scale with dimensions
shown, depicting the signs.
3. A typed legible, neat legal description of the property on a separate page.
4. Filing Fee: Includes and application fee and fee for the publishing of public notice.
B. Filing: The Building Inspector or his or her designee shall forward the application to the City
Clerk for filing and delivery to the Plan Commission or the Zoning Board of Appeals as
appropriate.
C. Review: The Building Inspector shall transmit copies of the application to the Plan
Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals, as appropriate for review and public hearing.
D. Public Hearing: The Plan Commission or Zoning Board of Appeal, as appropriate, shall hold
a public hearing within sixty (60) days after the completed application has been filed.
E. Notice of Hearing: The City Clerk shall cause notice of the public hearing to be published in
a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Geneseo at least fifteen (15) days prior to the
public hearing.
F. Hearing and Record: The public hearing shall be conducted by the Plan Commission or
Zoning Board of Appeals, as appropriate and a record of such proceedings shall be preserved in
such manner as the zoning board of appeals shall, by rule, prescribe from time to time.
G. Findings and Recommendations: Except for those matters on which the Board of Zoning
Appeals or the Plan Commission is authorized to take final action, the Zoning Board of Appeals
or the Plan Commission may make written findings of fact and shall submit same together with
its recommendation to the City Council within one hundred twenty (120) days of filing of the
application. The Plan Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals may impose such conditions and
restrictions upon the subject sign and property, the location, the construction, design and use of
the sign benefited by such a variation as may be necessary or appropriate to comply with the
foregoing standards and to protect adjacent property and property values, and ensure traffic
safety.
H. Council Decisions: After recommendation by the Plan Commission or Zoning Board of
Appeals, as appropriate, the City council may, by resolution, grant, or grant with modification,
the proposed variance. If the City Council does not approve of a proposed variance after
recommendation by the Plan Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals, it may deny the proposed
variance or refer the proposed variance back to the Plan Commission or Zoning Board of
Appeals, as appropriate.
I. Withdrawal of Application: An application for a variance may be withdrawn by the applicant
any time prior to its approval by the City Council. Withdrawal shall not affect the applicant’s
responsibility for payment of fees. Upon such withdrawal, the City Council may, at its
discretion, permit a substitute applicant, who shall be any person authorized to file an original
application, to resubmit the withdrawn application within thirty (30) days of the original
applicant' s withdrawal, and no addition fees be charged.
J. Effective Period of Variance:
1. No variance shall be valid for a period longer than one (1) year from the date of the
ordinance granting the variance.
2. Where conditions have not substantially changed since the date on which the variance
was authorized, the owner of a parcel for which a variance has been authorized may within one
(1) year prior to expiration of said variance, request the City Council to extend the effective
period of said variance for no more than one additional period of up to one year without
reapplication to the Zoning Board of Appeals or Plan Commission.
3. A variance shall not be valid if a sign for which a variance has been granted is destroyed
or damaged by fire, collapse, explosion or other casualty or act of God to the extent that the cost
of restoration to the condition in which it was before the occurrence shall exceed fifty percent
(50%) of the replacement cost of the sign at the time of destruction or damage.
4. In the event such damage or destruction is less than fifty percent (50%) of the
replacement cost of sign, the variance shall be valid only if such restoration is started within six
(6) months from the date of partial destruction and restoration proceeds and does not cease for a
period of sixty (60) days and completion is accomplished within twelve (12) months from the
date of partial destruction.
9-8-12: Sign Permit Process:
Unless exempted from the requirements of this chapter, no person shall erect or display any sign
unless issued a permit.
A. Application: Any person or activity proposing to erect, display, or replace a sign, with the
exception of individual panels on a multiple tenant sign, shall file an application on a form
provided by the City of Geneseo. Signs listed in 9-8-12 of this chapter are exempt from a sign
permit. The following supporting documents are required for review of a permit.
1. Scaled drawing of proposed sign (scale must be indicated on drawing).
2. Location drawing, clearly drawn indicating roadways, parking lots and buildings, including
dimensions of setback (ground signs).
3. Detailed, scaled drawing of building elevation where sign will be placed (wall sign).
B. Granting of Permit: After review, a permit for the sign shall be granted if:
1. It complies with this chapter.
2. It has been authorized by a variance granted by the City of Geneseo, if required.
3. All applicable permit fees have been paid as required.
C. Conformance with the National Electrical Code: All signs in which electrical wiring and
connections are required shall conform to the applicable provision of the national electrical code.
D. Wind Pressure and Dead Load Requirement: Signs shall be designed and constructed to
withstand a wind pressure and dead loads as required in the building code.
E. Payment of Fees: All fees shall be paid in full before any permit for a sign is issued.
F. Completion of Authorized Work: If the work authorized under the permit has not been
completed within twelve (12) months after the date of issuance, the permit shall become null and
void.
9-8-13: Administration and Enforcement:
A. Enforcement: The Building Inspector or his/her designee is hereby authorized and directed
to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
B. Interpretation: The Building Inspector shall be responsible for interpreting the provisions of
this ordinance.
C. Penalty: Any person who violates any of the provision of the Article shall be fined not less
than one hundred dollars ($100.00) not more than seven hundred dollars ($700.00). A separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which violation occurs or
continues.
D. Commercial and non-commercial signage placed in the public right of way shall be
considered a nuisance and subject to corrective actions by the City of Geneseo. The person
responsible for the illegally placed signs may be responsible for reimbursement to the City of
Geneseo for the City's costs of the removal s of the illegally place signs in addition to being
charged with violating the provision of this ordinance and subject to any fines and costs. The
City Manager may take whatever action is lawful and necessary to collect costs due under this
provision including, without limitation, hiring a collection agency, refusing to issue any city
permit or license to the person/s responsible, including any service charges and costs of
collection. The City of Geneseo may also set off against any amounts owed by the City of
Geneseo to the person/s responsible amounts then owed by the delinquent’s customer to the City
of Geneseo. Any person/s responsible desiring to obtain a City of Geneseo permit or license
while contesting the amount owed the City of Geneseo, may obtain a City of Geneseo permit or
license by posting financial security in a form acceptable to the City Attorney, and in an amount
equal to the disputed amount.
9-8-14: Insurance and Bond Requirements:
Every applicant for a permit for a street sign which will extend over a public right of way or
which is so located that it may fall upon the same, shall file with the City of Geneseo before the
permit is granted, a liability insurance policy covering all damage or injury that might be caused
by each of said street signs, or certificate of insurance therefore, issued by an insurance company
authorized to do business in the state of Illinois and is satisfactory to the City of Geneseo, with
limits of liability of not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for property
damage and five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for personal injuries. The City of
Geneseo, its officers, agents and employees shall be named as additional parties insured. Such
liability insurance policy shall be maintained in force throughout the life of the permit, and if at
any time it shall not be in full force, the permit shall be revoked by the City of Geneseo.
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-97-
Chapter 9
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES
9-9-1: Purpose
9-9-2: Certain Uses Not Covered By This Ordinance
9-9-3: Interpretation and Definitions
9-9-4: Designation and Applicability
9-9-5: Allowable Uses / Development Criteria
9-9-6: Review Process
9-9-7: Approval Process
9-9-8: Shared Facilities and Collocation Policy
9-9-9: Removal of Abandoned Wireless Communication Facilities
9-9-10: Nonconforming Wireless Communication Facilities
9-9-11: Revocation of Tower Use Permits
9-9-12: Penalty
9-9-13: Annual Review
9-9-14: Jurisdiction
9-9-15: Annual Inspection Fee
9-9-1: Purpose
The City of Geneseo recognizes that the City of Geneseo desires to encourage the orderly
development of wireless communication technologies for the benefit of the City of Geneseo and
its citizens. The City of Geneseo also recognizes the character of the communities of the City.
As a matter of public policy the City of Geneseo aims to encourage the delivery of new wireless
technologies throughout the City while controlling the proliferation of communication towers.
Such development activities will promote and protect the health, safety, prosperity, and general
welfare of persons living in Geneseo, Illinois.
Specifically, this Wireless Communication Facility Telecommunications Overlay Districts
Ordinance is designed to achieve the following:
A. Encourage the location of wireless communication facilities onto existing structures to
reduce the number of new communication towers needed within the City of Geneseo,
Illinois;
B. Encourage collocation and site sharing of new and existing wireless communication
facilities;
C. Provide a range of locations for wireless communication facilities in various zoning
districts;
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-98-
D. Control the type of tower facility constructed, when towers are permitted;
E. Establish adequate development and design criteria to enhance the ability of providers of
telecommunications services to provide service to the community quickly, effectively,
and efficiently;
F. Protect residential, historic preservation areas, and scenic corridors from the uncontrolled
development of wireless communication facilities by requiring reasonable siting
conditions;
G. Promote the use of suitable sites (public and private) for the location of wireless
antennae, towers, and/or wireless communication facilities.
H. Insure the harmonious, orderly and efficient growth and development of the City of
Geneseo;
I. Stabilize the economy of the City of Geneseo through the continued use of the City’s
suitable public resources;
J. Provide Overlay Districts in which the zoning regulations permit the development of
wireless communication facilities which are consistent with the requirements of the
Telecommunications Act of 1996 and in the best interest of the future of the City of
Geneseo, Illinois;
K. Provide clear performance standards addressing the siting of wireless communication
facilities; and
L. Streamline and expedite the permitting procedures to effect compliance with the Federal
Telecommunications Act of 1996.
9-9-2: Certain Uses Not Covered By This Ordinance
Nothing in this ordinance shall reduce any of the permitted uses of any zoned property within the
City of Geneseo. Nothing in this ordinance shall affect the right of a property owner to use or
develop their property consistent with existing zoning regulations. Nothing in the ordinance
shall affect the right of a property owner to continue any legal nonconforming use.
9-9-3: Interpretation and Definitions
To the extent this ordinance conflicts with the Zoning Ordinance, Sign Ordinance, or any other
ordinance of the City of Geneseo, this ordinance shall control.
For the purposes of this ordinance, words used in the present tense include the future tense;
words in the singular number include the plural number, and words in the plural number include
the singular number; the word “shall” is mandatory; the word “may” is permissive; the word
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-99-
“used” includes “designed” and “intended” or arranged to be used or occupied; and the word
“person” includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, foundation, company or
corporation as well as an individual.
For the purposes of this ordinance, certain words, phrases and terms used herein shall be
interpreted as stated in this SECTION III. The Zoning Administrator shall define any word,
phrase or term not defined herein. The interpretation shall be based upon its common and
ordinary usage in the region.
For the purposes of this ordinance, all definitions defined herein are in addition to all definitions
in the City of Geneseo Zoning Ordinance.
Antenna Array. An Antenna Array is one or more rods, panels, discs or similar devices
used for the transmission or reception of radio frequency signals, which may include omnidirectional
antenna (rod), directional antenna (panel) and parabolic antenna (disc). The Antenna
Array does not include the Support Structure.
Attached Wireless Communication Facility. An Attached Wireless Communication
Facility is an Antenna Array that is attached to an existing building or structure (Attachment
Structure), which structures shall include, but not be limited to, utility poles, signs, water towers,
roof tops, towers with any accompanying pole or device (Attachment Device) which attaches the
Antenna Array to the existing building or structure and associated connection cables, and an
Equipment Facility which may be located either inside or outside of the Attachment Structure.
Collocation/Site Sharing. Collocation/Site Sharing shall mean use of a common Wireless
Communication Facility or common site by more than one wireless communication license
holder or by one wireless license holder for more than one type of communications technology
and/or placement of a Wireless Communication Facility on a structure owned or operated by a
utility or other public entity.
Equipment Facility. An Equipment Facility is any structure used to contain ancillary
equipment for a Wireless Communication Facility which includes cabinets, shelters, a build out
of an existing structure, pedestals, and other similar structures.
Federal Aviation Administration. FAA
Federal Communications Commission. FCC
FTA. Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996.
Height. When referring to a Wireless Communication Facility, Height shall mean the
distance measured from ground level to the highest point on the Wireless Communication
Facility, excluding the Antenna Array.
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-100-
Setback. Setback shall mean the required distance from the property line of the parcel on
which the Wireless Communication Facility is located to the base of the Support Structure and
equipment shelter or cabinet where applicable, or, in the case of guy-wire supports, the guy
anchors.
Support Structure. A Support Structure is a structure designed and constructed specifically to
support an Antenna Array, and may include a monopole, self supporting (lattice) tower, guywire-
support tower and other similar structures. Any device (Attachment Device) which is used
to attach an Attached Wireless Communication Facility to an existing building or structure
(Attachment Structure) shall be excluded from the definition of and regulations applicable to
Support Structures.
Temporary Wireless Communication Facility. Temporary Wireless Communication Facility
shall mean a Wireless Communication Facility to be placed in use for ninety (90) or fewer days.
Tower Use Permit (TUP). A permit issued by the City of Geneseo specifically for the location,
construction and use of a Wireless Communication Facility subject to an approved site plan and
any special conditions determined by the Zoning Administrator to be appropriate under the
provision of this ordinance.
Wireless Communications. Wireless Communications shall mean any personal wireless
services as defined in the Telecommunications Act of 1996, which includes FCC licensed
commercial wireless telecommunications services including cellular, personal communication
services (PCS), specialized mobile radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobile radio (ESMR),
paging, and similar services that currently exist.
Wireless Communication Facility. A Wireless Communication Facility is any unstaffed
facility for the transmission and/or reception of wireless telecommunications services, usually
consisting of an Antenna Array, connection cables, an Equipment Facility, and a Support
Structure to achieve the necessary elevation.
9-9-4: Designation and Applicability
Attached wireless communications facilities shall be permitted only at the sites set forth on the
attached Exhibit A, incorporated by reference herein.
Amendments to add or delete permitted sites on Exhibit A shall only be made in the manner set
forth by law for zoning amendments.
Permit Required. No person, firm, or corporation shall install or construct any Wireless
Communication Facility unless and until a Tower Use Permit (TUP) has been issued pursuant to
the requirements of this ordinance.
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-101-
Pre-existing Wireless Communication Facility. Wireless Communication Facilities for which a
permit has been issued prior to the effective date of this ordinance shall be considered a
nonconforming use and shall not be required to meet the requirements of this ordinance.
Amateur Radio Exclusion. This ordinance shall not govern the installation of any amateur radio
facility that is owned and operated by a federally licensed amateur radio station operator or is
used exclusively for receive only antennas. Such installations shall comply with any other
applicable provisions of the zoning code.
Relationship to Other Ordinances. This ordinance shall supersede all conflicting requirements of
other ordinances regarding the locating and permitting of Wireless Communication Facilities.
Airport Zoning. Any Wireless Communication Facility located or proposed to be located in
airport areas governed by the Federal Aviation Administration shall also comply with the
provisions of all applicable local, state and federal airport regulations.
Building Codes. Construction of all Wireless Communication Facilities shall comply with the
requirements of the Geneseo, Illinois building codes and permitting process in addition to the
requirements of this ordinance.
9-9-5: Allowable Uses/Development Criteria
Allowable uses will include the underlying zoning district plus Wireless Communication
Facilities in compliance with the following development criteria:
A. Height Standards. The following height standards shall apply to all Wireless
Communication Facility installations:
1.) Attached Wireless Communication Facilities. Attached Wireless
Communication Facilities shall not add more than twenty (20) feet to the height of
the existing building or structure to which it is attached (Attachment Structure).
However, antenna attachments to existing communication towers shall not
increase the height of tower above the maximum permitted height of that tower.
2.) Wireless Communication Facilities with Support Structures shall have a
maximum height as set out in Exhibit A..
B. Setback Standards. The following setback standards shall apply to all Wireless
Communication Facility installations.
1.) Attached Wireless Communication Facilities. Attached Wireless
Communication Facilities shall meet the setback provisions of the zoning district
in which they are located. However, an Attached Wireless Communication
Facility Antenna Array may extend up to 30 inches horizontally beyond the edge
of the Attachment Structure so long as the Antenna Array does not encroach upon
an adjoining parcel.
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-102-
2.) Wireless Communication Facilities With Monopole Support Structures.
Wireless Communication Facilities with Monopole Support Structure shall meet
the setback requirements for principle structures of the underlying zoning district
in which they are located.
C. Landscaping. The following landscaping requirements shall apply to all Wireless
Communication Facility installations.
1.) New Construction. New Wireless Communication Facilities with Support
Structures and Attached Wireless Communication Facilities with new building
construction shall be landscaped in accordance with the applicable provisions of
the landscape ordinance that may now or hereafter be adopted.
2.) Land Form Preservation. Existing mature tree growth and natural land
form on the site shall be preserved to the extent feasible; provided however, that
vegetation that causes interference with the antennas or inhibits access to the
Equipment Facility may be trimmed or removed.
3.) Existing Vegetation. Existing vegetation on a Wireless Communication
Facility site may be used in lieu of required landscaping where approved by the
Zoning Administrator.
4.) Landscaping Plan. Any landscaping plan established pursuant to the
subparagraph C must be approved by the Tax Increment Finance (TIF) and
Community Development Board.
D. Aesthetics, Placement, Materials and Colors. Wireless Communication Facilities shall
be designed so as to be compatible with the existing structures and surroundings to the
extent feasible, including placement in a location which is consistent with proper
functioning of the Wireless Communication Facility, the use of compatible or neutral
colors, or camouflage technology.
E. Lighting and Signage. The following lighting and signage requirements shall apply to
all Wireless Communication Facility installations.
1.) Artificial Illumination. Wireless Communication Facilities shall not be
artificially illuminated, directly or indirectly, except for:
a.) security and safety lighting of equipment buildings if such
lighting is appropriately down shielded to keep light within the boundaries
of the site; and,
b.) such illumination of the Wireless Communication Facility
as may be required by the FAA or other applicable authority installed in a
manner to minimize impacts on adjacent residences.
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-103-
c.) Unless otherwise required by the FAA or other applicable
authority, the required light shall be red and shielded upward.
2.) Signage. Wireless Communication Facilities shall not display any
signage, logos, decals, symbols or any messages of a commercial or
noncommercial nature, except for a small message containing provider
identification and emergency telephone numbers and such other information as
may be required by local, state or federal regulations governing Wireless
Communication Facilities.
F. Fencing. Wireless Communication Facilities with Support Structures shall be enclosed
by an opaque fence (excluding slatted chain link) not less than six feet in height. Security
features may be incorporated into the buffer and landscaping requirements for the site.
Nothing herein shall prevent fencing that is necessary to meet requirements of state or
federal agencies.
G. Radio Frequency Emissions/Sound. The following radio frequency emissions
standards shall apply to all Wireless Communication Facility installation:
1.) Radio Frequency Impact. The FTA gives the FCC jurisdiction of the
regulation of Radio Frequency (RF) emissions, and Wireless Communication
Facilities that do not exceed the FCC standards shall not be conditioned or denied
on the basis of RF impact.
2.) FCC Compliance. In order to provide information to its citizens, copies of
ongoing FCC information concerning Wireless Communication Facilities and RF
emissions standards may be requested. Applicants for Wireless Communication
Facilities shall be required to provide information with the application on the
measurement of the effective radiated power of the facility and how this meets the
FCC standards.
3.) Sound Prohibited. No unusual sound emissions such as alarms, bells,
buzzers or the like are permitted.
H. Structural Integrity. Wireless Communication Facilities with Support Structures shall
be constructed to the Electronics Industries Association/Telecommunications Industries
Association (EIA/TIA) 222 Revision F Standard entitled “Structural Standards for Steel
Antenna Towers and Antenna Support Structures” (or equivalent), as it may be updated
and amended. Each Support Structure shall be capable of supporting multiple antenna
arrays. Structure shall be of galvanized steel.
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-104-
I. Collocation Agreement. All applicants for Wireless Communication Facilities are
required to submit a statement with the application agreeing to allow and reasonably
market collocation opportunities to other Wireless Communication Facility users. The
statement shall include the applicant’s policy regarding collocation of other providers and
the methodology to be used by the applicant in determining reasonable rates to be
charged other providers. The Collocation Agreement shall be considered a condition of
issuance of a TUP (Tower Use Permit). A TUP shall not be issued unless the applicant
complies with the collocation policy outlined in SECTION VIII. of this ordinance.
9-9-6: Review Process
A. The applicable development criteria referred to herein are those set forth in SECTION V.
of this ordinance.
B. Permitting Procedures. Attached Wireless Communication Facilities with or without
new building construction that meet the development criteria may be permitted by subject
to the Tax Increment Finance (TIF) and Community Development Board hearing process
and may not be approved by the administrative review process.
Any attached Wireless Communication Facility , regardless of type, to be located within an
established historic area, historic district or other designated overlay district will be subject to
review the Tax Increment Finance (TIF) and Community Development Board. All Wireless
Communication Facility applications that do not conform to the development criteria shall be
subject to the Community Development Board review process.
C. Wireless Communication Facilities as a part of a Coordinated Development Approval.
Wireless Communication Facilities as part of a proposed residential or nonresidential
subdivision, planned unit development, site plan, conditional rezoning, or other
coordinated development approval shall be reviewed and approved through those
processes.
D. Wireless Communication Facilities for Temporary Term. Temporary Wireless
Communication Facilities may be permitted by administrative approval for a term not to
exceed 90 days. Once granted, a temporary Wireless Communication Facility permit
may be extended for an additional 90 days upon evidence of need by the applicant. In
case of emergency (e.g., storm damage to an existing tower or other circumstances
resulting in the interruption of existing service) the administrative review shall be
expedited to the extent feasible.
9-9-7: Approval Process
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-105-
G. Application Submission. All applicants for a Tower Use Permit, regardless of Wireless
Communication Facility type, shall submit an application in accordance with the
requirements of this Section.
1.) Application Contents. Each applicant requesting a TUP under this
ordinance shall submit a sealed complete set of drawings prepared by a licensed
architect and engineer that will include a site plan, elevation view and other
supporting drawings, calculations and other documentation showing the location
and dimensions of the wireless communication facility and all improvements
associated therewith, including information concerning specifications, antenna
locations, equipment facility and shelters, landscaping, parking, access, fencing
and, if relevant as determined by staff, topography, adjacent uses and existing
vegetation. Applicants proposing to collocate on an existing Wireless
Communication Facility shall include a Radio Frequency Intermodulation Study
with their application.
2.) Submission requirements. Application for a TUP shall be submitted to the
Zoning Administrator on forms prescribed by the City of Geneseo. The
application shall be accompanied by a site plan containing the information
described above and a copy of the appropriate FCC license. The application and
site plan shall be placed on the next available Board agenda in accordance with
the agenda deadlines established by the Board.
3.) Application Fees. A plan review fee of $2500 and a Radio Frequency
Intermodulation Study review fee of $500 (collocation applicants only) shall
accompany each application. These fees may be used by the City of Geneseo to
engage an engineer(s) or other qualified consultant(s) to review the technical
aspects of the application and Radio Frequency Intermodulation Study (if
required).
4.) Technical Assistance. In the course of its consideration of an application,
the City of Geneseo, the Zoning Administrator, the Community Development
Board or the City Council may deem it necessary, in complex situations, to
employ an engineer(s) or other consultant(s) qualified in the design and
installation of Wireless Communication Facilities to assist the City of Geneseo in
the technical aspects of the application. In such cases, any additional reasonable
costs incurred by the City of Geneseo not to exceed fifteen hundred dollars
($1,500) for the technical review and recommendation shall be reimbursed by the
applicant prior to the final hearing on the TUP.
H. Administrative Review. The following administrative review process shall apply to all
Wireless Communication Facility applications eligible for administrative review.
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-106-
1.) Review Authority. Review of Wireless Communication Facilities under
this Section shall be conducted by the Tax Increment Finance (TIF) and
Community Development Board or his designee and upon filing a Wireless
Communication Facility application.
2.) Review Criteria. Each application shall be reviewed for compliance with
the development criteria specified in SECTION V.
3.) Timing of Decision. The Tax Increment Finance (TIF) and Community
Development Board shall render a decision on the Wireless Communication
Facility application by written response to the applicant within forty-five (45)
business days after receipt of the complete application, except that an extension
may be agreed upon by the applicant.
4.) Application Denial. If administrative approval is not obtained or is denied
due to noncompliance with the development criteria, the applicant may appeal the
denial by applying for City Council review.
5.) Application Approval. If the TUP application is in compliance with the
development criteria and otherwise meets the requirements of this Section, the
Zoning Administrator shall issue a Tower Use Permit.
I. Community Development Board Review. The following shall apply to all Tower Use
Permit applications requiring submission to the Community Development Board.
1.) Review Authority. The Community Development Board shall be the
review authority for TUP applications.
2.) Notice. Notice of the application and the public hearing by the
Community Development Board shall be accomplished in the same manner as set
forth by 65 ILCS 5/11-13-1.1.
3.) Hearing. The Community Development Board shall review and consider
the TUP application at a public hearing. At the hearing, interested persons may
appear and offer information in support of or opposition to the proposed
application. The Community Development Board shall consider the following in
reaching a decision.
a.) Development Criteria. The Tower Use Permit application
shall be reviewed for compliance with the development criteria set forth in
SECTION V.; provided that the applicable development criteria may be
amended or waived so long as the approval of the Wireless
Communication Facility meets the goals and purposes of the ordinance.
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-107-
The Community Development Board may recommend an alternative
development criteria by specific inclusion in a motion for approval.
b.) Tower Siting Conditions. The Community Development
Board may impose conditions and restrictions on the application or on the
premises benefitted by the TUP as it deems necessary to reduce or
minimize any adverse effects and to enhance the compatibility of the
Wireless Communication Facility with the surrounding property, in
accordance with the purposes and intent of this ordinance. The violation
of any condition shall be grounds for revocation of the TUP. The
Community Development Board may recommend such conditions in
addition to the development criteria upon the following findings:
i.) The Wireless Communication Facility would result in
significant adverse visual impact on nearby residences.
ii.) The conditions are based upon the purpose and goals of this
ordinance.
iii.) The conditions are reasonable and capable of being
accomplished.
c.) Action. Following the public hearing and presentation of
evidence, the Community Development Board shall take one of the
following actions:
i.) Recommend the application as submitted;
ii.) Recommend the application with conditions or
modifications;
iii.) Defer the application for additional information or
neighborhood input; or
iv.) Deny the application in writing.
4.) Findings. All decisions rendered by the Community Development Board
concerning a Tower Use Permit shall be supported by written findings of fact and
conclusions of law based upon substantial evidence of record.
5.) Timing of Decision. The Tax Increment Financing (TIF) and Community
Development Board shall render its decision within forty-five (45) days or less of
the final submission of all required application documents and technical review,
however, this time may be increased due to deferrals by either the applicant or the
Community Development Board.
6.) Appeals. The decision of the Tax Increment Financing (TIF) and
Community Development Board may be appealed to a hearing panel appointed by
the City Council within thirty (30) days consisting of three members of the
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-108-
Council, none of whom is a member of the Community Development Board.
This hearing panel shall conduct the hearing in conformance with the Illinois
Administrative Review Law (735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq), under the following
circumstances:
a.) An appeal shall be filed no later than 30 days after the final
action by the Zoning Administrator or the Tax Increment Financing and
Community Development Board. Only the applicant and those who
registered an objection to the TUP in the record of the Community
Development Board shall have standing to appeal.
b.) Only such evidence or testimony in support of or in
opposition to the issuance of the TUP which was provided to the
Community Development Board may be presented to the hearing panel
appointed by the City Council unless the hearing panel, by majority vote,
decides to hear new information.
c.) Notice of appeal shall be accomplished by the appellant in
the same manner as set forth by 65 ILCS 5/11-13-1.1.
d.) Any further appeals shall conform to the requirements of
the Illinois Administrative Review Law.
9-9-8: Shared Facilities and Collocation Policy
Collocation. All new Wireless Communication Facilities shall be engineered, designed and
constructed to be capable of sharing the facility with other providers, to collocate with other
existing Wireless Communication Facilities and to accommodate the future collocation of other
Wireless Communication Facilities. A TUP shall not be issued until the applicant proposing a
new Wireless Communication Facility shall demonstrate that it has made a reasonable good faith
attempt to locate its Wireless Communication Facility onto an existing structure. Competitive
conflict and financial burden are not deemed to be adequate reasons against collocation.
All Wireless Communication Facilities with support structure up to a height of 150 feet shall be
engineered and constructed to accommodate at least three (3) antenna array. All Wireless
Communication Facilities with support structures up to a height of more than 150 feet shall be
engineered and constructed to accommodate at least four (4) antenna array.
9-9-9: Removal of Abandoned Wireless Communication Facilities
Any Wireless Communication Facility that is not operated for a continuous period of twelve (12)
months shall be considered abandoned, and the City of Geneseo, at its election, may require the
Wireless Communication Facility owner to remove the Wireless Communication Facility within
90 days after notice from the City of Geneseo to remove the Wireless Communication Facility.
If the abandoned Wireless Communication Facility is not removed within 90 days, the City of
Geneseo may remove it and recover its costs from the Wireless Communication Facility owner.
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-109-
If there are two or more users of a single Wireless Communication Facility, this provision shall
not become effective until all providers cease to use the Wireless Communication Facility. If the
owner of an abandoned Wireless Communication Facility cannot be located or is no longer in
business, the requirements of this Section shall be the responsibility of the landowner on whose
property the Wireless Communication Facility is located.
9-9-10: Nonconforming Wireless Communication Facilities
Wireless Communication Facilities in existence on the date of the adoption of this ordinance
which do not comply with the requirements of this ordinance (nonconforming Wireless
Communication Facility) are subject to the following provisions:
A. Expansion. Nonconforming Wireless Communication Facilities may continue in
use for the purpose now used, but may not be expanded without complying with
this ordinance except as further provided in this Section.
B. Additions. Nonconforming Wireless Communication Facilities may add
additional antennas (belonging to the same provider or other providers) subject to
administrative review under this ordinance.
Repairs or Reconstruction. Nonconforming Wireless Communication Facilities
which become damaged due to any reason or cause may be repaired and restored
to their former use, location, and physical dimensions subject to the provisions of
this ordinance; provided however, that if the damage to the Wireless
Communication Facility exceeds 50% of replacement cost, said Wireless
Communication Facility may only be reconstructed or repaired in compliance
with this ordinance.
C. Any Wireless Communication Facility not in use for six months shall be deemed
abandoned and all rights as a nonconforming use shall cease.
9-9-11: Revocation of Tower Use Permits
Any Tower Use Permit issued pursuant to this ordinance may be revoked after a hearing as
provided hereinafter. If the Zoning Administrator finds that any permit holder has violated any
provision of this ordinance or has failed to make good faith reasonable efforts to provide or seek
collocation, the Zoning Administrator shall notify the permit holder in writing that the TUP is
revocable due to the permit holder’s noncompliance with the conditions of the permit and the
Zoning Administrator shall convene a meeting with the permit holder no later than 30 days from
the date of the letter. The Zoning Administrator may require the permit holder to correct the
violation within a reasonable amount of time or the Zoning Administrator may recommend to the
Tax Increment Finance (TIF) and Community Development Board that the Tower Use Permit be
revoked. After the appropriate public hearing, the Mayor and Tax Increment Finance (TIF) and
Community Development Board may revoke the Tower Use Permit (TUP) upon such terms and
conditions, if any, that the Mayor and Tax Increment Finance (TIF) and Community
Development Board determine. Prior to initiation of revocation proceedings, the Zoning
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-110-
Administrator shall notify the permit holder, in writing, of the specific areas of noncompliance
and specify the date by which such deficiencies must be corrected. The time for correction of
deficiencies shall not exceed 60 days. The permit holder shall provide the Zoning Administrator
with evidence that the required corrective action has been taken. Should the permit holder fail to
correct any deficiencies in the time required, the Mayor and Tax Increment Finance (TIF) and
Community Development Board shall convene a public hearing to consider revocation of the
Tower Use Permit. The hearing shall be conducted pursuant to notice by publication in a
newspaper with general circulation in the City of Geneseo not less than 10 days prior to the
hearing and by written notice to the permit holder. At any such hearing, the permit holder may
be represented by an attorney and may cross-examine opposing witnesses. Other interested
persons may comment. The Mayor and Tax Increment Finance (TIF) and Community
Development Board may impose reasonable restrictions with respect to time and procedure. The
proceedings shall be recorded; provided, however, that stenographic services, if desired, shall be
provided by the requesting party at that party’s expense.
9-9-12: Penalty
The fine or penalty for violating any provisions of this ordinance shall, upon conviction in the
municipal court, not exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for any one specified offense
or violation. Further, that if a thing prohibited or rendered unlawful is, in its nature, continuous
in respect to time, the fine or penalty for allowing the continuance thereof in violation of this
ordinance shall not exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each day that it may be unlawfully
continued.
9-9-13: Annual Review
The Mayor and City Council may review this ordinance on an annual basis and shall alter or
amend the same as required in the manner provided by law.
9-9-14: Jurisdiction
This agreement shall be interpreted and enforceable under the laws of the State of Illinois.
9-9-15 Annual Inspection Fee
All wireless communication facilities with support structures shall be required to have an annual
inspection for continued compliance with safety and zoning requirement. The inspection fee
assess will be $250 per year.
The structures which are located on City property will have the annual inspection required but
the inspection fee will be waived.
Any violation discovered in the annual inspection must be corrected within ninety (90) days.
Violations not corrected within ninety (90) days shall be subject to the penalties set forth in
Section 9-9-12 of this Ordinance, including but not limited to the per day fine of $100.
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-111-
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-112-
Exhibit A: Wireless Communication Facility Sites
Site # Field Site Name Recommended WCF Use
697 Richmond Hill Park 150’ Galvanized pole
699 Street Department 150’ Galvanized pole
700 Treatment Plant 150’ Galvanized pole
701 Water Tower Attachment
703 Edwards Commercial Park 150’ Galvanized pole
704 Prairie Park 150’ Galvanized pole
691 Water Standpipe Attachment
Wind Turbine Site 150’ Galvanized pole
OTHER SUITABLE SITES - NON-MUNICIPAL
Southwest Elementary School 150’ Galvanized pole
Cole Cabin 150’ Galvanized pole
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-113-
Chapter 10
NONCONFORMING USES
(BUILDINGS AND LAND)
9-10-1: Nonconforming Uses Are Regulated
9-10-1:Nonconforming Uses Are Regulated
A. Nonconforming Use of Land.
In the "F" and "R" districts where open land is being used as a nonconforming use and such use
or uses is the principal use or uses and not accessory to the main use conducted in a building,
such use shall be discontinued not later than five (5) years from the date of passage of this Title.
During the five (5) year period, such nonconforming use or uses shall not be extended or
enlarged either on the same or adjoining property. Any building incident and subordinate to such
use or uses of land, such as a shed, tool house, storage building, office, or trailer, shall be
removed at the end of the five (5) year period, or, if such building is so constructed as to permit
the issuance of a permit for a use not excluded from the district, such building may remain as a
conforming use; thereafter, both land and building shall be used only as conforming uses. Such
nonconforming uses of open land shall specifically include, but not be limited to, billboards,
poster boards, automobile wrecking yards, scrap from and junk storage, trailer camps (unless
they receive a conditional use permit), auction yards, contractor's yards, race tracks, stockyards,
golf driving ranges, and miniature golf courses.
B. Nonconforming Use of Buildings.
Except as otherwise provided herein, the lawful use of a building existing at the effective date of
this Title may be continued, although such use does not conform to the provisions hereof. If no
structural alterations are made, a nonconforming use of a building may be changed to another
restricted classification. Whenever a nonconforming use has been changed to a more restricted
use or to a conforming use, such use shall not thereafter be changed to a less restricted use. The
nonconforming use of a building may be hereafter extended throughout those parts of a building
which were lawfully and manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time of the
enactment of this Title.
C. Discontinuance of Nonconforming Uses.
No building or portion thereof used in whole or in part for a nonconforming use in an "R" district
which remains idle or unused for a continuous period of two (2) years, whether or not the
equipment or fixtures are removed, shall again be used except in conformity with the regulations
of the "R" district in which it is located.
D. Destruction of a Nonconforming Use.
No building which has been damaged by any cause whatsoever shall be restored except in
conformity with the regulations of this Title. If a building is damaged it may be repaired or
reconstructed and used as before the time of damage, provided that such repairs or reconstruction
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-114-
be substantially completed within twelve (12) months of the date of such damage.
E. Intermittent Use.
The casual intermittent, temporary, or illegal use of land or buildings shall not be sufficient to
establish the existence of a nonconforming use on a part of a lot or tract and shall not be
construed to establish a nonconforming use on the entire lot or tract.
F. Existence of a Nonconforming Use.
Whether a conforming use exists shall be a question of fact and shall be decided by the Zoning
Board of Appeals after public notice and hearing and in accordance with the rules of the Board.
G. Nonconforming Uses Not Validated.
A nonconforming use in violation of a provision of ordinance which this Title repeals shall not
be validated by the adoption of this Title.
H. Nonconforming uses may be extended or expanded only after public hearing before the
Zoning Board of Appeals and where such expansion would result in a nonconforming use being
sought closer to conformance. Such expansions or extensions would include the addition to a
building to provide accessory storage, where said storage was unenclosed on the premises and
off street parking either on the same lot or adjoining lots, where such off street parking would
meet the parking requirements of this Chapter for said nonconforming use if it were conforming
and where such off street parking would eliminate, or reduce substantially, a serious traffic
hazard in the streets abutting such nonconforming use. Expansion or extension of a
nonconforming use shall not be granted if the only reason for such extension or expansion is for
the sole purpose of perpetuating the nonconforming use.
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-115-
Chapter 11
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
9-11-1: Board Created
9-11-2: Members; Term of Office
9-11-3: Oath
9-11-4: Organization
9-11-5: Duties
9-11-6: Duties of the City Clerk's Office
9-11-7: Minutes and Records Kept
9-11-8: Compensation
9-11-9: Conflict of Interest by Members
9-11-10: Removal
9-11-1: Board Created
There is hereby created and established and shall hereafter be maintained and recognized in and
for the City of Geneseo a Zoning Board of Appeals, and said Board shall be under the
jurisdiction of the City Council.
9-11-2: Members; Term of Office
The Board shall consist of seven (7) members as stated below:
A. The seven (7) members of the Board shall be citizens of the City who are not members of
the City Council. The seven (7) citizen members shall be appointed by the Mayor and approved
by the City Council. Said members shall serve for a term of five (5) years each from the first
City Council meeting in April of the year they are appointed or until such time as their
successors take office. The term for which each said member is appointed shall be designated in
his appointment. At the April Council meeting of each year, the member shall be appointed for a
five-year term to succeed the member whose term expired in said month.
B. Members shall be eligible for reappointment and it is desirable that members rendering
good service be reappointed in order that the Zoning Board of Appeals may have the benefit of
their experience and that there may be a continuity policy. If any member should during the term
of his office die, move from the City, or for any reason be unable to act, the vacancy so created
shall be filled in the same manner as an original appointment and shall be for the remainder of
the unexpired term.
9-11-3: Oath
All citizen members of the Board do not have to take any oaths.
9-11-4: Organization
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-116-
The Board shall organize as soon as practicable after the appointment and qualification of its
members, by the election of one of its members as chairman, said chairman to be elected yearly
by a majority of said Board members.
All hearings conducted by said Board shall be open to the public. The Board shall keep minutes
of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon every question, or if absent or failing
to vote, indicating such fact and shall also keep records of its hearings and other official actions.
Findings of Fact shall be included in the minutes of each case, and the reasons for recommending
approval or denial of the request shall be specified. Every rule or regulation, every amendment
or repeal thereof, and every order, requirement, decision, or determination of the Board shall be
filed within ten (10) days in the office of the City Clerk and shall be a public record. The Board
shall adopt its own rules and procedures not in conflict with the ordinances or with the Illinois
Statutes in such case made and provided.
9-11-5: Duties
A. The powers and duties of the Board are:
1. To hold public hearings and recommend to the City Council approval of
conditional use permits.
2. To hold public hearings and grant variances and expansions of nonconforming
uses.
3. To hold public hearings and decide upon requests for determination of the
existence of a nonconforming use and request for the extension of a nonconforming use.
4. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in an order,
requirement, decision, or determination made by the Building Inspector in the
enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance or the Building Code and fee schedule.
5. To permit the extension of a district where the boundary line of a district divides a
lot held in a single ownership at the time of passage of the Zoning Ordinance.
6. To interpret the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance in such a way as to carry out
the intent and purpose of the plan, as shown upon the map fixing the several districts
accompanying and made a part of this Chapter where the street layout on the ground
varies from the layout as shown on the map aforesaid.
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-117-
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-118-
B. The Board may grant the following variances:
1. Vary the yard regulations where there is an exception or unusual physical
condition of a lot, which condition is not generally prevalent in the neighborhood and
which condition when related to the yard regulations of this Title would prevent a
reasonable or sensible arrangement of buildings on the lot. Applicants for a side or rear
yard variance must be able to show the distance of the proposed improvement from the
lot line by way of lot corner stakes in the neighborhood. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
a variance may be granted for the parking or storage of recreational vehicles in side
yards. Before granting such a variance, the Board shall consider such factors as the
closeness of neighboring buildings, adequate light, sunshine and airspace, and fire hazard
potential.
2. Vary the parking regulations where an applicant demonstrated conclusively that
the specific use of a building would make unnecessary the parking spaces required by this
ordinance, but providing that such a reduction not be more than fifty percent (50%) of the
usual requirement.
3. Use of the premises for public utilities and railroad purposes (other than track
right of way) or for radio and television tower or broadcasting station.
4. Vary the parking regulations for parking in "R" districts for churches, temples,
public schools, public libraries, community centers, public parks, and public playgrounds.
In the "R" districts twenty percent (20%) of the required front yard shall be reserved and
devoted to permanent landscaping and no off street parking spaces or off street loading
spaces shall be permitted within this landscaping area.
C. Conditional Use Permits.
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall conduct public hearings and make recommendations to the
City Council upon applications for conditional use permits, specifically listed in the district
regulations of this ordinance. Conditional uses of areas to be annexed shall be detailed in an
annexation agreement. A public hearing on the conditional use and annexation agreement shall
be conducted by the Community Development Board. In such cases it shall be the Community
Development Board rather than the Zoning Board of Appeals which shall make recommendation
to the City Council. No recommendation for a conditional use permit shall be forwarded to the
City Council within the same week as the public hearing is completed. Before recommending
approval of such a conditional use permit, the Board shall satisfy itself that the conditional use
requested will meet conditions that will, with the Board's judgment, insure that:
1. The establishment, maintenance, or operation of a conditional use will not be
detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, morals, comfort, or general welfare.
2. The conditional use will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of the property
in the immediate vicinity for the purposes already permitted nor substantially diminish
and impair property values within the neighborhood.
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-119-
3. The establishment of the conditional use will not impede the normal and orderly
development and improvement of surrounding property uses permitted in the district.
4. Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage, and other necessary facilities will be
provided.
5. Adequate measures will be taken to provide ingress and egress so designed as to
minimize traffic congestions in the public streets.
6. Duration of conditional uses shall be for that period of time as set forth.
D. Appeals to the Board.
An appeal may be taken to the Zoning Board of Appeals by a person or by an officer,
department, board or bureau of the City affected by a decision of the Building Inspector.
An appeal shall state all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the
Building Inspector certifies to the Zoning Board of Appeals after the notice of appeal has been
filed with him that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause
imminent peril to life or property, in which case the proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise
than by a restraining order, which may be granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals or by a court
of record on application, on notice to the Building Inspector, and on due cause shown.
The Board shall select a reasonable time and place for the hearing of the appeal and give fifteen
(15) days notice thereof to the parties and shall render a decision on the appeal without
unreasonable delay. Any person may appeal and testify at the hearing, either in person or by
duly authorized agent or attorney.
E. Appeals From Decision of the Board.
Any review of the decisions of the Zoning Board of Appeals as set forth in this Section B. shall
be subject to the Illinois Administrative Review Act.
9-11-6: Duties of the City Clerk's Office
For conditional uses, variances, and extension or expansions of nonconforming uses, or for the
determination of the existence of a nonconforming use, the City Clerk's office shall:
A. Obtain the name of the property owners within a radius of 250 feet of the property of the
stated case and notify each property owner of the public hearing by a letter.
B. Have the legal notice published in the official newspaper fifteen (15) days prior to the
public hearing.
C. Have recorded in the Henry County Recorder's Office all conditional uses, variances, and
expansions of nonconforming uses, including any restrictions thereof.
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-120-
D. The City Clerk's office shall receive a fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) with
applications for conditional uses, variances, and expansions of nonconforming uses. No fee
shall be received with applications for other meetings or hearings of the Zoning Board of
Appeals.
9-11-7: Minutes and Records Kept
The Board shall keep full and accurate minutes of its proceedings. The City Clerk shall
designate a member of his staff to be present to take full and accurate minutes. All records of the
Board shall be kept at City Hall and shall be open to the public.
9-11-8: Compensation
Each citizen member of the Board shall serve without compensation for his service.
9-11-9: Conflict of Interest by Members
No member of the Board shall be interested, directly or indirectly, in any contract or job for
work, or material or any work for himself or family, or the profits therefrom, or services to be
furnished or performed in the carrying out of the Geneseo Zoning Ordinance.
9-11-10: Removal
Any member of the Board may be removed at any time by the Council by a two-thirds vote of
Council members present whenever, in the opinion of the Council, the interest of the City
requires such removal.
Also, the Board may recommend to the City Council the removal of any member of the Board
for excessive absenteeism at any regularly scheduled Board meeting. Excessive absenteeism
shall be the missing of any three (3) of the last four (4) regularly scheduled Board meetings.
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-121-
Chapter 12
ENFORCEMENT OF TITLE
9-12-1: Enforcement: Administrative Officer
9-12-2: Appeals: General
9-12-3: Appeals: Historic Preservation District
9-12-1: Administrative Officer
The Administrative Officer shall enforce this Title in accordance with the penalties and remedies
set forth in this Title.
9-12-2: Appeals: General
Any appeals which may be made from the actions of the Administrative Officer shall be taken to
the Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with Chapter 11 of this Title.
9-12-3: Appeals: Historic Preservation District
Any appeals which may be made from the actions of the Administrative Officer pertaining to the
Historic Preservation District shall be taken to the Community Development Board in
accordance with Chapter 11 of the Geneseo Zoning Ordinance.
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-122-
Chapter 13
AMENDMENTS
9-13-1: Amendment of Zoning Regulations
9-13-2: Administrative or Procedural Changes
9-13-1:Amendment of Zoning Regulations
A. The Council may from time to time amend this Title in the manner prescribed by the statutes
of the State. No such amendment shall be made until it shall have been referred to the
Community Development Board and a report received from said Board of the effect of said
amendment upon the City and the welfare of the inhabitants thereof. The Board shall hold one
public hearing upon such amendments as required by law and is hereby designated as the body to
hold such hearings. If no report is received from the Board in sixty (60) days, said board has
approved the amendment. No report for an amendment shall be forwarded to the City Council
within the same week as the public hearing is completed.
B. Meetings of the Board. All meetings of the Community Development Board shall be at the
call of the Chairman and at such other times as such Board may determine. An application of
any type of amendment to this Title must be submitted to the City Clerk's office three (3) weeks
prior to the scheduled Community Development Board meeting.
C. Duties of the City Clerk's office. For amendments to the zoning district boundaries, the
City Clerk's office shall:
1. Obtain the names of property owners within a radius of two hundred fifty
feet (250') of the property of the stated case and notify each property owner of the
public hearing by letter.
2. Have the legal notice published in the official newspaper fifteen (15) days
prior to the public hearing.
D. The City Clerk's office shall receive a fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) from the
party or parties proposing or recommending a change in the district regulations or district
boundaries.
9-13-2:Administrative or Procedural Changes
The City Council of the City of Geneseo, Illinois shall have the power to make any
administrative or procedural changes to the Geneseo Zoning Ordinance without first submitting
such change to a public hearing held by the Community Development Board.
"Administrative or procedural change" as set forth in the above paragraph shall mean any of the
following changes:
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-123-
A. The name of any board, committee, commission, or individual.
B. The composition of any board, committee, commission, or position including, but not limited
to, the number of members, length of term or proportionment by residential location or other
category.
c. The transfer of duties between board, committees, or commissions.
CITY OF GENESEO ZONING ORDINANCE
-124-
Chapter 14
VIOLATION AND PENALTY
9-14-1: Zoning Violations and Penalty
9-14-2: Remedies
9-14-1:Zoning Violations and Penalty
The owner or agent of a building or premises in or upon which a violation of any provision of
this Title has been committed or shall exist; or the lessee or tenant of an entire building or entire
premises in or upon which violation has been committed or shall exist; or the agent, architect,
building contractor or any other person who commits, takes part in, or assists in any violation or
who maintains any building or premises in or upon which such violation shall exist shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one
hundred dollars ($100.00). Each and every day that such violation continues may constitute a
separate offense.
9-14-2:Remedies
In the event that any building or structure is or is sought to be erected, constructed,
reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, or maintained or any building, structure, or land is
sought to be used in violation of this Title, the Building Inspector or the City Council, in addition
to other remedies, shall have the power to withhold or revoke any necessary permit and shall
institute appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction,
reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use, or to correct or abate such
violation, or to prevent the occupancy of said building, structure, or land.














































CITY OF GENESEO
ORDINANCE NO. 1708
AN ORDINANCE PROVIDING FOR CONTROL OF
STORM WATER DRAINAGE & DETENTION,
SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
WITHIN THE CITY OF GENESEO, ILLINOIS
ADOPTED BY THE
CITY COUNCIL
OF THE
CITY OF GENESEO
THIS 13th DAY OF MARCH, 2001
APPROVED BY THE MAYOR MARCH 14, 2001
CITY OF GENESEO STORM WATER CONTROL ORDINANCE NO. 1708
1
Title 11
Table of Contents
Chapter 1 Authority and Purpose; Other Relevant Permitting; Applicability; Exemptions;
Variances, and Responsibility
11-1-1: Authority and Purpose
11-1-2 : Other Relevant Permitting
11-1-3 : Applicability
11-1-4 : Exemptions
11-1-5 : Variances
11-1-6 : Fees
11-1-7: Responsibility
Chapter 2 Definitions
11-2-1: Definitions
Chapter 3 Stormwater Drainage and Detention
11-3-1: Drainage Plan Submittal Requirements
11-3-2: Drainage Plan Requirements
11-3-3: Minimization of Increases in Runoff Volumes and Rates
11-3-4: Evaluations of Site Design Feature
11-3-5: Conservation Design Benefits
11-3-6: Water Quality and Multiple Uses
11-3-7: Regional Detention in Lieu of On-Site Detention
11-3-8: Release Rates
11-3-9: Detention Basin Outlet Design
11-3-10: Detention Storage Requirements
11-3-11: Drainage System Design and Evaluation
11-3-12: Methods For Generating Runoff Hydrographs
11-3-13: Agriculture Tiles and Sanitary Sewers
11-3-14: Created Wetlands
11-3-15: Wet Detention Basin Design
11-3-16: Dry Detention Basis Design
11-3-17: Existing Depressional Areas
11-3-18: Minimum Detention Outlet Size
11-3-19: Detention in Flood Plains
11-3-20: Drainage Into Wetlands, Rivers, Streams, Lakes, Ponds, and Depressional Storage Areas
11-3-21: Street Detention, Parking Lot Detention, and Culvert Drainage
11-3-22: Infiltration Practices
11-3-23: Safety Considerations
11-3-24: Maintenance Considerations
11-3-25: Accommodating Flows From Upstream Tributary Areas
11-3-26: Upstream Areas Not Meeting Ordinance Requirements
11-3-27: Upstream Areas Meeting Ordinance Requirements
11-3-28: Early Completion of Detention Facilities
2
CITY OF GENESEO STORM WATER CONTROL ORDINANCE NO. 1708
Chapter 4 Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
11-4-1: Findings
11-4-2: General Principles
11-4-3: Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan Submittal Requirements
11-4-4: Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan Requirements
11-4-5: Design and Operation Standards and Requirements
11-4-6: Erosion and Sediment Control Design Requirements
11-4-7: Maintenance of Control Measures
Chapter 5 Long Term Maintenance Responsibility
11-5-1: Long Term Maintenance Responsibility
Chapter 6 Inspections
11-6-1: Inspections
11-6-2: Special Precautions
11-6-3: Amendment of Plans
Chapter 7 Permitting
11-7-1: Application for Permit
11-7-2: Application Fee
11-7-3: Bond Required
11-7-4: Review and Approval
11-7-5: Expiration of Permit
11-7-6: Scope of Appeals
11-7-7: Findings on Appeal
11-7-8: Retention of Plans
11-7-9: Amendments
11-7-10: Initiations of Amendments
11-7-11: Application for Amendment
11-7-12: Hearing on Application
11-7-13: Notice of Hearing
11-7-14: Findings of Fact and Recommendation of the Community Development Board
11-7-15: Action by City Council
11-7-16: Effect of Denial of Amendment
Chapter 8 Enforcement
11-8-1: Stop-Work Order; Revocation of Permit
11-8-2: Fees
11-8-3: Violations and Penalties
11-8-4: Repealer
11-8-5: Severability Clause
Appendices
Appendix A - Special Service Area Ordinance
Appendix B - Desirable Trees Native to Northwestern Illinois
Appendix C - Desirable Trees Native to Areas South of Geneseo, Illinois
Appendix D - Form of Letter of Credit
Appendix E - Engineer’s Certification of Storm Water Detention and/or Soil Erosion Control Compliance
Exhibits
Exhibit A - Development Application Fee Schedule
CITY OF GENESEO STORM WATER CONTROL ORDINANCE NO. 1708
3
Chapter 1
AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE; OTHER RELEVANT PERMITTING;
APPLICABILITY; EXEMPTIONS; EXCEPTIONS; AND SEPARABILITY
11-1-1: Authority and Purpose
11-1-2: Other Relevant Permitting
11-1-3: Applicability
11-1-4: Exemptions
11-1-5: Variances
11-1-6: Fees
11-1-7: Responsibility
11-1-1: Authority and Purpose
This ordinance is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to the City of Geneseo, Illinois, by
the Illinois Compiled Statutes, 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1, 5/11-12-12, 5/11/30-2, and 5/11/31-2.
The purpose of this ordinance is to diminish threats to public health and safety, protect property,
prevent damage to the environment, and promote public welfare by guiding, regulating, and
controlling the design, construction, use, and maintenance of any new development, or
redevelopment, or other activity which disturbs or breaks the topsoil, or otherwise results in the
movement of earth, and/or changes the storm water drainage pattern and/or storm water flows from
that which would have occurred if the land had been left in its natural state. This storm water runoff
and resulting soil erosion could result in the inundation of damageable properties, the erosion and
destabilization of downstream channels, and the pollution of valuable stream and lake resources.
One cause of increases in storm water runoff quantity or rate and impairment of quality, and loss of
valuable topsoil is the new development or redevelopment of the land. This ordinance regulates these
activities to minimize adverse impacts.
This ordinance is adopted to accomplish the following objectives:
A. To meet the goals and objectives of the City’s Comprehensive Land Use Plan with
regard to the environment;
B. To assure that new development or redevelopment does not increase the drainage or
flood hazards or create unstable conditions susceptible to soil erosion;
C. To protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from flood damage
due to increased storm water runoff and soil erosion;
D. To protect human life and health from the hazards of increased flooding and soil
CITY OF GENESEO STORM WATER CONTROL ORDINANCE NO. 1708
4
erosion on a watershed basis;
E. To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control projects, repairs to flooddamaged
public facilities and utilities, correction of channel erosion problems, and
flood rescue and relief operations caused by storm water runoff and soil erosion
quantities from new development or redevelopment;
F. To protect, conserve, and promote the orderly development of land and soil, water,
air, animal, and plant resources;
G. To preserve the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of watercourses, wetlands
and flood plains for protecting water quality, and enhance storm water management
and aquatic habitats;
H. To preserve the natural characteristics of stream corridors in order to manage flood
and storm water impacts, improve water and groundwater quality, reduce soil
erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat, maintain quality forest resources,
provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits, enhance community
and economic development.
11-1-2: Other Relevant Permitting
Before a Development Permit under this ordinance becomes effective, all required federal, state, and
local permits will have been received for the site subject to new development or redevelopment. The
acquisition of these permits shall be the sole responsibility of the applicant. These may include, but
are not limited to, Section 404 of the Clean Waters Act; Section 106 of the National Historic
Preservation Act; Section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act; permitting required by the Illinois
Department of Natural Resources, Office of Water Resources in accordance with the Rivers, Lakes
and Streams Act, 615 ILCS; the Soil and Water Conservation Districts Act, 70 ILCS; the Farmland
Preservation Act, 505 ILCS; the Illinois Groundwater Protection Act, 415 ILCS; the National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Permit (NPDES) and Section 401 of the Clean Water Act
thru the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Water Pollution Control; and the
Threatened and Endangered Species Act, 16 USC 1531 ET. SEQ. Compliance is also required with,
but not limited to, the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Geneseo, Illinois and the Uniform Building
Code, most recent edition adopted by the City, Chapter on Excavation and Grading.
11-1-3: Applicability
This ordinance shall apply to all new development or redevelopment in the City. Except as
otherwise provided in this ordinance, no person, firm or corporation, public or private; the State of
Illinois and its agencies or political subdivisions; the United States of America and its agencies or
political subdivisions; any agent, servant, officer or employee of any of the foregoing which meets
the following provisions or is otherwise exempted in this ordinance, shall commence any
CITY OF GENESEO STORM WATER CONTROL ORDINANCE NO. 1708
5
development activities without first having obtained a development permit from the Zoning
Administrator.
A. Any new development or redevelopment that will include an area that will increase
by ten thousand (10,000) square feet or more the total impervious surface (i.e.,
streets, roof, patio or parking area or any combination thereof); or
B. Any land disturbing activity (i.e., clearing, grading, stripping, excavation, fill, or any
combination thereof) that will affect an area that will meet or exceed ten thousand
(10,000) square feet or that will exceed 100 cubic yards; or
C. Any land disturbing activity greater than 500 square feet if the activity is within 100
feet of a river, lake, pond, stream, abandoned mine, or wetland; and is done in
conjunction with sub sections 12.01 or 12.02; or
D. Any land-disturbing activity on the sloping side of the slope disturbance line and is
in conjunction with Section 11-1-3:A, B, or C or,
E. Any tree cutting or mechanized land clearing where the tree, native to Northwestern
Illinois, is in excess of eight (8) inches in diameter and is done in conjunction with
Chapter 1, Section 11-1-3:A, B, or C.
F. The construction of one single-family dwelling that is not constructed as part of a
residential development shall not be subject to the provisions of this ordinance
regarding permanent storm water control measures.
G. The City, which may consult with the Henry County Soil and Water Conservation
District, reserves the right to require any non-agricultural, construction development
activity, regardless of disturbed area or type of activity, to comply with this ordinance
if it is determined to be the cause of or a contributor to an existing or potential
erosion, sediment, or storm water impact. Soil erosion and sediment control planning
for individual home sites may utilize a soil erosion and sediment control planning
“kit” provided by the Henry County Soil and Water Conservation District.
11-1-4: Exemptions
A development permit shall not be required for the following:
A. Any new development, redevelopment or other activity falling below the minimum
standards as set forth in Section 11-1-3.
B. The agricultural use of land, including the implementation of conservation measures
included in a farm conservation plan approved by the Natural Resources
Conservation Service, and including the construction of agricultural structures.
CITY OF GENESEO STORM WATER CONTROL ORDINANCE NO. 1708
6
C. The maintenance of any existing storm water drainage/detention component or
structure or any existing soil erosion/sediment control component or structure;
including dredging, levee restoration, tree removal or other function which maintains
the original design capacities of the above.
D. The construction of, improvements to, or the maintenance of any street, road,
highway or interstate highway performed by any unit of government whose powers
grant such authority.
11-1-5: Variances
The Community Development Board, after a public hearing, may determine and vary the
requirements and regulations of this ordinance in harmony with their general purpose and intent,
where the Community Development Board makes written finding of fact in accordance with the
standards herein after prescribed and, further, finds that there are practical difficulties or particular
hard ships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of requirements and regulations of this
ordinance.
A. Application for variance shall be made by a verified petition of the applicant for a
development permit, stating fully the grounds of the petition and the facts relied upon
by the applicant. Such petition shall be filed with the development permit application.
Each application for a variance shall be made in writing and filed with the Zoning
Administrator. The Zoning Administrator and the City Engineer will review and
transmit recommendations to the Community Development Board, which shall
review such recommendations prior to granting or denying the variance.
B Standards for variance. The Community Development Board shall not vary the
requirements and regulations of this ordinance as authorized in this section unless
there is evidence presented to it in each specific case that:
1. The land is of such shape or size, or is affected by such physical conditions,
or is subject to such title limitations or record that it is impossible or
impractical for the applicant to comply with all of the requirements of this
ordinance;
2. The variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial
property right of the applicant;
3. The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public welfare,
environment or injurious to other property in the vicinity of the subject
property.
CITY OF GENESEO STORM WATER CONTROL ORDINANCE NO. 1708
7
C. The Community Development Board shall hold a public hearing on each application
for variance, in accordance with the City of Geneseo Zoning Ordinance. Within
thirty (30) days after the public hearing, the Community Development Board shall
either approve the site development permit application with the variances and
conditions it deems necessary, or it shall disapprove such development permit
application and variance application, or it shall take other such action as appropriate.
11-1-6: Fees
The fee for variances and appeals shall be One Hundred Fifty dollars ($150).
11-1-7: Responsibility
The applicant shall not be relieved of responsibility for damage to persons or property otherwise
imposed by law, and the City or its officers or agents, including the directors and staff of the Henry
County SWCD, will not be made liable for such damage by, (1) the issuance of a development
permit under this ordinance, (2) compliance with the provisions of that development permit or
conditions attached to it by the Zoning Administrator, (3) failure of City of Geneseo officials to
observe or recognize hazardous or unsightly conditions, (4) failure of City officials to recommend
denial or to deny a development permit, or (5) exemptions from development permit requirements
of this ordinance.
CITY OF GENESEO STORM WATER CONTROL ORDINANCE NO. 1708
8
Chapter 2
DEFINITIONS
11-2-1: Definitions
11-2-1: Definitions
For the purposes of this ordinance certain terms are defined and set forth below:
Abandoned Mine. An abandoned mine is a large excavation in the earth that is no longer being
used. These conditions make such areas unstable and susceptible to subsidence and surface collapse.
Subsurface excavations and fractures in the bedrock may channel runoff water to public or private
water supplies, making those sources especially susceptible to groundwater contamination.
Adverse Impacts. Any negative impact on plant, soil, air or water resources affecting their
beneficial uses, including recreation, aesthetics, aquatic habitat, quality, and quantity.
Applicant. Any person, firm, or governmental agency who executes the necessary forms to procure
official approval of a development or permit to carry out construction of a new development or redevelopment
from the City of Geneseo, Illinois.
Base Flood Elevation. The flood having a one percent probability of being equaled or exceeded in
any given year. The base flood is also known as the 100-year flood.
Building Official. The officer or other designated authority charged with the administration and
enforcement of the Uniform Building Code for the City of Geneseo, Illinois.
Building Permit. A permit issued by the City of Geneseo, Illinois for the construction, erection, or
alteration of a structure or building and the related ground and surface preparation prior to and after
completion of construction, erection, or alteration of a structure or building.
Bypass Flows. Storm water runoff from upstream properties tributary to a property's drainage
system but not under its control.
Certify or Certification. Formally attesting that the specific inspections and tests were performed
and that such inspections and tests comply with the applicable requirements of this ordinance.
Channel. Any defined river, stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or artificial depression, ponded
area, on-stream lake or impoundment, abandoned mine, flowage, slough, ditch, conduit, culvert,
gully, ravine, wash, or natural or manmade drainage way which has a definite bed and bank or
shoreline, in or into which surface or groundwater flows, either perennially or intermittently.
Channel Modification. Alteration of a channel by changing the physical dimensions or materials
CITY OF GENESEO STORM WATER CONTROL ORDINANCE NO. 1708
9
of its bed or banks. Channel modification includes damming, riprapping (or other armoring), filling,
widening, deepening, straightening, relocating, lining, and significant removal of bottom or woody
rooted vegetation. Channel modification does not include the man-made clearing of debris or
removal of trash.
City. City of Geneseo, Illinois.
City Attorney. Attorney for the City of Geneseo, Illinois.
City Engineer. Engineer for the City of Geneseo, Illinois.
Clearing. Any activity which removes the natural vegetative ground cover.
Community Development Board. The duly created Board of the City of Geneseo assigned the duty
to oversee the Planning Department of the City and to make recommendations regarding the
development of the City.
Compensatory Storage. An artificially excavated, hydraulically equivalent volume of storage
within the flood plain used to balance the loss of natural flood storage capacity when fill or structure
is placed within the flood plain.
Conduit. Any channel, pipe, sewer, or culvert used for the conveyance or movement of water,
whether open or closed.
Conservation Design. Development design guidelines that conserve open land, including areas
such as woodlands, steep slopes, streams, flood plains and wetlands, and that protect agricultural
soils for continued agricultural use in blocks of land large enough to allow for efficient farming
operations by using greater flexibility and efficiency in the design and siting of services and
infrastructure and the platting of lots.
County. Henry County of Illinois.
Cubic Yard. A one (1) yard by one (1) yard by one (1) yard amount of material in excavation and/or
fill.
Detention Basin. A facility constructed or modified to provide for the temporary storage of storm
water runoff and the controlled release by gravity of this runoff at a prescribed rate during and after
a flood or storm.
Detention Time. The amount of time storm water is held within a detention basin.
Development. Any man-made change to real estate, including:
CITY OF GENESEO STORM WATER CONTROL ORDINANCE NO. 1708
10
1. Constructing, reconstructing, or placing of a structure or any addition to a structure
valued at more than $1,000;
2. Installing a manufactured home on a site or preparing a site for a manufactured home,
recreational vehicles, or travel trailers;
3. Installing utilities, construction of roads, or similar projects;
4. Constructing or erecting of levees, walls, fences, bridges, or culverts;
5. Drilling, mining, filling, dredging, grading, excavating, or other nonagricultural
alterations of the ground surface;
6. Storage of materials; or
7. Any other activity that might change the direction, height, or velocity of flood or
surface waters.
“Development” does not include maintenance of existing structures and facilities such as reroofing;
resurfacing roads; or gardening, plowing, and similar agricultural practices that do not involve
filling, grading, or construction of levees.
Drainage Plan. A plan, including engineering drawings and supporting calculations, which
describes the existing storm water drainage system and environmental features, including grading,
as well as proposed alterations or changes to the drainage system and environment of a property.
Dry Basin. A detention basin designed to drain after temporary storage of storm water and to
normally be dry over much of its bottom area.
Erosion. The general process whereby soil or earth is moved by rainfall, flowing water, wind, or
wave action.
Excavation. Any act by which organic matter, earth, sand, gravel, rock, or any other similar material
is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced, re-located, or bulldozed and shall include
the conditions resulting from such actions.
Excess Storm water Runoff. The volume and rate of flow of storm water discharged from a new
development or re-development which is or will be in excess of that volume and rate which existed
before development or re-development.
Existing Grade. The vertical location of the existing ground surface prior to excavation or filling.
CITY OF GENESEO STORM WATER CONTROL ORDINANCE NO. 1708
11
Fill. Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock, or any other material is deposited, placed, replaced,
pushed, dumped, pulled, transported, or moved by a person to a new location and shall include the
conditions resulting therefrom.
Final Grade. The vertical location of the ground surface after grading work is completed in
accordance with the engineering plans.
Flood Fringe. That area as designated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) on
either side of the flood way. This area is subject to inundation from the base flood, but conveys little
or no flow.
Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM). A very generalized map prepared by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) which shows only where flood plains are located based
on very basic data. FHBM's do not include base flood elevations.
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). A map prepared by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA) that depicts the special flood hazard area (SFHA) within a community. This map
includes insurance rate zones and regulatory flood plains and may or may not depict regulatory flood
ways.
Flood way. The portion of the special flood hazard area required to store and convey the base flood.
The flood way for the special flood hazard area of Geneseo Creek shall be as delineated on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated September
30, 1992. The flood way for each of the remaining special flood hazard areas of the City shall be
according to the best data available from federal, state, or other sources.
Grading. The excavation or fill or any combination thereof and shall include the conditions
resulting from any excavation or fill.
Henry County SWCD. Henry County Soil & Water Conservation District.
Hydrograph. A graph showing for a given location on a stream or conduit the flow rate with
respect to time.
Hydrograph Method. This method estimates runoff volume and runoff hydrographs for the point
of interest by generating hydrographs for individual subareas, combining them, and routing them
through stream lengths and reservoir structures. Factors such as rainfall amount and distribution,
runoff curve number, time of concentration, and travel time are included.
Impervious Surface. That area of property that is covered by materials other than soil and
vegetation and that has no intended capacity to absorb storm water, such as parking lots, driveways,
sidewalks, patios, tennis courts, roofs, and other structures.
CITY OF GENESEO STORM WATER CONTROL ORDINANCE NO. 1708
12
Infiltration. The passage or movement of water into the soil surfaces.
Loessial Soil. A sediment, commonly non-stratified and unconsolidated, composed predominately
of silt sized particles with accessory clay and sand.
Lot. An individual platted parcel in an approved subdivision.
Major Drainage System. That portion of a drainage system needed to store and convey flows
beyond the capacity of the minor drainage system.
Minor Drainage System. That portion of a drainage system designed for the convenience of the
public. It consists of street gutters, storm sewers, small open channels, and swales and, where
manmade, is to be designed to handle the 10-year runoff event.
Mitigation. Mitigation is when the prescribed controls are not sufficient and additional measures
are required to offset the development, including those measures necessary to minimize the negative
effects which storm water drainage and development activities might have on the public health,
safety, and welfare. Examples of mitigation include, but are not limited to, compensatory storage,
soil erosion and sedimentation control, and channel restoration.
Natural. Conditions resulting from physical, chemical, and biological processes without
intervention by man.
Natural Drainage. Channels formed in the existing surface topography of the earth prior to changes
made by unnatural causes.
One Hundred-Year Event. A rainfall, runoff, or flood event having a one percent (1%) probability
of occurrence in any given year. A 24 hour storm duration is assumed unless otherwise noted.
Parcel. All contiguous land in one ownership.
Peak Flow. The maximum rate of flow of water at a given point in a channel or conduit.
Permittee. Any person to whom a building permit or a development permit is issued.
Person. Any individual, firm, or corporation, public or private; the State of Illinois and its agencies
or political subdivisions; the United States of America and its agencies or political subdivisions; and
any agent, servant, officer, or employee of any of the foregoing.
Positive Drainage. Provision for overland paths for all areas of a property including depressional
areas that may also be drained by storm sewer.
Prime Farmland. Prime farmland is land that is best suited to food, feed, forage, fiber, and oilseed
crops. It may be crop land, pasture, woodland, or other land, but it is not urban and built up land or
CITY OF GENESEO STORM WATER CONTROL ORDINANCE NO. 1708
13
water areas. It is either used for food or fiber or is available for those uses. The soil qualities,
growing season, and moisture supply are those needed for a well managed soil to economically
produce a sustained high yield of crops. Prime farmland produces the highest yields with minimum
inputs of energy and economic resources and farming it results in the least damage to the
environment.
Property. A parcel of real estate.
Retention Basin. A facility designed to completely retain a specified amount of storm water runoff
without release except by means of evaporation, infiltration, emergency bypass, or pumping.
Sedimentation. The process that deposits soils, debris, and other materials either on other ground
surfaces or in bodies of water or storm water drainage systems.
Site. A parcel of land, or a contiguous combination thereof, where grading work is performed as a
single unified operation.
Slope Disturbance Line. The line which delineates relatively level building areas from areas where
slopes exceed 7 percent (7%) and where special precautions must be taken.
Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA). Those lands within the jurisdiction of the City that are subject
to inundation by the base flood. The SFHAs of the City are generally identified as such on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map of the City, prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, and dated
September 30, 1992. The SFHAs of those parts of unincorporated Henry County that are within the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City or that may be annexed into the City are generally identified
as such on the Flood Insurance Rate Map, prepared for Henry County by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency, and dated January 17, 1985.
Special Service Area Tax (SSA). A tax placed upon an area for the purpose of funding special
services particular to a geographically defined area. As set forth in the compiled statutes of the state
of Illinois at 35 ILCS 200/27-5, et seq.
Storm water Drainage System. All means, natural and manmade, used for conducting storm water
to, through, or from a drainage area to the point of final outlet from a property. The storm water
drainage system includes, but is not limited to, any of the following: conduits and appurtenance
features, canals, channels, ditches, streams, culverts, streets, storm sewers, detention basins, swales,
and pumping stations.
Storm Water Runoff. The waters derived from melting snow or rain falling within a tributary
drainage basin which are in excess of the infiltration capacity of the soils of that basin, which flow
over the surface of the ground or are collected in channels or conduits.
Storm Sewer. A closed conduit for conveying collected storm water.
CITY OF GENESEO STORM WATER CONTROL ORDINANCE NO. 1708
14
Stream. Any river, creek, brook, branch, flowage, ravine, or natural or man-made drainage way
which has a definite bed and banks or shoreline, in or into which surface or groundwater flows,
either perennially or intermittently.
Stripping. Any activity which removes the vegetative surface cover, including tree removal, by
spraying or clearing, and storage or removal of top soil.
Ten-Year Event. A runoff, rainfall, or flood event having a ten percent (10%) chance of occurring
in any given year. A 24 hour storm duration is assumed unless otherwise note.
Time of Concentration. The elapsed time for storm water to flow from the most hydraulically
remote point in a drainage basin to a particular point of interest in that watershed.
Tributary Watershed. All of the land surface area that contributes runoff to a given point.
Two-Year Event. A runoff, rainfall, or flood event having a fifty percent (50%) chance of occurring
in any given year. A 24 hour storm duration is assumed unless otherwise noted.
Vacant. Land on which there are no structures or only structures which are secondary to the use or
maintenance of the land itself.
Watershed. All land area drained by, or contributing water to, the same stream, creek, ditch, lake,
marsh, storm water facility, groundwater or depressional area.
Wet Basin. A detention basin designed to maintain a permanent pool of water after the temporary
storage of storm water runoff.
Wetlands. Wetlands are defined by regulation as "those areas that are inundated or saturated by
surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and under normal
circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil
conditions." For general, but not inclusive, locations of designated wetlands refer to mapping
prepared jointly by the U.S. Department of Interior, Fish and Wildlife Service and the Illinois
Department of Natural Resources, Office of Resource Conservation; National Wetlands Inventory
Mapping, 1987.
Zoning Administrator. Zoning Administrator for the City of Geneseo, Illinois.
Chapter 3
STORM WATER DRAINAGE AND DETENTION
11-3-1: Drainage Plan Submittal Requirements
11-3-2: Drainage Plan Requirements
11-3-3: Minimization of Increases in Runoff Volumes and Rates
11-3-4: Evaluations of Site Design Features
CITY OF GENESEO STORM WATER CONTROL ORDINANCE NO. 1708
15
11-3-5: Conservation Design Benefits
11-3-6: Water Quality and Multiple Uses
11-3-7: Regional Detention in Lieu of On-Site Detention
11-3-8: Release Rates
11-3-9: Detention Basin Outlet Design
11-3-10: Detention Storage Requirements
11-3-11: Drainage System Design and Evaluation
11-3-12: Methods For Generating Runoff Hydrographs
11-3-13: Agriculture Tiles and Sanitary Sewers
11-3-14: Created Wetlands
11-3-15: Wet Detention Basin Design
11-3-16: Dry Detention Basin Design
11-3-17: Existing Depressional Areas
11-3-18: Minimum Detention Outlet Size
11-3-19: Detention in Flood Plains
11-3-20: Drainage Into Wetlands, Rivers, Streams, Lakes, Ponds, and Depressional Storage Areas
11-3-21: Street Detention, Parking Lot Detention, and Culvert Drainage
11-3-22: Infiltration Practices
11-3-23: Safety Considerations
11-3-24: Maintenance Considerations
11-3-25: Accommodating Flows From Upstream Tributary Areas
11-3-26: Upstream Areas Not Meeting Ordinance Requirements
11-3-27: Upstream Areas Meeting Ordinance Requirements
11-3-28: Early Completion of Detention Facilities
11-3-1: Drainage Plan Submittal Requirements.
Each applicant shall submit the following information to ensure that the provisions of this ordinance
are met. The submittal shall include sufficient information to evaluate the environmental
characteristics of the property, the potential adverse impacts and benefits of the development on
water resources both on-site and off-site, and the effectiveness of the proposed drainage plan in
managing storm water runoff, and meeting the provisions of Section 11-1-2. The applicant shall
certify on the drawings that all clearing, grading, drainage, and construction shall be accomplished
in strict conformance with the drainage plan. The following information shall be submitted for both
existing and proposed property conditions for all new developments or re-developments that meet
or exceed the minimum requirements of Section 11-1-3.
11-3-2: Drainage Plan Requirements.
A topographic survey of the property at two-foot contours unless otherwise specified or approved
by the City Engineer. The plan map shall be keyed to a consistent datum specified by the City. If the
mapping is compiled using a digital format and the Global Positioning System (GPS), the applicant
will provide both paper and digital copies including GPS points.
A. Mapping and Descriptions. An existing drainage and proposed drainage plan for the
property and one hundred (100) feet surrounding the property at a scale of not more than one
CITY OF GENESEO STORM WATER CONTROL ORDINANCE NO. 1708
16
hundred (100) feet to one (1) inch, and including the following list. Minor developments may not
require all of the items shown below. The City Engineer shall determine the items required based
upon the property.
1. Property boundary, dimensions, and approximate acreage
2. Building setback lines
3. All existing and proposed structures and sizes
4. Square feet of existing and proposed impervious surface
5. All existing or proposed easements
6. All existing, abandoned, or proposed water or monitoring wellhead locations
7. All sanitary or combined sewer lines and septic systems
8. The banks and centerline of streams and channels
9. Shoreline of lakes, ponds, and detention basins with normal water level
elevation
10. Farm drains and tiles
11. Soils classifications
12. Location, size, and slope of storm water conduits and drainage swales
13. Depressional storage areas
14. Detention facilities
15. Roads, streets, and associated storm water inlets, including finished grades
16. Base flood elevation, flood fringe, and regulatory flood way
17. Basis of design for the final drainage network components
18. A statement giving any applicable engineering assumptions and calculations
19. A vicinity map showing the relationship of the site to its general surroundings
at a scale of not less than two thousand (2,000) feet to one (1) inch
(1:24,000)
CITY OF GENESEO STORM WATER CONTROL ORDINANCE NO. 1708
17
20. Title, scale, north arrow, legend, seal of licensed professional engineer, date,
and name of person preparing plans
21. Cross-section data for open channel flow paths and designated overland flow
paths
22. Direction of storm flows
23. Flow rates and velocities at critical points in the drainage system
24. A statement by the design engineer of the drainage system's provision for
handling events greater than the 100 year, 24 hour runoff
25. A statement of certification of all drainage plans, calculations, and supporting
data by a licensed professional engineer
26. Abandoned mine location and type
27. Subwatershed boundaries within the property
B. Environmental Features. A depiction of environmental features of the property and
immediate vicinity, including the following:
1. The limits of designated regulatory and non-regulatory wetland areas
2. The location and limits of abandoned mining activity
3. The location of trees greater than eight (8) inches in diameter
4. any designated natural areas, prime farmland
5. any proposed environmental mitigation features
11-3-3: Minimization of Increases in Runoff Volumes and Rates
In the selection of a drainage plan for a new development or redevelopment, the applicant shall
evaluate and implement site design features which minimize the increase in runoff volumes and rates
from the site and addresses the water quality treatment requirements of this ordinance.
11-3-4: Evaluations of Site Design Features
The applicant's drainage plan submittal shall include evaluations of site design features which are
consistent with the following hierarchy:
A. Preserves regulatory flood plains, flood prone and wetland areas
CITY OF GENESEO STORM WATER CONTROL ORDINANCE NO. 1708
18
B. Minimizes impervious surfaces on the property consistent with the needs of the
project
C. Attenuates flows by use of open vegetated swales and natural depressions and
preserves the existing natural stream channel
D. Infiltrates runoff on-site where appropriate soil conditions exist
E. Provides wet or wetland detention structures
F. Provides storm water retention structures
G. Provides dry detention structures
H. Constructs storm sewers
11-3-5: Conservation Design Benefits
The City of Geneseo wishes to encourage development which utilizes naturalized or Conservation
Design techniques. The City will consider density, building setback variances, and alternate public
improvements standards for new development or redevelopment which minimizes the amount of
storm water runoff through the utilization of items A. through E. of the hierarchy in Section 11-3-4
above. The purposes of utilizing Conservation Design standards are to conserve open land,
especially areas containing or creating natural features such as woodlands, streams, flood plains and
wetlands, to protect prime agricultural land for its continued use, and to conserve scenic areas
representative of the City’s rural, small town character. Developments which meet the criteria of
Conservation Design developments may be processed as planned unit developments as described
in the City’s Subdivision and Development Regulations.
The hydraulically-connected, impervious area used in the calculation of required retention volume
may be reduced by the City Engineer if the soils are prepared or are left undisturbed to maximize
infiltration and deep rooted native grasses are planted in areas appropriately dedicated. The
reduction in hydraulically- connected, impervious area used in the calculation shall be equal to the
area of the development meeting the above soils/native planting requirement.
11-3-6: Water Quality and Multiple Uses
The drainage system should be designed to minimize adverse surface and groundwater quality
impacts off-site and on the property itself. Detention basins shall incorporate design features to
capture storm water runoff pollutants. In particular, designers shall give preference to wet bottom
and wetland type designs and all flows from the development shall be routed through the basin (i.e.,
low flows shall not be bypassed). Detention of storm water shall be promoted throughout the
property's drainage system to reduce the volume of storm water runoff and to reduce the quantity of
runoff pollutants.
CITY OF GENESEO STORM WATER CONTROL ORDINANCE NO. 1708
19
The drainage system should incorporate multiple uses where practicable. Uses considered
compatible with storm water management include open space, aesthetics, aquatic habitat, recreation
(boating, fishing, trails, playing fields), wetlands, and water quality mitigation.
11-3-7: Regional Detention in Lieu of On-Site Detention
Regional detention is encouraged in lieu of constructing a detention basin on-site. Regional
detention, where available, will be on City-owned property for the purpose of detaining storm water
runoff for the entire drainage area. The release rate shall be the five (5) year storm event, predeveloped
condition or less. Funding for the long term maintenance of regional detention basins shall
be derived by the establishment of a special service area for the area covered by the development
permit, as set forth in Section 11-3-24 herein. The City shall maintain these regional detention
facilities. The developer shall be responsible to estimate the cost of on-site detention that meets the
requirements of this ordinance. The City engineer shall review and agree to the above estimate. The
developer shall pay the City the above-estimated cost as a fee for storage of storm water runoff
generated from their site in the regional detention facility. The developer shall be responsible for the
incremental costs of conveying the storm water from the developed property to the regional detention
basin.
11-3-8: Release Rates
The drainage system for new developments or redevelopments shall be designed to control the peak
rate of discharge for a 100 year storm, 24-hour event from the property with a peak release rate less
than or equal to pre-project levels for a 5 year storm, 24 hour event or less, which will not cause an
increase in flooding or channel instability downstream when considered in aggregate with other
developed properties and downstream drainage capacities. The peak discharge rate from events less
than or equal to the 5 year, 24 hour event and the peak discharge rate for the 100 year, 24 hour event
shall be reviewed by the City Engineer.
11-3-9: Detention Basin Outlet Design
Backwater on the outlet structure from the downstream drainage system shall be addressed when
designing the outlet.
11-3-10: Detention Storage Requirements
The design maximum storage to be provided in the detention basin shall be based on the runoff from
the runoff difference before and after development from the 100 year, 24 hour event. All detention
basin storage shall be computed using Hydrograph Methods utilizing reservoir routing (also called
modified pulse or level pool) or equivalent method as described in Section 11-3-12.
11-3-11: Drainage System Design and Evaluation. The following criteria should be used in
evaluating and designing the drainage system. The design will provide capacity to pass the 10 year,
24 hour peak flow in the minor drainage system and an overload flow path for flows in excess of the
design capacity. Whenever practicable, the storm water systems shall not result in the interbasin
transfer of drainage unless no other alternative exists.
CITY OF GENESEO STORM WATER CONTROL ORDINANCE NO. 1708
20
A. Design Methodologies. Major and minor conveyance systems for areas up to 10 acres
may be designed using the Rational Formula. The Rational Formula, the Soil Conservation
Service (SCS) Technical Release 55 (TR 55) or other methods approved by the City
Engineer. These methods may also be used in sizing the minor drainage system for larger
sites up to 100 acres. Runoff hydrograph methods as described in Section 11-3-12 must be
used for major drainage system design for all systems with greater than 10 acres of drainage
area and for the design of all detention basins.
B. Positive Drainage. Whenever practicable, all developments must be provided an
overland flow path that will pass the 100 year, 24 hour flow at a stage at least one (1) foot
below the lowest foundation grade in the vicinity of the flow path. Overland flow paths
designed to handle flows in excess of the minor drainage system capacity shall be provided
drainage easements. Street ponding and flow depths shall not exceed curb heights.
11-3-12: Methods For Generating Runoff Hydrographs
Runoff hydrographs shall be developed incorporating the following assumptions of rainfall amounts
and antecedent moisture.
A. Rainfall. Unless a continuous simulation approach to drainage system hydrology is used,
all design rainfall events shall be based on the Illinois State Water Survey's Bulletin 70. The
first quartile point rainfall distribution shall be used for the design and analysis of
conveyance systems with critical durations less than or equal to 12 hours. The third quartile
point rainfall distribution shall be used for the design and analysis of detention basins and
conveyance systems with critical durations greater than 12 and less than or equal to 24 hours.
The fourth quartile distribution shall be used in the design and analysis of systems with
durations greater than 24 hours. The first, third, and fourth quartile distributions described
by Huff are presented in Table 37 of Bulletin 70. Refer to Table 13 of Bulletin 70 for rainfall
depth, duration, and frequency. The NRCS Type II distribution may be used as an alternate
to the Huff distributions.
B. Antecedent Moisture. Computations of runoff hydrographs which do not rely on a
continuous accounting of antecedent moisture conditions shall use wet antecedent moisture
condition as a minimum.
11-3-13: Agriculture Tiles and Sanitary Sewers
Connections to sanitary sewers or existing agricultural storm water management system (tiles) shall
not be permitted for new developments. However, in exceptional circumstances and with the
approval of the City Engineer, connections to existing agricultural storm water management systems
may be allowed if the applicant demonstrates that the existing system has adequate hydraulic
capacity and structural integrity. Additionally, development meeting the criteria in Sections 11-3-8
through 11-3-24 shall either obtain a maintenance agreement or deed or plat restriction covering the
entire downstream drain tile in accordance with this ordinance before a connection to that system
is permitted. Field tile systems disturbed during the process of land development must be
CITY OF GENESEO STORM WATER CONTROL ORDINANCE NO. 1708
21
reconnected by those responsible for their disturbance unless the approved drainage plan
incorporates the tiles in the land development design.
11-3-14: Created Wetlands. Created wetlands shall be designed to remove storm water pollutants,
to be safe and aesthetically pleasing, and shall be used where existing wetlands or natural
depressions exist or the topography of the land lends itself to the creation of wetland area.
A. Wetland Design. Wetlands shall be designed to be inundated or saturated by surface or
groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support and under normal circumstances,
do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. The
created wetland may pond water at a depth which will be dependent upon the topography and
type of soils of the land, the plantings proposed, and the duration that water is to remain
standing, subject to the review and approval of the City’s engineer. Not withstanding the above,
the depth of stored, ponded water shall not exceed twelve inches of additional depth beyond the
design depth, for a period longer than ten days.
B. Wetland Basin Shoreline Slopes. The sides of wetland basins shall not be steeper than eight
to one (8 to 1 horizontal to vertical) where practical. Native wetland vegetation shall be
established throughout the basin area and a vegetated buffer strip of at least 25 feet in width,
preferably vegetated with native plant species, shall be maintained or restored around the
periphery of a created wetland where practical.
11-3-15: Wet Detention Basin Design
Wet detention basins shall be designed to remove storm water pollutants, to be safe, to be
aesthetically pleasing, and, as much as feasible, to be available for recreational use.
A.Wet Basin Depths. Wet basins shall be at least three feet deep, excluding near-shore banks
and safety ledges. If fish habitat is to be provided they shall be at least ten (10) feet deep
over twenty-five percent (25%)of the bottom area to prevent winterkill.
B. Wet Basin Shoreline Slopes. The side slopes of wet basins at the normal pool elevation
shall not be steeper than five to one (5 to 1 horizontal to vertical). It is recommended that
native aquatic vegetation be established around the perimeter to provide protection from
shoreline erosion. A vegetated buffer strip of at least 25 feet in width, preferably vegetated
with native plant species, shall be maintained or restored around the periphery of a wet basin
where practical.
C. Permanent Pool Volume. The permanent pool volume in a wet basin at normal depth
shall be equal to the runoff volume from its watershed for the 2 year, 24 hour event as a
minimum.
D. Wet Basin Inlet and Outlet Orientation. The distance between detention inlets and outlets
shall be maximized. Inlets and outlets shall be at opposite ends of the basin providing that
the orientation does not create undue hardship based on topography or other natural
CITY OF GENESEO STORM WATER CONTROL ORDINANCE NO. 1708
22
constraints. Designers are encouraged to use baffles or berms in the basin bottom to prevent
short-circuiting. There shall be no low flow bypass between the inlet and outlet. Paved low
flow channels shall not be used. The minimum flow length shall be ten (10) feet with a
recommended minimum ratio of two to one (2:1) for width.
11-3-16: Dry Detention Basin Design
In addition to the other requirements of this ordinance, dry basins shall be designed to remove storm
water pollutants, to be safe, to be aesthetically pleasing and, as much as feasible, to be available for
multiple uses.
A. Dry Basin Drainage. Dry basins shall be designed so that eighty percent (80%) of their
bottom area shall have standing water no longer than seventy-two (72) hours for any runoff
event less than the 100-year, 24 hour event. Grading plans shall clearly distinguish the wet
portion of the basin bottom. Under drains directed to the outlet may be used to accomplish
this requirement.
B. Dry Basin Depths. Dry basins shall be not more than four feet deep, excluding near-shore
banks and safety ledges.
C. Dry Basin Slope Design. The side slopes of dry basins at the normal pool elevation shall
not be steeper than five to one (5 to 1 horizontal to vertical). It is recommended that native
aquatic vegetation be established around the perimeter to provide protection from shoreline
erosion. As an alternative, if the City’s Engineer agrees that the dry basin storage area can
be accommodated only with a side slope being greater than five to one, then the dry basin
shall be fenced and secured to prevent accidental entry into the basin area. In no case shall
a side slope exceed a three to one slope. A vegetated buffer strip of at least 25 feet in width,
preferably vegetated with native plant species, shall be maintained or restored around the
periphery of a dry basin where practical.
D. Velocity Dissipation. Velocity dissipation measures shall be incorporated into dry basin
designs to minimize erosion at inlets and outlets and to minimize resuspension of pollutants.
E. Dry Basin Inlet and Outlet Orientation. Shall be the same as Section 11-3-15:D.
F. Temporary Sediment Trap. A sediment trap shall be constructed at each major inlet to a
dry basin during construction. The temporary sediment trap should be designed in accordance
with criteria in the Illinois Urban Manual.
11-3-17: Existing Depressional Areas
Existing depressional storage volume will be maintained and the volume of detention storage
provided to meet the requirements of this ordinance; and shall be in addition to existing storage.
11-3-18: Minimum Detention Outlet Size
CITY OF GENESEO STORM WATER CONTROL ORDINANCE NO. 1708
23
Where a single pipe outlet or orifice plate is to be used to control discharge, it shall have a minimum
diameter of twelve (12) inches. If design release rates call for smaller outlets, a design that
minimizes the possibility of clogging shall be used. Minimum outlet restrictor size shall be 4"
provided there is adequate downstream capacity. Detention volumes for a development shall be
dictated by adherence to the release rates specified in Section 11-3-8.
11-3-19: Detention in Flood Plains
The placement of detention basins within the flood plain is strongly discouraged because of
questions about their reliable operation during flood events. However, the storm water detention
requirements of this ordinance may be fulfilled by providing detention storage within flood fringe
areas on the project site, provided the following provisions are met as well as compliance with
Section 11-1-2.
A. Detention in Flood Fringe Areas. The placement of a detention basin in a flood fringe
area shall require compensatory storage for 1.5 times the volume below the base flood
elevation occupied by the detention basin, including any berms. The release from the
detention storage provided shall still be controlled consistent with the requirements of this
section. The applicant shall demonstrate its operation for all stream-flow and flood plain
backwater conditions. Excavations for compensatory storage along watercourses shall be
opposite or adjacent to the area occupied by detention. All flood plain storage lost below the
existing ten-year flood elevation shall be replaced below the existing ten-year elevation. All
flood plain storage lost above the existing ten-year flood elevation shall be replaced above
the existing ten-year flood elevation. All compensatory storage excavations shall be
constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse and comply with Section 11-1-2.
B. Detention in Flood ways. Detention basins shall be placed in the flood way only in
accordance with 11-3-19:C.
C. On-stream Detention. On-stream detention basins are discouraged but allowable if they
provide regional public benefits and if they meet the other provisions of this ordinance with
respect to water quality and control of the 5 year and 100 year, 24 hour events from the
property. The volume of detention shall be provided in addition to the existing stream flood
way storage. Further criteria are presented in Section 11-3-25 of this ordinance. If onstream
detention is used in watersheds larger than one square mile, the applicant will use
hydrographic modeling to demonstrate that the design will not increase the water level for
any properties upstream or downstream of the property. Also, impoundment of the stream
as part of on-stream detention:
1. Shall not prevent the migration of indigenous fish species, which require
access to upstream areas as part of their life cycle, such as for spawning;
2. Shall not cause or contribute to the degradation of water quality or stream
aquatic habitat;
CITY OF GENESEO STORM WATER CONTROL ORDINANCE NO. 1708
24
3. Shall include a design calling for gradual bank slopes, appropriate bank
stabilization measures, and a pre-sedimentation basin;
4. Shall not involve any stream channelization or the filling of wetlands;
5. Shall require the implementation of an effective non-point source
management program throughout the upstream watershed which shall include
as a minimum: runoff reduction "Best Management Practices" (BMP's)
consistent with Section 11-3-3; 2 year, 24 hour detention / sedimentation
basins for all development, consistent with Section 11-3-16:F.;
6. Shall not occur downstream of a wastewater discharge;
7. Shall not contribute to the duration or flood frequency of any adjacent land;
8. Shall comply with Section 11-1-2.
11-3-20: Drainage Into Wetlands, Rivers, Streams, Lakes, Ponds, and Depressional Storage Areas
Wetlands, lakes, ponds, and depressional storage areas shall be protected from damaging
modifications and adverse changes in runoff quality and quantity associated with land developments.
In addition to the other requirements of this ordinance, the following requirements shall be met for
all developments whose drainage flows into wetlands, rivers, lakes, ponds or depressional storage
areas:
A. Detention in Wetlands, Rivers, Streams, Lakes, Ponds or Depressional Storage Areas.
Existing wetlands, rivers, lakes, ponds, or depressional storage areas shall not be modified
for the purposes of storm water detention unless it is demonstrated that the proposed
modifications will maintain or improve its habitat and ability to perform beneficial functions
and shall comply with Section 11-2-1. Existing storage and release rate characteristics of
wetlands, rivers, lakes, ponds, or depressional storage areas shall be maintained and the
volume of detention storage provided to meet the requirements of this section shall be in
addition to this existing storage.
B. Sediment Control. The existing wetlands, rivers, lakes, ponds, or depressional storage
areas shall be protected during construction, and as further regulated in Chapter 4 of this
ordinance, and shall not be filled.
C. Alteration of Drainage Patterns. Site drainage patterns shall not be altered to substantially
decrease or increase the existing area tributary to wetlands, rivers, lakes, ponds, or
depressional storage areas. Drainage patterns shall not be altered by development to direct
runoff off site to other than natural drainage outlets existing prior to development.
CITY OF GENESEO STORM WATER CONTROL ORDINANCE NO. 1708
25
D. Detention/Sedimentation. All runoff from the development shall be routed through a
preliminary detention/sedimentation basin designed to capture the two-year, 24 hour event
and hold it for at least 24 hours, before being discharged to the wetland, river, lake, pond, or
depressional storage area. This basin shall be constructed before property grading begins and
shall be maintained throughout the construction process. In addition, the drainage hierarchy
defined in Section 11-3-1 should be followed to minimize runoff volumes and rates being
discharged to the wetland, river, stream, lake, pond, or depressional storage area and as
further regulated in Chapter 2 and Chapter 4 of this ordinance.
E. Vegetated Buffer Strip. A buffer strip of at least 25 feet in width, preferably vegetated
with native plant species, shall be maintained or restored around the periphery of a wetland,
river, stream, lake, pond, or depressional storage area.
F. Loessial Soils. Care must be taken to avoid open flow discharges of storm water over silt
(Loessial) soils due to high potential for erosion.
G. Abandoned Mines. The following requirements apply for new developments or redevelopments
where abandoned mines are determined to be present:
1. A storm water detention basin shall not be placed in or over an abandoned
mine.
2. Storm water detention basins shall not be located closer than one hundred
(100) feet from the opening of an abandoned mine.
3. The outflow from a storm water detention basin, channel, ditch, or any storm
water runoff generated as a result of a new development or redevelopment
shall not empty into, or be directed, or redirected by any means into or
through any abandoned mine.
4. If, after review of the storm water drainage plan, the City Engineer may
determine that more detailed information is required, an abandoned mine
evaluation may be required. An abandoned mine evaluation which addresses
the geologic, engineering, and environmental factors resulting from a new
development or redevelopment shall be performed by a professional with
experience and expertise in abandoned mine topography, who shall certify the
results of the evaluation. This evaluation shall be the responsibility of the
applicant and performed at no cost to the City. After review of this evaluation
and consultation with the Henry County Soil and Water Conservation
District, the City Engineer may either approve or disapprove the drainage
plan as submitted.
CITY OF GENESEO STORM WATER CONTROL ORDINANCE NO. 1708
26
5. Whenever an abandoned mine is discovered or it becomes apparent that the
abandoned mine has not yet been identified, it shall be reported to the Henry
County Soil and Water Conservation District.
6. Shall comply with Section 11-1-2.
11-3-21: Street Detention, Parking Lot Detention, and Culvert Drainage
A. Street Detention. If streets are to be used as part of the minor or major drainage system,
ponding depths shall not exceed curb heights and shall not remain flooded for more than
eight (8) hours for any event less than or equal to the 100 year, 24 hour event.
B. Parking Lot Detention. The maximum storm water ponding depth in any parking area
shall not exceed six (6) inches for more than four (4) hours.
C. Culvert, Road, and Driveway Crossings. Sizing of culvert crossings shall consider
entrance and exit losses as well as tailwater conditions on the culvert.
11-3-22: Infiltration Practices
To effectively reduce runoff volumes, infiltration practices, including basins, trenches, and
permeable pavement shall follow criteria in the Illinois Urban Manual with Section 11-1-2. An
appropriate sediment control device shall be provided to remove coarse sediment from storm water
flows before they reach infiltration basins or trenches. Storm water shall not be allowed to stand
more than 72 hours over eighty percent (80%) of the dry basin's bottom area for the maximum design
event to be ex-filtrated. The bottom of infiltration basins or trenches shall be a minimum of three feet
above the seasonally high groundwater and bedrock level. Engineering calculations demonstrating
infiltration rates shall be included with the application.
A. Vegetated Filter Strips and Swales. To effectively filter storm water pollutants and
promote infiltration of runoff, sites should be designed to maximize the use of vegetated
filter strips and swales and to follow criteria in the Illinois Urban Manual. Whenever
practicable, runoff from impervious surfaces should be directed onto filter strips and swales
comprised of native grasses and forbs before being routed to a storm sewer or detention
basin.
11-3-23: Safety Considerations
The drainage system components, especially all detention basins, shall be designed to protect the
safety of any children or adults coming in contact with the system during runoff events and shall
comply with Section 11-1-2.
A. Side Slopes. The side slopes of all detention basins at 100 year, 24 hour capacity shall
be as level as practicable to prevent accidental falls into the basin and for stability and ease
CITY OF GENESEO STORM WATER CONTROL ORDINANCE NO. 1708
27
of maintenance. Side slopes of detention basins and open channels shall not be steeper than
five to one (5 to 1) horizontal to vertical. As an alternative, if the City’s Engineer agrees that
the dry basin storage area can be accommodated only with a side slope being greater than
five to one, then the dry basin shall be fenced and secured to prevent accidental entry into the
basin area. In no case shall a side slope exceed a three to one slope.
B. Safety Ledge. All detention basins shall have a level safety ledge at least four feet in
width, 2.5 to 3 feet below the normal water depth.
C. Velocity. Velocities throughout the surface drainage system shall be controlled to safe
levels, taking into consideration rates and depths of flow. When velocities exceed 6 feet per
second, proper safety measures shall be provided and approved by the City Engineer.
Velocity calculations shall be submitted to the City Engineer.
D. Overflow Structures. All storm water detention basins shall be provided with an overflow
structure capable of safely passing excess flows at a stage at least one foot below the lowest
foundation grade in the vicinity of the detention basin. The design flow rate of the overflow
structure shall be equivalent to the 100 year, 24 hour inflow rate.
11-3-24: Maintenance Considerations. The storm water drainage system shall be designed to
minimize and facilitate maintenance. Turfed side slopes shall be designed to allow lawn-mowing
equipment to easily negotiate them. Wet basins shall be provided with alternate outflows, which can
be used to completely drain the pool for sediment removal. Pumping may be considered if drainage
by gravity is not feasible. Pre-sedimentation basins shall be included, where feasible, for localizing
sediment deposition and removal. Site access for heavy equipment shall be provided. Use of native
vegetation is strongly encouraged to reduce maintenance, increase wildlife habitat, and provide other
benefits. Included in the application for a development permit shall be a plan for the long term
management, operation, and maintenance of the storm water drainage system and a description of
the sources of funding therefore.
A. Long-term Maintenance Responsibility. Unless maintenance responsibility has been
delegated to and accepted by another person under this section, the owner shall maintain that
portion of a storm water drainage system, including any special management areas, located
upon their land. With the approval of the City the storm water drainage system and special
management areas, or specified portions thereof, may be dedicated or otherwise transferred
to and accepted by the City or other public entity.
B. Transfer to the City or Other Public Entity. If any portion of the storm water drainage
system is to be dedicated or otherwise transferred to the City or other public entity under
Section 11-3-24, appropriate easements or dedications for ingress and egress to and
maintenance of such portions shall be reserved for the benefit of such entity on the final plat.
CITY OF GENESEO STORM WATER CONTROL ORDINANCE NO. 1708
28
C. Incorporation of Maintenance Obligations in Storm Water Management Permit. The
provisions of this Section shall be incorporated by reference in the Storm Water Management
Permit and the applicant’s acceptance of the permit shall be deemed to be the applicant’s
acceptance and assumption of the obligations imposed under this section. At the option of
the City, the Storm Water Management Permit may be recorded.
D. Funding of Long Term Maintenance of Storm water Drainage Systems. As a condition
of approval of an application for a development permit, unless the property is a single
property to be held unsubdivided by a single owner, the City may at its discretion require the
establishment of a special service area pursuant to 35 ILCS 200/27-5, et seq. as the primary
means of providing for the long term maintenance of the facilities. If the establishment of
a special service area is required, the City shall make a good faith effort to determine and
establish the maximum tax rate sufficient to produce revenues required for ongoing
maintenance of the storm water management facilities. The City shall levy a de minimis
level of tax to be levied upon all taxable properties in the area covered by the development
permit until such time as 50% of the lots of the development have been issued building and
occupancy permits. At the tax levy next following the issuance of building and occupancy
permits for 50% of the lots of the development, the City shall then and annually thereafter
make a good faith estimate of the tax rate necessary to produce a tax sufficient for the
ongoing maintenance of the storm water management facilities and shall incorporate said rate
into its enactment of a special service area tax levy. The special service area tax shall be
deposited in a fund specifically designated for the maintenance of the storm water
management facilities.
11-3-25: Accommodating Flows From Upstream Tributary Areas
Storm water runoff from areas tributary to the property shall be considered in the design of the
property's drainage system. Whenever practicable, flows from upstream areas that are not to be
detained should be routed around the basin being provided for the site being developed.
11-3-26: Upstream Areas Not meeting Ordinance Requirements
When there are areas not meeting the storage and release rates of this ordinance, tributary to the
applicant's property, regionalized detention on the applicant's property shall be explored by the
applicant. The following steps shall be followed:
A. The applicant shall compute the storage volume needed for his property using the
release rates of Sections 11-3-8, the applicant's property area, and the procedures
described in Section 11-3-6.
B. Areas tributary to the applicant's property not meeting the storage and release rate
requirements of this ordinance shall be identified
CITY OF GENESEO STORM WATER CONTROL ORDINANCE NO. 1708
29
C. Using the areas determined above plus the applicant's property area, total storage
needed for the combined properties shall be computed.
Allowable release rates shall be computed using the combined property areas. Storage shall be
computed as described in Sections 11-3-8 through 11-3-24. If tributary areas are not developed, a
reasonable fully developed land cover, based on local zoning, shall be used for the purposes of
computing storage.
Once the necessary combined storage is computed the City may choose to pay for over-sizing the
applicant's detention basin to accommodate the regional flows. The applicant's responsibility will
be limited to the storage for his property as computed above. If regional storage is selected by the
City then the design produced in Section 11-3-6 shall be implemented. If regional storage is rejected
by the City the applicant shall bypass all tributary area flows around the applicant's basin whenever
practicable. If the applicant must route upstream flows through his basin and the upstream areas
exceed one-square mile in size, the applicant must meet the provision of Section 11-3-7:C. for onstream
basins.
11-3-27: Upstream Areas Meeting Ordinance Requirements
When there are areas which meet the storage and release rate requirements of this ordinance tributary
to the applicant's property, the upstream flows shall be bypassed around the applicant's detention
basin if this is the only practicable alternative. Storage needed for the applicant's property shall be
computed as described in Section 11-3-26. However, if the City decides to route tributary area flows
through an applicant's basin, the final design storm water releases shall be based on the combined
total of the applicant's property plus tributary areas. It must be shown that at no time will the runoff
rate from the applicant's property exceed the allowable release rate for his/her property alone.
11-3-28: Early Completion of Detention Facilities
Where detention, retention, or depressional storage areas are to be used as part of the drainage system
for a property, they shall be constructed as the first element of the initial earthwork program. Any
eroded sediment captured in these facilities shall be removed by the applicant on a regular basis and
before project completion in order to maintain the design volume of the facilities.
CITY OF GENESEO STORM WATER CONTROL ORDINANCE NO. 1708
30
Chapter 4
SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
11-4-1: Findings
11-4-2: General Principles
11-4-3: Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan Submittal Requirements
11-4-4: Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan Requirements
11-4-5: Design and Operation Standards and Requirements
11-4-6: Erosion and Sediment Control Design Requirements
11-4-7: Maintenance of Control Measures
11-4-1: Findings
The City hereby finds that:
A. The soil types found in the City of Geneseo, Illinois are susceptible to erosion and if
left unprotected could cause severe loss of soil with resultant damage to property;
B. The topography of the City contains areas with steep slopes upon which clearing of
trees and/or inappropriate construction could result in severe erosion and slope
stability problems, which could result in damage to property;
C. Excessive quantities of soil may erode from areas undergoing development for
certain non-agricultural uses including, but not limited to, the construction of
dwelling units, commercial buildings and industrial plants, the building of roads and
highways, the modification of stream channels and drainage ways, and the creation
of recreational facilities;
D. The washing, blowing, and falling of eroded soil across and upon roadways
endangers the health and safety of users thereof by decreasing vision and reducing
traction of road vehicles;
E. Soil erosion necessitates the costly repairing of gullies, washed out fills, and embankments;
F. Sediment from soil erosion clogs drainage systems and pollutes rivers, streams, lakes,
wetlands, and reservoirs;
G. Sediment limits the use of water and waterways for most beneficial purposes,
promotes the growth of undesirable aquatic weeds, destroys fish and other desirable
aquatic life, and is costly and difficult to remove; and
H. Sediment reduces the channel capacity of waterways and the storage capacity of flood
plains and natural depressions, resulting in increased chances of flooding at risk to
public health and safety.
11-4-2: General Principles
CITY OF GENESEO STORM WATER CONTROL ORDINANCE NO. 1708
31
It is the objective of this ordinance to control soil erosion and sedimentation caused by development
activities in the City, including clearing, grading, stripping, excavating, and filling of land. Measures
taken to control soil erosion and off-site sediment runoff shall be adequate to assure that sediment
is not transported from the site by a storm event of 10 year, 24 hour frequency or less. The following
principles shall apply to all new development or redevelopment activities within the City and to the
preparation of the submissions required under Section 11-4-3 of this ordinance:
A. New development or redevelopment shall be related to the topography and soils of
the site so as to create the least potential for erosion. Areas of steep slopes greater
than seven percent (7%) where high cuts and fills may be required are to be avoided
wherever possible and natural contours should be followed as closely as possible;
B. Natural vegetation shall be retained and protected wherever possible. Areas
immediately adjacent to natural watercourses, lakes, ponds, and wetlands are to be
left undisturbed wherever possible. Temporary crossings of watercourses, when
permitted, must include appropriate stabilization measures;
C. Special precautions shall be taken to prevent damages resulting from any necessary
development activity within or adjacent to any stream, lake, pond, abandoned mine,
or wetland. Preventive measures shall reflect the sensitivity of these areas to erosion
and sedimentation;
D. The smallest practical area of land should be exposed for the shortest practical time
during development;
E. Sediment basins or traps, filter barriers, diversions, and any other appropriate
sediment or runoff control measures shall be installed prior to site clearing and
grading and maintained to remove sediment from run-off waters from land
undergoing development;
F. The selection of erosion and sediment control measures shall be based on assessment
of the probable frequency of climatic and other events likely to contribute to erosion
and on evaluation of the risks, costs, and benefits involved;
G. In the design of erosion control facilities and practices, aesthetics and the
requirements of continuing maintenance must be considered;
H. Provisions shall be made to accommodate the increased runoff caused by changed
soil and surface conditions during and after development. Drainage ways should be
designed so that their final gradients and the resultant velocities and rates of
discharge will not create additional erosion on-site or downstream;
I. Permanent vegetation and structures shall be installed and functional as soon as
practical during development;
CITY OF GENESEO STORM WATER CONTROL ORDINANCE NO. 1708
32
J. Those areas being converted from agricultural purposes to other land uses shall be
vegetated with an appropriate protective cover prior to development;
K. All waste generated as a result of site development activity shall be properly disposed
of and shall be prevented from being carried off the site by either wind or water;
L. All construction sites shall provide measures to prevent sediment from being tracked
onto public or private roadways; and
M. All temporary soil erosion and sediment control practices shall be maintained to
function as intended until the contributing drainage area has been permanently
stabilized, at which time they shall be removed.
11-4-3: Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan Submittal Requirements
Each applicant shall submit the information depending on development size, as regulated, to ensure
that the provisions of this ordinance are met. The submittal shall include sufficient information to
evaluate the environmental characteristics of the property, the potential adverse impacts of the
development related to erosion both on-site and off-site, and the effectiveness of the proposed
erosion and sediment control plan in reducing sediment loss and meeting the provisions of Section
11-1-2. The applicant shall certify on the drawing that all clearing, grading, drainage, and
construction shall be accomplished in strict conformance with the erosion and sediment control plan.
The following information shall be submitted for both existing and proposed property conditions;
new developments or re-developments meeting the requirements of Section 11-1-3.
11-4-4: Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan Requirements
Shall meet the requirements of Sections 11-3-7, 11-3-2:A., and 11-3-2:B.
A. Mapping and Descriptions. The existing and proposed erosion and sediment control
features of the property and immediate vicinity including:
1. As required in Sections 11-3-2, 11-3-2:A, and 11-3-2:B.
2. Location of the slope disturbance line
3. Location and description of the soil erosion and sediment control measures
to be employed during construction
4. For any structures proposed to be located on the slope side of the slope
disturbance line, the map shall include the limits of disturbance, including
tree removal, soil erosion and sediment control measures during construction,
cross section view of any proposed cut or fill, erosion and sediment control
measures during construction, details of method(s) proposed for providing
CITY OF GENESEO STORM WATER CONTROL ORDINANCE NO. 1708
33
slope stability, permanent storm water control measures, and permanent
erosion and sediment control measures, all being certified by a registered
professional engineer or a "Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment
Control;"
5. The predominant soil types on the site, their location, and their limitations for
the proposed use as defined by the U.S.D.A. Natural Resources Conservation
Service;
6. The proposed use of the site, including present and planned development,
areas of clearing, stripping, grading, excavation and filling; proposed
contours, finished grades, and street profiles; the storm water plan as required
in Chapter 2; kinds and locations of utilities, areas and acreages proposed to
be paved, sodded or seeded, vegetatively stabilized, or left undisturbed; and
the location of trees over eight (8) inches in diameter and their type;
7. A soil erosion and sediment control plan, including a narrative, shall be
submitted showing all measures necessary to meet the objectives of this
ordinance throughout all phases of construction. The development of a soil
erosion and sediment control plan shall follow the requirements of this
ordinance and the procedures in the latest edition of the "Illinois Procedures
and Standards for Urban Soil Erosion and Sediment Control" (commonly
known as the Greenbook), which is hereby incorporated into this ordinance
by reference. The City, in consultation with the Henry County SWCD, may
waive specific requirements for the content of submissions upon finding that
the information submitted is sufficient to show that the work will comply
with the objectives and principles of this ordinance. Permanent soil erosion
and sediment control features needed at the completion of any development
site shall be included in the submittal. The submitted soil erosion and
sediment control plan shall include:
a. Location and description, including standard details, of all sediment
control measures and specifics of sediment basins and traps,
including outlet details;
b. Location and description of all soil stabilization and erosion control
measures, including seeding mixtures and rates, types of sod, method
of seed bed preparation (type and extent of tillage, weed control,
planting equipment, etc...), expected seeding dates, type, method and
rate of lime and fertilizer application (soil fertility testing required),
kind and quantity of mulching for both temporary and permanent
vegetative control measures, and types of non-vegetative stabilization
measures;
CITY OF GENESEO STORM WATER CONTROL ORDINANCE NO. 1708
34
c. Location and description of all runoff control measures, including
diversions, waterways, and outlets;
d. Location and description of methods to prevent tracking of sediment
off-site including construction entrance details, as appropriate;
e. Description of dust and traffic control measures;
f. Locations of stockpiles and description of stabilization methods;
g. Description of offsite fill or borrow volumes, locations and methods
of stabilization;
h. Provisions for maintenance of control measures, including type and
frequency of maintenance, easements, and estimates of the cost of
maintenance; and
i. Identification (name, address, and telephone) of the person(s) or
entity which will have legal responsibility for maintenance of soil
erosion control structures and measures during development and after
development is completed.
11-4-5: Design and Operation Standards and Requirements. The practice standards and
specifications outlined in the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control plan shall follow criteria in the
latest edition of the Illinois Urban Manual.
A. All clearing, grading, stripping, excavating, and filling which is subject to the
approval requirements of this ordinance shall be subject to the applicable standards
and requirements set forth and/or referenced in this ordinance;
B. Responsibility. The permittee shall not be relieved of responsibility for damage to
persons or property otherwise imposed by law and the City or its officers or agents,
including the Directors and Staff of the Henry County SWCD, will not be made
liable for such damage by (1) the issuance of a permit under this ordinance, (2)
compliance with the provisions of that permit or with conditions attached to it by the
City, (3) failure of the City officials to observe or recognized hazardous or unsightly
conditions, (4) failure of the City officials to recommend denial of or to deny a
permit, or (5) exemptions from the permit requirements of this ordinance; and
C. Site Design Requirements. Practice standards and specifications for measures
outlined in the soil erosion and sediment control plan shall follow criteria in the latest
edition of the "Illinois Urban Manual: A Technical Manual Designed for Urban
Ecosystem Protection and Enhancement", which is hereby incorporated into this
ordinance by reference.
CITY OF GENESEO STORM WATER CONTROL ORDINANCE NO. 1708
35
11-4-6: Erosion and Sediment Control Design Requirements
New developments or redevelopments shall comply with Section 11-4-3 and meet the following:
B. Control measures shall be constructed to control runoff from the property to such an
extent possible that sediment is retained on-site.
C. Temporary on-site control measures required shall be constructed and functional
prior to initiating clearing, grading, stripping, excavating, or fill activities on the site.
D. Disturbed areas shall be stabilized with permanent measures within seven (7)
calendar days following the end of active disturbance or redisturbance, consistent
with the following criteria:
1. Appropriate permanent stabilization measures shall include seeding,
mulching, sodding, with non-vegetative measures as a last resort; and
2. Areas having slopes greater than 12% shall be stabilized with sod, mat, or
blanket in combination with seeding or equivalent.
D. All temporary and permanent erosion and sediment control practices must be
maintained and repaired as needed to assure effective performance of their intended
function.
E. All temporary erosion and sediment control measures shall be disposed in a proper
manner within thirty (30) days after final site stabilization is achieved with
permanent soil stabilization measures. Trapped sediment and other disturbed soils
resulting from the disposition of temporary measures shall be permanently stabilized
to prevent further erosion and sedimentation.
F. Site Development Requirements. On-site sediment control measures, as specified by
the following criteria, shall be constructed as specified in the referenced handbooks
and shall be functional prior to initiating clearing, grading, stripping, excavating, or
fill activities on the site.
1. For new developments or redevelopments less than one (1) acre, filter
barriers (including filter fences, straw bales, or equivalent control measures)
shall be constructed to control all on-site runoff. Vegetated filter strips, with
a minimum width of twenty-five (25) feet, may be used as an alternative only
where runoff in sheet flow is expected;
2. For new developments or re-developments more than one (1) acre but less
than five (5) acres, a sediment trap or equivalent control measure shall be
constructed at the downslope point of the disturbed area;
CITY OF GENESEO STORM WATER CONTROL ORDINANCE NO. 1708
36
3. For new developments or re-developments greater than five (5) acres, a
sediment basin or equivalent control measure shall be constructed at the
down slope point of the disturbed area;
4. Sediment basin and sediment trap designs shall provide for both "dry"
detention and "wet" detention sediment storage. The detention storage shall
be composed of equal volumes of "wet" detention storage and “dry” detention
storage and each shall be sized as regulated in Section 11-3-1. The release
rate of the basin shall be that rate as regulated in Chapter 3. The elevation of
the outlet structure shall be placed such that it only drains the dry detention
storage;
5. The sediment storage shall be sized to store the estimated sediment load
generated from the site over the duration of the construction period with a
minimum storage equivalent to the volume or sediment generated in one year.
For construction periods exceeding one year, the one-year sediment load and
a sediment removal schedule may be substituted; and
6. To the extent possible or as otherwise regulated in this ordinance, all
desirable trees eight (8) inches in diameter and larger shall be protected for
their present and future value for erosion protection and other environmental
benefits. Trees that have been selected for preservation shall be marked prior
to the beginning of any clearing, grading, stripping, excavation, or filling of
the site. A "No Construction” zone shall be established and marked at the
perimeter of the drip line of each tree which is to be preserved.
G. Storm water conveyance channels, including ditches, swales, diversions, and the outlets
of all channels and pipes, shall be designed and constructed as regulated in Chapter 3. All
constructed or modified channels shall be stabilized within 48 hours, consistent with the
following standards and as required in the referenced handbooks:
1. For grades up to four (4) percent, seeding in combination with mulch, erosion
blanket, or an equivalent control measure shall be applied. Sod or erosion
blanket or mat shall be applied to the bottom of the channel;
2. For grades of four (4) to eight (8) percent, sod or an equivalent control
measure shall be applied in the channel; and
3. For grades greater than 8 percent, rock, riprap, or an equivalent control
measure shall be applied over filter fabric or other type of soil protection, or
the grade shall be effectively reduced using drop structures.
H. Land disturbance activities in stream channels shall be avoided where possible, or as
regulated in Chapter 3. If disturbance activities are unavoidable, the following requirements
shall be met:
CITY OF GENESEO STORM WATER CONTROL ORDINANCE NO. 1708
37
1. Construction vehicles shall be kept out of the stream channel to the maximum
extent practicable. Where construction crossings are necessary, temporary
crossings shall be constructed of non-erosive material, such as riprap or
gravel;
2. The time and area of disturbance of stream channels shall be kept to a
minimum. The stream channel, including bed and banks, shall be stabilized
within 48 hours after channel disturbance is completed, interrupted, or
stopped; and
3. Whenever channel relocation is necessary, the new channel shall be
constructed under dry conditions and fully stabilized before flow is diverted,
incorporating meanders, pool and riffle sequence, and riparian planting.
I. Storm sewer inlets and culverts shall be protected by sediment traps or filter barriers
meeting accepted design standards and specifications.
J. Soil storage piles containing more than 10 cubic yards of material shall not be located
with a downslope drainage length of less than 50 feet to a roadway, drainage channel, or
abandoned mine. Filter barriers, including straw bales, filter fence, or equivalent, shall be
installed immediately surrounding the perimeter of the pile.
K. If dewatering devices are used, discharge locations shall be protected from erosion. All
pumped discharges shall be routed through appropriately designed sediment traps or basins,
or equivalent, and shall not be deposited into an abandoned mine.
L. Each site shall have graveled (or equivalent) entrance roads, access drives, and parking
areas of sufficient length and width to prevent sediment from being tracked onto public or
private roadways. Any sediment reaching a public or private road shall be removed by
shoveling or street cleaning (not flushing) before the end of each workday and transported
to a controlled sediment disposal area.
11-4-7: Maintenance of Control Measures
All soil erosion and sediment control measures necessary to meet the requirements of this ordinance
shall be maintained by the applicant or subsequent land owner during the period of land disturbance
and development of the site in a satisfactory manner to ensure adequate performance. The applicant
or contractor responsible for maintaining the soil erosion and sediment control practices shall inspect
all such practices at least once every seven (7) days or within 24 hours of a precipitation event equal
to or exceeding 0.5" of rainfall.
LONG TERM MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITY
Chapter 5
CITY OF GENESEO STORM WATER CONTROL ORDINANCE NO. 1708
38
11-5-1: Long Term Maintenance Responsibility
11-5-1: Long Term Maintenance Responsibility
Maintenance of storm water drainage and soil erosion and sediment control facilities located on
private property shall be the responsibility of the owner of that property. Before an appropriate
permit is obtained from the City, the applicant shall execute a maintenance agreement with the City
guaranteeing that the applicant and all future owners of the property will maintain its storm water
drainage and soil erosion and sediment control system. Such agreement shall be recorded with the
Recorder of Deeds of the County. The maintenance agreement shall include a schedule for regular
maintenance of each aspect of the property's storm water drainage and soil erosion and sediment
control system and shall provide for access to the system for inspection by authorized personnel of
the City. The maintenance agreement shall also stipulate that if the appropriate personnel of the City
notifies the property owner in writing of maintenance problems which require correction, the
property owner shall begin such corrections within 24 hours and shall not extend beyond seven (7)
calendar days of such notification. If the corrections are not made within this time period, the City
may have the necessary work completed and assess the cost to the property owner. The City shall
require a bond to be filed by the property owner for maintenance of the storm water drainage and soil
erosion and sediment control system.
CITY OF GENESEO STORM WATER CONTROL ORDINANCE NO. 1708
39
Chapter 6
INSPECTIONS
11-6-1: Inspections
11-6-2: Special Precautions
11-6-3: Amendment of Plans
11-6-1: Inspections
The City of Geneseo shall make inspections as hereinafter required and shall either approve that
portion of the work completed or shall notify the permittee wherein the work fails to comply with
the site development or erosion and sediment control plan as approved. Plans for grading, stripping,
excavating, and filling work bearing the stamp of approval of the City shall be maintained at the site
during progress of the work. In order to obtain inspections and to ensure compliance with the
approved erosion and sediment control plan, the grading or building permit, and this Ordinance the
permittee shall notify the City within two (2) working days of the completion of the construction
stages specified below:
A. Upon completion of installation of sediment and runoff control measures, including
perimeter controls and diversions, prior to proceeding with any other earth
disturbance or grading;
B. After stripping and clearing;
C. After rough grading;
D. After final grading;
E. After seeding and landscaping deadlines; and
F. After final stabilization and landscaping, prior to removal of temporary sediment
controls.
If stripping, clearing, grading, and/or landscaping are to be done in phases or areas, the permittee
shall give notice and request inspection at the completion of each of the above work stages in each
phase or area. If an inspection is not made and notification of the results given within five (5)
working days after notice is received by the City from the permittee, the permittee may continue
work at his/her own risk without presuming acceptance by the City. Notification of the results of
the inspection shall be given in writing at the site. A duplicate copy shall be kept by the enforcing
agency of the City.
11-6-2: Special Precautions
CITY OF GENESEO STORM WATER CONTROL ORDINANCE NO. 1708
40
If at any stage of the grading of any development site the City determines by inspection that the
nature of the site is such that further work authorized by an existing permit is likely to imperil any
property, public way, stream, lake, wetland, or drainage structure, the City shall require, as a
condition of allowing the work to be done, such reasonable special precautions to be taken as are
considered advisable to avoid the likelihood of such peril. "Special precautions" may include, but
shall not be limited to, a more level exposed slope; construction of additional drainage facilities,
berms, terracing, compaction, or cribbing; installation of plant materials for erosion control; and
recommendations of a registered soils engineer and/or engineering geologist which may be made
requirements for further work.
Where it appears that storm damage may result because the grading on any development site is not
complete, work shall be stopped and the permittee required to install temporary structures or take
such other measures as may be required to protect adjoining property or the public safety. On large
developments or where unusual site conditions prevail, the Zoning Administrator shall specify the
time of starting grading and time of completion or may require that the operations be conducted in
specific stages so as to ensure completion of protective measures or devices prior to the advent of
seasonal rains.
11-6-3: Amendment of Plans
Major amendments to storm water drainage and detention or erosion and sediment control plans shall
be submitted to the Zoning Administrator and shall be processed and approved or disapproved in the
same manner as the original plans. Field modification of a minor nature may be authorized by the
Zoning Administrator by written authorization to the permittee.
CITY OF GENESEO STORM WATER CONTROL ORDINANCE NO. 1708
41
Chapter 7
PERMITTING
11-7-1: Application For Permit
11-7-2: Application Fee
11-7-3: Bond Required
11-7-4: Review and Approval
11-7-5: Expiration pf Permit
11-7-6: Scope of Appeals
11-7-7: Findings On Appeal
11-7-8: Retention of Plans
11-7-9: Amendments
11-7-10: Initiations of Amendments
11-7-11: Application for Amendment
11-7-12: Hearing on Application
11-7-13: Notice of Hearing
11-7-14: Findings of Fact and Recommendation of the Community Development Board
11-7-15: Action by City Council
11-7-16: Effect of Denial of Amendment
11-7-1: Application For Permit
Application for a development permit shall be made by the owner of the property or his authorized
agent to the Zoning Administrator on a form furnished for that purpose. Each application shall bear
the name(s) and address(es) of the owner or developer of the site, the contractor(s) and any
consulting firm retained by the applicant, together with the name of the applicant's principal contact
at such firm. Each application shall include certification that any land clearing, construction, or
development involving the movement of earth shall be in accordance with the plans approved upon
issuance of the permit.
11-7-2: Application Fee
All applications for a development permit shall be accompanied with an application fee as set forth
in Exhibit A, attached hereto and incorporated herein. In addition, the applicant shall be responsible
for reimbursing the City for any additional cost necessary for review, inspection, and approval of this
project including, but not limited to, the engineering services of the City Engineer. The Zoning
Administrator shall require a $500.00 deposit to cover these additional costs.
11-7-3: Bond Required
The applicant for a development permit shall be required to file with the City a faithful performance
bond or bonds, letter of credit in the form found in Appendix “D”, or other improvement security
satisfactory to the City Attorney in an amount deemed sufficient by the Zoning Administrator to
CITY OF GENESEO STORM WATER CONTROL ORDINANCE NO. 1708
42
cover all costs of improvements, landscaping, maintenance of improvements and landscaping, soil
erosion and sediment control measures, and engineering and inspection costs to cover the cost of
failure or repair of improvements installed on the site, for such period as specified by the City.
11-7-4: Review and Approval
Each application for an approved development permit or erosion and sediment control plan shall be
reviewed and acted upon according to the following procedures:
A. The City of Geneseo shall:
1. After review of the application and required submissions, if it is found to be
in conformance with the provisions of this ordinance, approve the
development and/or erosion and sediment control plan;
2. Approve the development and/or erosion and sediment control plan subject
to such reasonable conditions as may be necessary to secure substantially the
objectives of this ordinance and issue the approval subject to these
conditions; or
3. Disapprove the development and/or erosion and sediment control plan,
indicating the deficiencies and the procedure for submitting a revised
application and/or submission;
4. Conduct on-site inspections during the active construction phases of land
development projects to determine whether site development is in compliance
with the approved erosion and sediment control plans and determine
adjustments needed to the approved plans. After construction has been
completed, determine whether permanent site stabilization has been achieved
and identify operation and maintenance needs;
B. No approval for development plan and/or an erosion and sediment control plan shall
be issued for an intended development site unless one or more of the following have
been obtained:
1. The development including, but not limited to, subdivisions and planned unit
developments, has been approved by the City where applicable; or
2. Such permit is accompanied by or combined with a valid building permit
issued by the City Building Official; or
3. The proposed earth moving is coordinated with any overall development
program previously approved by the City for the area in which the site is
situated; and
4. All relevant federal and state permits including, but not limited to, NPDES,
404, 401, NRI's, etc. have been received for the portion of the site subject to
CITY OF GENESEO STORM WATER CONTROL ORDINANCE NO. 1708
43
soil disturbance.
5. Upon their review and approval, the City Engineer shall issue a certification
of storm water detention and/or soil erosion control compliance, signed and
affixed with their seal.
C. Applicant is successful in the appeals process.
Failure of the Zoning Administrator to act on an original or revised application within thirty (30)
days of receipt shall authorize the applicant to proceed in accordance with the plans as filed and in
compliance with the regulations contained herein, unless such time is extended by agreement
between the Zoning Administrator and the applicant. Pending preparation and approval of a revised
plan, development activities shall be allowed to proceed in accordance with conditions established
by the Zoning Administrator.
11-7-5: Expiration of Permit
Every development permit shall expire and become null and void if the work authorized by such
permit has not been commenced within one hundred and eighty (180) days or if not completed by
a date which shall be specified in the permit, except that the Zoning Administrator may, if the
permittee presents satisfactory evidence that unusual difficulties have prevented work being
commenced or completed within the specified time limits, grant a reasonable extension of time if
written application is made before the expiration date of the permit. The Zoning Administrator may
require modification of the erosion control plan to prevent any increase in erosion or off-site
sediment runoff resulting from any extension.
11-7-6: Scope of Appeals
An appeal may be taken to the Community Development Board by the applicant, any person or
agency which received notice of the filing of the application, or by any person , firm, corporation,
office, department, board or bureau aggrieved by decision of the Zoning Administrator. Such appeal
shall be taken within such time as shall be prescribed by the Community Development Board by
general rule by filing with the Zoning Administrator a notice of appeal specifying the grounds
thereof. The Zoning Administrator shall forthwith transmit to the Community Development Board
all of the papers constituting a record upon which the Section being appealed was taken.
The factors to be considered on appeal shall include, but need not be limited to, the effects of the
proposed development activities on the surface water flow to tributary and downstream lands, any
comprehensive watershed management plans, or the use of any retention facilities; possible
saturation of fill and unsupported cuts by water, both natural and domestic; runoff surface waters
that produce erosion and silting of drainage ways; nature and type of soil or rock which when
disturbed by the proposed development activities may create earth movement and produce slopes
that cannot be landscaped; and excessive and unnecessary scarring of the natural landscape through
grading or removal of vegetation.
CITY OF GENESEO STORM WATER CONTROL ORDINANCE NO. 1708
44
11-7-7: Findings on Appeal
An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the Zoning
Administrator certifies to the Community Development Board, after the notice of the appeal has been
filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause
imminent peril to life or property.
The Community Development Board shall select a reasonable time and place for the hearing of the
appeal, give due notice thereof to the parties, and shall render a written decision on the appeal
without unreasonable delay. The Community Development Board may affirm or may, upon the
concurring vote of four (4) members, reverse wholly or in part or modify the order, requirement,
decision, or determination that, in its opinion, ought to be done. To that end, the Community
Development Board shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken. The
Zoning Administrator shall maintain records of all actions of the Community Development Board
relative to appeals.
11-7-8: Retention of Plans
Plans, specifications, and reports for all site developments shall be retained in original form or on
microfilm by the Zoning Administrator.
11-7-9: Amendments
The ordinance may be amended, provided that in all amendments adopted under the authority of this
Section, due allowance shall be made for existing conditions, the conservation of property values,
and the direction of building development to the best advantages of the entire community.
11-7-10: Initiations of Amendments
Amendments may be proposed by the City Council, Community Development Board, Mayor, Zoning
Administrator, or the Henry County SWCD.
11-7-11: Application for Amendment
An application or an amendment shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator in such form and
accompanied by such information as required by the Zoning Administrator. Such application shall
be forwarded to the Community Development Board with the request to hold a public hearing on
said application for amendment.
11-7-12: Hearing on Application
The Community Development Board shall hold a public hearing on each application for an
amendment at such time and place as shall be established by the Community Development Board.
The hearing shall be conducted and a record of such proceedings shall be preserved in such manner
as the Community Development Board shall, by rule, prescribe from time to time.
11-7-13: Notice of Hearing
Notice of time and place of such hearing shall be published at least once in one or more newspapers
of general circulation in the City of Geneseo not less than fifteen (15) nor more than thirty (30) days
CITY OF GENESEO STORM WATER CONTROL ORDINANCE NO. 1708
45
before such hearing. Supplemental or additional notices may be published or distributed as the
Community Development Board may, by rule, prescribe from time to time.
11-7-14: Findings of Fact and Recommendation of the Community Development Board.
Within forty-five (45) days after the close of the hearing on a proposed amendment, the Community
Development Board shall make written findings of fact and shall submit same together with its
recommendations to the City Council.
The Community Development Board shall not recommend the adoption of a proposed amendment
unless it finds that the adoption of such amendment is in the public interest.
11-7-15: Action by City Council
The City Council shall not act upon a proposed amendment to this Ordinance until it shall have
received a written report and recommendation from the Community Development Board on the
proposed amendment.
The City Council may grant or deny an application for an amendment.
The City Council may request specific changes to a proposed amendment to this Ordinance once it
has received a written report and recommendation from the Community Development Board on the
proposed amendment. However, before the proposed amendment with the City Council’s specific
changes can be adopted by the City Council, the proposed amendment with the specific changes
must be forwarded to the Community Development Board for another public hearing, findings of
facts, and written recommendation.
A proposed amendment or a proposed amendment with specific changes that does not receive a
written recommendation from the Community Development Board shall not be adopted except by
a favorable vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the City Council then holding office.
11-7-16: Effect of Denial of Amendment
No application for an amendment that has been denied wholly or in part by the City Council shall
be resubmitted for a period of one (1) year from the date of said denial except on the grounds of new
evidence or proof of change of conditions found to be valid by the Community Development Board.
CITY OF GENESEO STORM WATER CONTROL ORDINANCE NO. 1708
46
Chapter 8
ENFORCEMENT
11-8-1: Stop Work Order; Revocation of Permit
11-8-2: Fees
11-8-3: Violations and Penalties
11-8-4: Repealer
11-8-5: Severability Clause
11-8-1: Stop-Work Order; Revocation of Permit
In the event any person holding a development permit pursuant to this ordinance violates the terms
of the permit or carries on-site development in such a manner so as to materially adversely affect the
health, welfare, environment, or safety of persons residing or working in the neighborhood of the
development site or so as to be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property
or improvements in the neighborhood, the Zoning Administrator shall suspend or revoke the
development permit.
Suspension of a permit shall be by a written stop-work order issued by the Zoning Administrator and
delivered to the permittee or his agent or the person performing the work. The stop-work order shall
be effective immediately, shall state the specific violations cited, and shall state the conditions under
which work may be resumed. A stop-work order shall remain in effect until appealed by the
permittee to the Community Development Board, at which time the conditions of Chapter 11-7-6
can be met.
No development permit shall be revoked until a hearing is held by the Community Development
Board. Written notice of such hearing shall be served on the permittee, either personally or by
certified mail return receipt requested, and shall state:
A. The reasons for revocation, in clear and concise language; and
B. The time, date, and place where such hearing will be held.
Such notice shall be served on the permittee at least five (5) days prior to the date set for the hearing.
At such hearing, the permittee shall be given an opportunity to be heard and may call witnesses and
present evidence on his behalf. At the conclusion of the hearing the Community Development Board
shall determine whether the permit shall be revoked.
11-8-2: Fees
The fee for variances and appeals shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150).
11-8-3: Violations and Penalties
CITY OF GENESEO STORM WATER CONTROL ORDINANCE NO. 1708
47
No person shall construct, enlarge, alter, repair, or maintain any grading, excavation or fill or cause
the same to be done contrary to or in violation of any terms of this ordinance. Any person violating
any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and each day during
which any violation of any of the provisions of this ordinance is committed, continued, or permitted
shall constitute a separate offense. Upon conviction of any such violation, such person, partnership,
or corporation shall be punished by a fine of not less than seventy-five dollars ($75.00) nor more
than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. In addition to any other penalty
authorized by this section, any person, partnership, or corporation convicted of violating any of the
provisions of this ordinance shall be required to restore the site to the condition existing prior to
commission of the violation, or to bear the expense of such restoration.
11-8-4: Repealer
All ordinances and resolutions, or any part thereof, in conflict with all or any part of this Ordinance
are hereby repealed in so far as they do conflict.
11-8-5: Severability Clause
That if any section, subdivision, or sentence of this ordinance shall for any reason be held invalid
or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portion of this
ordinance.
PASSED AND ADOPTED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF GENESEO, HENRY
COUNTY, ILLINOIS ON THIS 13TH DAY OF MARCH, 2001 AND APPROVED BY THE
MAYOR THIS 14TH DAY OF MARCH, 2001.
_______________________________________
Merle LeSage, Mayor
(SEAL)
________________________________________
Cindy J. Gonzalez, City Clerk
AYES: 7 Eberhardt, Ewert, Gillet, Henderson, Ludwig, Peterson, Wachtel
NAYS: 0
PASSED: 0
ABSENT: 1 Swanson
STATE OF ILLINOIS)
COUNTY OF HENRY ) SS
CITY OF GENESEO STORM WATER CONTROL ORDINANCE NO. 1708
CITY OF GENESEO )
I, Cindy J. Gonzalez, City Clerk of the City of Geneseo, Henry County, Illinois do hereby certify that
the foregoing is the original ordinance of Ordinance No. 1708.
I further certify that a pamphlet consisting of forty-eight (48) pages, an Appendix A, Appendix B,
Appendix C, Appendix D, Appendix E, Exhibit A, and a cover sheet thereof was published and a
coy of such pamphlet was posted in the municipal building commencing on the 14th day of March,
2001 and continuing for at least then (10) days thereafter; copies of said pamphlet were also
available for public inspection upon request in the office of the City Clerk.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto affixed my official signature and the seal of the City this
14th day of March, 2001.
_______________________________________
Cindy J. Gonzalez
CITY OF GENESEO STORM WATER CONTROL ORDINANCE NO. 1708
APPENDIX A
CITY OF GENESEO
ORDINANCE NO. _____
AN ORDINANCE PROPOSING THE ESTABLISHMENT
OF THE __________ SPECIAL SERVICE AREA
OF GENESEO, ILLINOIS
AND THE LEVY OF TAXES FOR THE PURPOSE
OF PAYING THE COST OF PROVIDING
SPECIAL SERVICES IN AND FOR SUCH AREA
ADOPTED BY THE
CITY COUNCIL
OF THE
CITY OF GENESEO
THIS _____DAY OF __________, 2001
APPROVED BY THE MAYOR ________________, 2001
APPPENDIX A
CITY OF GENESEO STORM WATER CONTROL ORDINANCE NO. 1708
ORDINANCE NO. _____
AN ORDINANCE PROPOSING THE ESTABLISHMENT
OF THE __________ SPECIAL SERVICE AREA
OF GENESEO, ILLINOIS
AND THE LEVY OF TAXES FOR THE PURPOSE
OF PAYING THE COST OF PROVIDING
SPECIAL SERVICES IN AND FOR SUCH AREA
WHEREAS, pursuant to the provisions of the 1970 Constitution of the State of Illinois (the
Constitution), the City of Geneseo, Henry County, Illinois (the City) is authorized to create special
service areas in and for the City; and,
WHEREAS, special service areas are established by non-home rule units pursuant to Section
7(6) of Article VII of the Constitution, which provides that–
Municipalities...which are not home rule units shall have...powers...to
levy or impose additional taxes upon areas within their boundaries in
the manner provided by law for the provision of special services to
those areas and for the payment of debt incurred in order to provide
those special services;
and are established “in the manner provided by law” pursuant to the provisions of “AN ACT to
provide the manner of levying or imposing taxes for the provision of special services to areas within
the boundaries of home rule units and non-home rule municipalities and counties”, approved
September 21, 1973, as amended, and pursuant to the Revenue Act of 1939 of the State of Illinois,
as amended; and,
WHEREAS, it is in the public interest that the establishment of the area hereinafter described
as a special service area for the purposes set forth herein and to be designated as the ____________
Special Service Area of the City (the Area) be considered; and,
WHEREAS, the Area is compact and contiguous, totally within the corporate limits of the
City; and,
WHEREAS, the Area will benefit specially from the municipal services to be provided by
the City (the Services), and the Services are unique and in addition to the services provided to the
City as a whole, and it is, therefore, in the best interests of the City that the establishment of the Area
be considered; and,
APPENDIX A
CITY OF GENESEO STORM WATER CONTROL ORDINANCE NO. 1708
ORDINANCE NO. _____
WHEREAS, it is in the public interest that the levy of a direct annual ad valorem tax upon
all taxable property within the Area be considered for the purpose of paying the cost of providing
the Services; and,
WHEREAS, the revenue from such tax shall be used solely and only for Services for which
the City is authorized under the provisions of the Illinois Municipal Code, as amended, to levy taxes
or special assessments or to appropriate the funds of the City, all of the Services to be in and for the
Area and all of the necessary construction and maintenance to be on property now owned or to be
acquired by the City, or property in which the City will obtain an interest sufficient for the provision
of the Services; and,
WHEREAS, said direct annual ad valorem tax shall be levied upon all taxable property
within the Area for an indefinite period of time beginning for the year __________ and shall not
exceed an annual rate of __________ of the assessed valuation of each tax parcel within the Area
and shall be in addition to all other taxes permitted by law; and,
WHEREAS, a public hearing will be held at ________ on the _________ day of
_________________, _____, in the City Council Chambers, 121 South Oakwood Avenue, Geneseo,
Illinois 61254 (the Hearing) to consider the establishment of the Area for the purpose of providing
the Services and the levy of an additional direct annual ad valorem tax for the purpose of paying the
cost thereof, all as described in the Notice of Public Hearing set forth in Section II. hereof (the
Notice); and,
WHEREAS, the Notice shall be given by publication and mailing. Notice by publication
shall be given by publication on a date, such date being not less than 15 days prior to the Hearing,
in a newspaper published within the City. Notice by mailing shall be given by depositing the Notice
in the United States mail addressed to the person or persons in whose name the general taxes for the
last preceding year were paid on each lot, block, tract, or parcel of land lying within the Area. The
Notice shall be mailed not less than 10 days prior to the time set for the Hearing. In the event taxes
for the past preceding year were not paid, the Notice shall be sent to the person last listed on the tax
rolls prior to that year as the owner of said property.
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF GENESEO, ILLINOIS:
SECTION I: That the preambles of this ordinance are hereby incorporated into this text as
if set out herein in full.
APPENDIX A
CITY OF GENESEO STORM WATER CONTROL ORDINANCE NO. 1708
SECTION II: That the Mayor and City Council shall determine that the Notice is in the
proper statutory form as set forth as follows:
ORDINANCE NO. _____
NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING
CITY OF GENESEO, HENRY COUNTY, ILLINOIS
_______________ SPECIAL SERVICE AREA
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that on ____________________ at __________ in the City
Council Chambers, 121 South Oakwood Avenue, Geneseo, Illinois, a public hearing (the Hearing)
will be held by the Mayor and City Council of the City of Geneseo, Henry County, Illinois (the City),
to consider the establishment of the _______________ Special Service Area (the Area), of the City,
consisting of the following described territory:
{see attached Exhibit A}
Said territory consists of approximately ________ acres lying {insert general description of
location}. An accurate map of said territory is on file in the office of the City Clerk and is available
for public inspection.
The purpose of the establishment of the Area is to provide the following special services (the
Services) to the Area: the operation, maintenance, repair, rehabilitation, replacement and
reconstruction of any storm water detention and/or retention area, drainage way, ditch, swale, storm
sewer or other storm water facility; costs of design, engineering and other consulting services,
surveying and permits, public liability insurance, and all administrative, legal and other costs or
expenses incurred in connection therewith and with the administration of the Area, including the
repayment of any loan or debt incurred for the provision of any such Services, all of the Services to
be in and for the Area.
All of the Services are to be on property now owned or to be acquired by the City, or property
in which the City will obtain an interest sufficient for the provision of the Services.
The levy of a direct annual ad valorem tax upon all taxable property within the Area for the
purpose of paying the cost of the Services will also be considered at the Hearing. The tax shall be
levied upon all taxable property within the Area for an indefinite period of time beginning for the
year _____ and shall not exceed an annual rate of _____________ of the assessed valuation of each
tax parcel within the Area and shall be in addition to all other taxes permitted by law.
APPENDIX A
ORDINANCE NO. _____
CITY OF GENESEO STORM WATER CONTROL ORDINANCE NO. 1708
All interested persons affected by the establishment of the Area or tax levy, including all owners of
real estate located within the Area, will be given an opportunity to be heard at the Hearing regarding
the establishment of the Area and the tax levy and an opportunity to file objections to the
establishment of the Area or the tax levy.
At the Hearing, any interested persons affected by the Area may file with the City Clerk written
objections to and may be heard orally in respect to any issues embodied in this notice. The Mayor
and City Council shall hear and determine all protests and objections at the Hearing, and the Hearing
may be adjourned to another date without further notice other than a motion to be entered upon the
minutes fixing the time and place of its adjournment.
If a petition signed by at least 51% of the electors residing within the Area and by at least 51% of
the owners of record of the land included within the boundaries of the Area is filed with the City
Clerk within 60 days following the final adjournment of the Hearing objecting to the creation of the
Area or the levy or imposition of a tax for the provision of the Services to the Area, no such Special
Service Area may be created or no tax may be levied or imposed.
By order of the Mayor and City Council of the City of Geneseo, Henry County, Illinois.
DATED this _____ day of _____________________, __________.
/s/
_______________________________________
City Clerk, City of Geneseo
Henry County, Illinois
SECTION III: That the City agrees to produce or file such forms, statements, proceedings
and supporting documents as may be required and in a timely manner in order to establish the Area
and levy the taxes and, if deemed necessary or advisable by its officers, to employ and pay fiscal
agents, financial advisors, attorneys and other persons to assist the City in these endeavors.
SECTION IV: That all ordinances, orders, and resolutions and parts thereof in conflict
herewith be and the same are hereby repealed, and this ordinance be in full force and effect forthwith
upon its passage, approval, and publication as provided by law.
APPENDIX A
ORDINANCE NO. _____
CITY OF GENESEO STORM WATER CONTROL ORDINANCE NO. 1708
PASSED AND ADOPTED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF GENESEO, ILLINOIS
ON THIS _____DAY OF ________________, 2001 AND APPROVED BY THE MAYOR THIS
_____ DAY OF _______________, 2001.
_______________________________________
Merle LeSage, Mayor
(SEAL)
____________________________________
Cindy J. Gonzalez, City Clerk
AYES:
NAYS:
PASSED:
ABSENT:
CITY OF GENESEO STORM WATER CONTROL ORDINANCE NO. 1708
APPENDIX A
STATE OF ILLINOIS)
COUNTY OF HENRY ) ss:
CITY OF GENESEO )
I, Cindy J. Gonzalez, City Clerk of the City of Geneseo, Henry County, Illinois do hereby certify that
the foregoing is the original ordinance of Ordinance No.
I further certify that a pamphlet form of said ordinance consisting of four (4 ) pages and a cover sheet
thereof was published and a copy of such pamphlet was posted in the municipal building
commencing on the _____ day of __________, 2001, and continuing for at least ten (10) days
thereafter; copies of said pamphlet were also available for public inspection upon request in the
office of the City Clerk.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto affixed my official signature and the seal of the City this
_____ day of ____________, 2001.
_______________________________________
(SEAL) Cindy J. Gonzalez, City Clerk
CITY OF GENESEO STORM WATER CONTROL ORDINANCE NO. 1708
APPENDIX B
Desirable Trees Native to Northwestern Illinois
Ash, Blue, Fraxinus quadrangulata
Ash, Green, Fraxinus pennsylvanica
Ash, White, Fraxinus americana
Birch, River or Red, Betula nigra
Coffeetree, Kentucky, Gymnocladus diocia
Hackberry, Common, Celtis occidentalis
Hickory, Shagbark, Carya ovata
Ironwood (Hophornbeam), Ostrya virginiana
Larch, American (Tamarack), Larix laricina
Linden, American (Basswood), Tilia americana
Maple, Black, Acer nigrum
Maple, Red or Swamp, Acer rubrum
Maple, Sugar or Rock, Acer saccharum
Oak, Black, Quercus velutina
Oak, Bur, Quercus macrocarpa
Oak, Chinkapin, Quercus muehlenbergii
Oak, Pin or Swamp, Quercus palustris
Oak, Red, Quercus rubra
Oak, Swamp White, Quercus bicolor
Pecan, Carya illinoensis
Redbud, Cercis canadensis
Arborvitae, White Cedar, Thuja occidentalis
Juniper, Eastern Redcedar, Juniperus virginiana
Pine, Easter White, Pinus strobus
CITY OF GENESEO STORM WATER CONTROL ORDINANCE NO. 1708
APPENDIX C
Desirable Trees Native to Areas South of Geneseo, Illinois. Additional planting is encouraged.
Baldcypress, Taxodium distichum
Beech, European, Fagus sylvatica (except)
Buckeye, Red, Aesculus pavia
Dogwood, Flowering, Cornus florida
Hickory, Shellbark, Carya laciniosa (for wet areas)
Persimmon, Common, Diospyros virginiana
Sassafras, Common, Sassafras albidum
Sourgum (Black Tupelo), Nyssa sylvatica
Sweetgum, Liquidambar styraciflua
Tuliptree, Liriodendron tulipifera
CITY OF GENESEO STORM WATER CONTROL ORDINANCE NO. 1708
APPENDIX D
(Issuer’s Letterhead)
IRREVOCABLE LETTER OF CREDIT1 __________2
Date: _____________________3
Amount: _____________________4
Expiration Date: _____________________5
Applicant:
Name
Address6
BENEFICIARY:
City of Geneseo
101 South State Street
Geneseo, Illinois 61254-1347
Dear Sir:
The undersigned Bank hereby establishes in your favor our Irrevocable Letter of Credit No. __________7
which is available for negotiation of your draft at sight, drawn on ______________________8, bearing
the clause: “Drawn under ______________________9, Irrevocable Credit No. __________10,” and
accompanied by:
Your off ici al l y signed st at ement that the appl i can t ,
___________________________________11, has defaulted and has not complied with
the engineering plans and specifications dated ____________, 20_____, prepared by
____________________12 as reviewed and conditionally approved by the City of
Geneseo by Resolution No. _____13 on _______________________, 20_____14, for the
construction of public improvements for the development known as
__________________________________15, Geneseo, Illinois or has not paid the
engineering and inspection fees of the City.
Notwithstanding the expiration date stated above, this Letter of Credit shall continue in
full force and effect and shall not expire unless and until the City has been given written
notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, that the Letter of Credit is about to
expire. The Letter of Credit shall thereafter expire 35 days after said notice, but no
sooner than the above described expiration date.
APPENDIX D
IRREVOCABLE LETTER OF CREDIT1 __________2
The undersigned, _________________________,16 hereby undertakes and engages that
all demands made in conformity with this Irrevocable Letter of Credit will be duly
honored upon presentation. If, within three business days of the date any demand made
in conformity with this Irrevocable Letter of Credit is presented, the undersigned,
______________________________,17 fails to honor the same (unless legally precluded
from doing so), we agree to pay all attorney’s fees, court costs, and other expenses
incurred by the City of Geneseo in enforcing the terms of this Letter of Credit.
The amount of this Letter of Credit may be reduced from time to time prior to expiration
at the request of the applicant, upon presentation of the City of Geneseo’s officially
signed consent thereto.
We hereby engage with drawers and/or bonafide holders that drafts drawn and negotiated
in conformity with the terms of this credit will be duly honored on presentation and that
drafts accepted within the terms of this credit will be duly honored at maturity. The
amount of each draft must be endorsed on the reverse of this credit by the negotiating
bank.
Very truly yours,
________________________________________18
By: ________________________________________
President19
ATTEST:
By: _______________________________
Secretary
CORPORATE SEAL
APPENDIX D
IRREVOCABLE LETTER OF CREDIT1 __________2
1 This is the form letter of credit for the City of Geneseo. Letters of credit which vary from the terms of
this form will not be accepted.
2 Insert letter of credit number (optional).
3 Insert date of issuance.
4 The amount of the letter of credit shall be as recommended by the City’s engineer.
5 The expiration date shall be two years after final plat approval.
6 Insert name and address of applicant.
7 Insert number.
8 Insert name of issuer.
9 Insert name of issuer.
10 Insert letter of credit number.
11 Insert name of applicant.
12 Insert name and address of engineer who authored the plans.
13 Insert Resolution number.
14 Insert date resolution was passed by the Geneseo City Council.
15 Insert name of development.
16 Insert name of issuer.
17 Insert name of issuer.
18 Insert name of issuer.
19 Or other authorized officer.
APPENDIX E
ENGINEER’S CERTIFICATION OF STORM WATER DETENTION
AND/OR SOIL EROSION CONTROL COMPLIANCE
FOR
_____________________________________________
Site Plan or Subdivision Name
______________________________________________
Owner
I, _________________________________________, an Illinois Registered Professional Engineer, do
hereby certify that on behalf of ___________________________________________, I have reviewed
___________________________________________________________________________________
and find the final construction of the above named site plan or subdivision in substantial compliance with
the approved design calculations, plan drawings, and, more specifically, the following:
A. Allowable release rate
B. Outlet structure(s), dimension, and grades
C. Overflow structure(s)/emergency spillways(s), dimensions, and grades
D. Volume of storage
E. Site flow patterns and grading
F. Storm sewer system to and from detention basin
Date ______________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________ (SEAL)
EXHIBIT A
DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION FEE SCHEDULE1
50 cubic yards (38.2 m ) or 3 less . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . $23.50
51 to 100 cubic yards (40 m3 to 76.5 m3) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37.00
101 to 1,000 cubic yards (77.2 m3 to 764.6 m3)–$37.00 for the first 100 cubic yards (76.5 m3) plus $17.50 for each
additional 100 cubic yards (76.5 m3) or fraction thereof.
1,001 to 10,000 cubic yards (765.3 m3 to 7645.5 m3)–$194.50 for the first 1,000 cubic yards (764.6 m3), plus $14.50 for
each additional 1,000 cubic yards (764.6 m3) or fraction thereof.
10,001 to 100,000 cubic yards (7646.3 m3 to 76 455 m3)–$325.00 for the first 10,000 cubic yards (7645.5 m3), plus
$66.00 for each additional 10,000 cubic yards (7645.5 m3) or fraction thereof.
100,001 cubic yards (76 456 m3) or more–$919.00 for the first 100,000 cubic yards (76 455 m3), plus $36.50 for each
additional 10,000 cubic yards (7645.5 m3) or fraction thereof.
Other Inspections and Fees:
d. Inspections outside of normal business hours . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . $50.50 per hour 2
(minimum charge–two hours)
e. Reinspection fees assessed under provisions of Section 108.8 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . $50.50 per hour 2
f. Inspections for which no fee is specifically indicated . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . $50.50 per hour 2
(minimum charge–one-half hour)
1 The fee for a development permit authorizing additional work to that under a valid permit shall be the difference between
the fee paid for the original permit and the fee shown for the entire project.
2 Or the total hourly cost to the jurisdiction, whichever is the greatest. This cost shall include supervision, overhead,
equipment, hourly wages and fringe benefits of the employees involved.
DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION FEE SCHEDULE
50 cubic yards (38.2 m3 ) or less . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . $15.00
51 to 100 cubic yards (40 m3 to 76.5 m3) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22.50
101 to 1,000 cubic yards (77.2 m3 to 764.6 m3)–$22.50 for the first 100 cubic yards (76.5 m3) plus $10.50 for each
additional 100 cubic yards (76.5 m3) or fraction thereof.
1,001 to 10,000 cubic yards (765.3 m3 to 7645.5 m3)–$117.00 for the first 1,000 cubic yards (764.6 m3), plus $9.00 for
each additional 1,000 cubic yards (764.6 m3) or fraction thereof.
10,001 to 100,000 cubic yards (7646.3 m3 to 76 455 m3)–$198.00 for the first 10,000 cubic yards (7645.5 m3), plus
$40.50 for each additional 10,000 cubic yards (7645.5 m3) or fraction thereof.
100,001 cubic yards (76 456 m3) or more–$562.50 for the first 100,000 cubic yards (76 455 m3), plus $22.50 for each
additional 10,000 cubic yards (7645.5 m3) or fraction thereof.
Other Inspections and Fees:
a. Inspections outside of normal business hours . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . $30.00 per hour 2
(minimum charge–two hours)
 
 
 
 
 




 



 


