CODE OF ORDINANCES VILLAGE OF GLEN ELLYN, IL 
____________ 
Republished in 2017 by Order of the Board of Trustees 
____________ 

> 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the Village of Glen Ellyn, IL. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 2017 Code, as supplemented through 2017, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the Board of Trustees. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 2017 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The titles of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, except for Subdivision Regulations Code, which is codified adjacent to the Zoning Code. The various chapters and sections within each title have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Title and Section Numbering System 
    The title and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of three parts separated by dashes. The figure before the first dash refers to the title number, the figure after the first dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the second dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 in title 10 is numbered 10-1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 in title 3 is 3-6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter and title, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments, if necessary. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 3-6-1 and 3-6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 3-6-1.5. New chapters and new articles may be included in the same way or, in the case of chapters, may be placed at the end of the title embracing the subject, and, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new chapter or article. New titles may be included by using one of the reserved title numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of titles is maintained when including new titles, wherever possible. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
(Index or Indexes) 
    The (index or indexes) (has or have) been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the (index itself or indexes themselves) which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Jim Jenkins, Code Attorney, and Tassy Spinks, Supplement Department Vice President, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to the Village at Glen Ellyn for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the Village readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the Village's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the Village of Glen Ellyn, IL. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the Village of Glen Ellyn, IL. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the Village of Glen Ellyn, IL. 2017. 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omitted." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date Adopted Included/ 
Omitted Supp. No. 6494  6-26-2017 Included 1 6532  9-25-2017 Included 1 6534  9-25-2017 Included 1 6537 10-23-2017 Included 1 6561 11-13-2017 Included 1 6567  1- 8-2018 Included 1 6570  1-22-2018 Included 1 6576  2-12-2018 Included 1 6585  3-12-2018 Included 1 6587  4- 9-2018 Included 1 6591  4-23-2018 Included 1 6592  4- 9-2018 Included 1 6593  4- 9-2018 Included 1 6594  4- 9-2018 Included 1 6595  4-23-2018 Included 1 6601  5-14-2018 Included 1 6603  5-29-2018 Included 2 6607  6- 4-2018 Included 2 6608  6-25-2018 Included 2 6615  6-25-2018 Included 2 6617  7-16-2018 Included 2 6619  8-27-2018 Included 2 6625  8-27-2018 Included 2 6629  9-24-2018 Included 2 6630  9-24-2018 Included 2 6633 10- 8-2018 Included 2 6634 10-22-2018 Included 2 6637 11-12-2018 Included 2 6638 11-12-2018 Included 2 6639 11-12-2018 Included 2 6641 11-12-2018 Included 2 6651 12-10-2018 Included 2 6652 12-10-2018 Included 2 6656 12-10-2018 Included 2 6659 12-10-2018 Included 2 6660  1-14-2019 Included 2 6667  1-14-2019 Included 2 6668  1-28-2019 Included 2 6669  1-28-2019 Included 2 6674  2-25-2019 Included 3 6677  2-25-2019 Included 3 6684  3-11-2019 Included 3 6687  4- 8-2019 Included 3 6692  5-13-2019 Included 3 6698  5-28-2019 Included 3  
TITLE 1 - ADMINISTRATIVE 
Chapter 1 - OFFICIAL VILLAGE CODE 

1-1-1. - Title. 
Upon adoption by the Board of Trustees this Code is hereby declared to be and shall hereafter constitute the official Village Code of the Village of Glen Ellyn. This Code of ordinances shall be known and cited as the Glen Ellyn Municipal Code, and it is hereby published by authority of the Board of Trustees and shall be kept up to date as provided in section 1-1-3 of this chapter under the direction of the Attorney for the Village, acting for said Village Board of Trustees. Any reference to the number of any section contained herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to this Code by title in any legal document. 
(1975 Code) 
1-1-2. - Acceptance. 
This Code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received without further proof in all courts and in all administrative tribunals of this State as the ordinances of the Village of general and permanent effect, except the excluded ordinances enumerated in section 1-2-1 of this title. 
(1975 Code) 
1-1-3. - Amendments. 
Any ordinance amending this Code shall set forth the title, chapter and section number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall constitute a sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this Code. All such amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the codifiers and the same ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in its proper place in each copy of this Code. Each such replacement page shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of this Code within 30 days from the date of its final passage. 
(1975 Code) 
1-1-4. - Interpretations. 
In the determination of the provisions of each section of this Code, the following rules shall be observed: 
(A)  Intent to defraud: Whenever an intent to defraud is required in order to constitute an offense, it shall be sufficient if an intent appears to defraud any person. 
(B)  Liability of employers and agents: When the provisions of any section of this Code prohibit the commission of an act, not only the person actually doing the prohibited act or omitting the directed act, but also the employer and all other persons concerned with or in aiding or abetting the said person shall be guilty of the offense described and liable to the penalty set forth. 
(1975 Code) 
1-1-5. - Code alteration. 
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface in any way any section or any page of this Code in such a manner that the meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages shall be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized by the Village Board. The Clerk shall see that the replacement pages are properly inserted in the official copies maintained in the Office of the Clerk. 
Any person having in his custody an official copy of this Code shall make every effort to maintain said Code in an up to date and efficient manner. He shall see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages when such are delivered to him or made available to him through the Office of the Village Clerk. Said Code books, while in actual possession of the officials and other interested persons, shall be and remain the property of the Village and shall be returned to the Office of the Clerk when directed so to do by order of the Village Board. 
(1975 Code) 
1-1-6. - Waivers to this Code. 
Where an application is made in accordance to section 3-39-3 of this Code and the required fee set forth in section 4-1-4 of this Code has been paid, the Village Board may grant waivers and/or variations from the provisions within this Code by motion, except where State statute or this Code requires a different more formal procedure. 
If the Village Board has previously granted waivers to this Code for a special promotional or community event, the Village Manager or his/her designee, shall have the authority to administratively approve such subsequent events provided that the event is in substantial conformance with the event for which the previous waivers were granted, and previous waivers were granted within three years of the date of the proposed event. Commercial uses located on property comprised of six and one-half acres or more and on which no other commercial uses are located shall receive no more than four administrative waivers per calendar year for events. All other commercial uses shall be allotted no more than two administrative waivers per calendar year for events. The Village Manager or his/her designee may impose any conditions deemed appropriate for the safe and efficient conduct of the special event. Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, the Village Manager or his/her designee may refer a request for administrative approval of a promotional event to the Village Board of Trustees for consideration. Any request for administrative or Village Board waiver under this section shall be subject to fees specified in section 4-1-4 of this Code. 
(Ord. 6425, 7-11-2016) 
Chapter 2 - SAVING CLAUSE 

1-2-1. - Repeal of general ordinances. 
All general ordinances of the Village passed prior to the adoption of this Code are hereby repealed, except such as are referred to herein as being still in force or are by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving clauses contained in the following section), from which are excluded the following ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations; franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places; improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to elections; or ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the Village; and all special ordinances. 
(1975 Code) 
1-2-2. - Public utility ordinances. 
No ordinance relating to railroads or railroad crossings with streets and other public ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this Code or by virtue of the preceding section, excepting as this code may contain provisions for such matters, in which case this Code shall be considered as amending such ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only. 
(1975 Code) 
1-2-3. - Court proceedings. 
No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance, whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment be mitigated by any provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by the consent of the party affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes effect. 
This section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance. 
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the Village herein repealed and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new enactment of the same provision; nor shall this chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the Village under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the adoption of this Code. 
(1975 Code) 
Chapter 3 - DEFINITIONS 

1-3-1. - Construction of words. 
Whenever any word in any section of this Code importing the plural number is used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or persons, any single matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included, although distributive words may not have been used. 
When any subject matter, party or person is referred to in this Code by words importing the singular number only, or the masculine gender, several matters, parties or persons and females as well as males and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be included; provided, that these rules of construction shall not be applied to any section of this Code which contains any express provision excluding such construction or where the subject matter or content may be repugnant thereto. 
(1975 Code) 
1-3-2. - Definitions, general. 
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this Code, they shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning repugnant thereto: 
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another. 
BOARD: Unless otherwise indicated, shall mean the Board of Trustees of the Village. CODE: The Municipal Code of Glen Ellyn and amendments thereto. 
COUNTY: The County of DuPage, State of Illinois. 
EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this Code to a Village employee by title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the Village of Glen Ellyn". 
FEE: A sum of money charged by the Village for the carrying on of a business, profession or occupation. 
FISCAL YEAR: The fiscal year of the Village shall begin on January 1 of each year. 
KNOWINGLY: Imports only a knowledge that the facts exist which brings the act or omission within the provisions of this Code. It does not require any knowledge of the unlawfulness of such act or omission. 
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession or occupation. 
MISDEMEANOR: Any offense deemed a violation of the provisions of this Code which is a lesser offense than a felony as defined by state law. 
NEGLIGENT, NEGLECT, NEGLIGENCE AND NEGLIGENTLY: Imports a want of such attention to the nature of probable consequences of the act or omission as a prudent man ordinarily bestows in acting in his own concern. 
NUISANCE: Anything offensive or obnoxious to the health and welfare of the inhabitants of the city; or any act or thing repugnant to, or creating a hazard to, or having a detrimental effect on the property of another person or to the community. 
OCCUPANT: Applied to a building or land shall include any person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with others. 
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this Code or the omission of any act required by the provisions of this Code. 
OFFICERS: Whenever reference is made in this code to a Village officer by title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the Village of Glen Ellyn". 
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession. 
OWNER: Applied to a building or land shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
PERSON: Shall include the singular and the plural and shall also mean and include any person, firm, corporation, association, partnership or any other form of association or organization. 
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Shall include every description of money, goods, chattels, effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which any pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged, transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or interest therein. 
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in small quantities direct to the consumer. 
RIGHT-OF-WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other property. 
STREET: Shall include alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public squares, public places and sidewalks. 
TENANT: Applied to a building or land shall include any person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with others. 
VILLAGE: The Village of Glen Ellyn, County of DuPage, State of Illinois. 
WHOLESALER: The words "wholesaler" and "wholesale dealer" as used in this code, unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in quantity to persons who purchase for the purpose of resale. 
WILLFULLY: The word "willfully" when applied to the intent with which an act is done or omitted, implies simply a purpose or willingness to commit the act or make the omission referred to. It does not require any intent to violate law, or to injure another, or to acquire an advantage. 
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: The words "written" or "in writing" may include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by law to any official or public writing or bond required by law, it shall be in the proper handwriting of such person, or in case he is unable to write, by his proper mark. 
(1965 Code § 2.25; amd. 1975 Code; Ord. 6226, 3-24-2014) 
1-3-3. - Catchlines. 
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(1975 Code) 
Chapter 4 - GENERAL PENALTY 

1-4-1. - General penalty. 
Except as otherwise provided, any person convicted of a violation of any section or provision of this Code shall be fined a sum not to exceed $500.00 for any one offense. 
(Ord. 3829, 4-22-1991) 
1-4-2. - License. 
When a person is convicted of a violation of any section of this Code, any license previously issued to him by the Village may be revoked by the Board of Trustees of the Village; provided, however, that the revocation shall not take effect for ten days after notice of the action has been given to the licensee who may thereafter request a hearing which the Board of Trustees shall call within 30 days after the request. If a hearing is sought, the Board of Trustees may suspend the revocation pending the hearing. 
(Ord. 3829, 4-22-1991) 
1-4-3. - Application. 
The penalty provided in this chapter shall be applicable to every section of this Code the same as though it were a part of each and every separate section. Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this Code where any duty is prescribed or obligation imposed, or where any action which is of a continuing nature is forbidden or declared to be unlawful, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day such duty or obligation remains unperformed or such act continues, unless otherwise specifically provided in this Code. 
In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of this Code, the prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed; but not more than one recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense; provided, that the revocation of a license or permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced. 
Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this Code and there shall be no fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach, the provisions of this chapter shall apply and a separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a breach or violation occurs or continues. 
(1975 Code) 
1-4-4. - Liability of officers. 
No provision of this Code designating the duties of any officer or employee shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of the Village Board to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. 
(Ord. 3829, 4-22-1991) 
Chapter 5 - VILLAGE PRESIDENT 

1-5-1. - Election; term of office. 
The Village President shall be elected every other odd numbered year for a term of four years and serve as President of the Board of Trustees as provided by statute. A regular term shall commence and a newly elected Village President who has otherwise qualified shall be inaugurated and begin the duties of office during the regular meeting of the Board of Trustees on the second Monday in the month of May, following the proclamation of the results of the regular Municipal election at which the President is elected. The inauguration shall be scheduled on the agenda under "other business" as that term is used in section 1-6-7 of this title. 
(Ord. 5317, 12-20-2004) 
1-5-2. - Bond; oath. 
(A)  Bond: Before entering upon the duties of his office, the President shall give bond in the sum of $3,000.00, with surety to be approved by the Board of Trustees, conditioned upon his faithful performance of his duties. 
(B)  Oath: He shall take the oath of office prescribed by statute. 
(1965 Code § 2.01) 
1-5-3 - Duties. 
The President is the Chief Executive Officer of the Village, and shall perform all duties required of him by statute or ordinance. He shall supervise the executive officers of the Village, and have the power and authority to inspect all books and records kept by any officer of the Village at any time. 
(1965 Code § 2.01) 
1-5-4. - Appointment of officers. 
The President shall appoint, by and with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, all officers of the Village whose appointment or election is not otherwise provided for. 
He may delegate to any officer any duty to be performed; and whenever there is a question as to the respective duties and powers of any officer of the Village, this shall be settled by the President. 
(1965 Code § 2.01) 
1-5-5. - Compensation. 
There is hereby established as compensation for the Village President, commencing on May 1, 2017, and thereafter, the amount of $0.00 per month. 
(Ord. 6447, 10-24-2016) 
Chapter 6 - BOARD OF TRUSTEES 

1-6-1. - Election; term of office. 
The Board of Trustees shall consist of six members elected as provided by statute. This Board shall be the legislative department of the Village government and shall perform such duties and have such powers as may be authorized by statute. The Trustees shall serve terms of four years and until their successors are elected and qualified. A regular term of a Trustee shall commence and a newly elected Trustee who has otherwise qualified shall be inaugurated and begin the duties of office during the regular meeting of the Board of Trustees on the second Monday in the month of May, following the proclamation of the results of the regular Municipal election at which the Trustee is elected. The inauguration shall be scheduled on the agenda under "other business" as that term is used in section 1-6-7 of this chapter. A Trustee who has not qualified at that time or a Trustee chosen to fill a vacancy shall take office upon qualification. 
(Ord. 5317, 12-20-2004; amd. Ord. 5751, 4-27-2009) 
1-6-2. - Oath. 
Members of the Board of Trustees shall take the oath as prescribed by statute. 
(1965 Code § 2.02) 
1-6-3. - Meetings. 
(A)  Regular meetings: The regular meetings of the Board of Trustees shall be held on the second and fourth Monday in each calendar month in each year at the hour of 7:00 p.m. The meeting place of the Board of Trustees shall be in the boardroom, in the Civic Center, unless otherwise specified by the Board of Trustees. 
(B)  Village Board workshops: One Village Board workshop will be held each month. The Village Board shall hold the workshop at the hour of 7:00 p.m. on the third Monday of every month of each year. At the workshop, the Village Board may discuss any item of current business or matters involving future attention. No formal action shall be taken at any workshop meetings. The meeting place of the Board of Trustees shall be in the Civic Center, unless otherwise specified by the Board of Trustees. 
(C)  Special meetings: Special meetings may be called by any three members of the Board of Trustees or by the President; provided, that a written notice of such special meeting be given in the manner provided by law. 
(D)  Emergency meetings: Emergency meetings may be called as provided by statute. 
(Ord. 3829, 4-22-1991; amd. Ord. 5817, 11-23-2009, eff. after 1-1-2010; Ord. 6149, 7-8-2013) 
1-6-4. - President to preside. 
The President shall preside at all meetings of the Board of Trustees, but shall vote only in those cases provided by law. 
(Ord. 3829, 4-22-1991) 
1-6-5. - Quorum. 
A majority of the Trustees, or three Trustees and the President, shall constitute a quorum to do business; but no ordinance shall be passed except on the favorable vote of a majority of elective members. 
(1965 Code § 2.02) 
1-6-6. - Records. 
The Village Clerk shall keep a record of all proceedings which shall take place at regular or special meetings of the Board of Trustees. 
(1965 Code § 2.02) 
1-6-7. - Rules of order. 
(A)  Order of business: The order of business to be considered at regular meetings of the Board of Trustees shall be as follows: 
1.  Call to order. 
2.  Roll call. 
3.  Pledge of Allegiance led by a member of the Village Board, or by a member of a group or organization associated with the Village. 
4.  Village recognition. 
5.  Audience participation. 
6.  Consent agenda (omnibus vote), which may include, but is not limited to, the approval of meeting minutes, approval of payroll and vouchers and other items considered to be routine in nature. 
7.  Reports, motions, resolutions and ordinances. 
8.  Other business. 
9.  Adjournment. 
(B)  Rescinding action: No vote or action of the Board of Trustees shall be rescinded at any special meeting unless there be present at such special meeting as many members of the Board as were present at the meeting when such vote or action was taken. 
(C)  Resolutions: Any resolution submitted to the Board of Trustees shall be reduced in writing before being voted on upon the request of the President or any two members of the Board. 
(D)  Suspension of rules: The rules of order, other than those prescribed by statute, may be suspended at any time by the consent of a majority of the Trustees present at any meeting. 
(E)  Robert's Rules of Order: "Robert's Rules of Order" shall govern the deliberations of the Board of Trustees, except when in conflict with any of the foregoing rules. 
(F)  Two readings of ordinances: Upon the request of the President or upon the request of any two or more Trustees, two readings of any ordinance shall be required before final action of the passage thereof is taken, otherwise an ordinance may be passed when first presented. Any request by either the President or any two or more Trustees for two readings of an ordinance shall be made before any vote is taken on the proposed ordinance. When two readings of an ordinance are requested by either the President or any two or more Trustees, the first reading shall take place at the same meeting as the request to require two readings, and the second reading shall not take place sooner than the regular or adjourned meeting of the Board of Trustees subsequent to the meeting at which the first reading was presented. In the event an ordinance fails to receive a favorable vote of a majority of the elective members on first reading, it shall nevertheless proceed to a second reading for final action. The vote taken at the second reading shall supersede the vote taken at the first reading. 
(1965 Code § 2.03; Ord. 2848, 12-27-1982; Ord. 6226, 3-24-2014) 
1-6-8. - Compensation. 
There is hereby established as compensation for the Village Trustees, the amount of $0.00 per month, commencing on May 1, 2017. 
(Ord. 6447, 10-24-2016) 
1-6-9. - Omnibus vote. 
At any regular meeting, a single vote may be taken on several questions relating to the passage of any two or more ordinances, orders, resolutions or motions placed together for voting purposes in a single group (omnibus group), which single vote shall be entered separately in the minutes of each meeting under the designation "consent agenda". The Village Clerk shall enter the words "consent agenda" in the minutes in each case in lieu of entering the names and individual votes of the members of the Board of Trustees on the passage of each of the ordinances, orders, resolutions and motions included in the omnibus group. 
When the omnibus group is presented for consideration and vote at a regular meeting of the Board of Trustees, the Village President or any one Trustee may request that an item be removed from the omnibus group, in which event that item shall be discussed, considered and voted upon individually. The omnibus vote shall be preceded by a public recital of the nature of each matter or item included in the omnibus group and such other information as would inform the public of the business being conducted. 
(Ord. 6226, 3-24-2014) 
Chapter 7 - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 

1-7-1. - Village Manager (formerly Village Administrator). 
(A)  Authorization to employ manager; appointment : The President and Board of Trustees are hereby authorized to employ a Village Manager. Such manager shall be appointed by the president, by and with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees. 
(B)  To be Chief Administrator of Village : The Village Manager, under and subject to the direction of the President and Board of Trustees, shall be the chief administrator of the Village, and shall be responsible to the President and Board of Trustees for the proper direction of the administrative affairs of the Village. 
(C)  Execution of administrative supervision, control: The Village Manager shall execute, on behalf of the Board of Trustees, its administrative supervision and control of the affairs of the Village and its employees. 
(D)  Relationship with appointed Boards and Commissions : The Village Manager shall cooperate with such advisory boards and commissions that the board has and shall create. The manager shall receive direction from the Village board. 
(E)  Supervision over all departments : The Village Manager shall supervise and coordinate the work of all departments of the Village and the employees thereof. 
(F)  Appointment power : The Village Manager shall hire and promote all employees necessary for the proper functioning of the Village except for those offices, boards or institutions whose appointment is otherwise mandated by state statute. The Village Manager, subject to the approval of the Village Board and the President, shall appoint Village department heads. 
(G)  Budget preparation, adoption: The Village Manager, together with the Finance Director shall prepare budgets and submit such budgets together with his opinions and recommendations covering their important features to the President and Board of Trustees for their review and approval. Together with the Finance Director, the Village Manager shall assume the responsibility for the administration of the budget after its adoption. 
(H)  Investigation of complaints : The Village Manager shall receive and have investigated all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the government of the Village and the services maintained and provided by the Village. 
(I)  Recommending municipal pay scale : The Village Manager shall, in coordination with the department involved, recommend to the President and Board of Trustees a standard schedule of pay for employee classifications in the service of the Village. 
(J)  Making general recommendations : The Village Manager shall recommend to the President and Board of Trustees the adoption of such measures as he may deem necessary or expedient for the health, safety or welfare of the community, or for the improvement of the services rendered by the Village when such measures require action by the Village board. 
(K)  Other additional duties : The Village Manager shall perform such other duties as may be required by the President and Board of Trustees consistent with law and ordinances of the Village. 
(L)  Matters directed to manager's attention : All offices and departments shall submit all matters requiring Board of Trustees' action or attention to the Village Manager, who shall submit them to the board with recommendations as may be deemed necessary. All department or employee requests by the Village board shall be submitted to the Village Manager and shall receive instruction as to policy and departmental operation from the manager. 
(M)  Absence of manager, appointment of acting Village Manager : The Village Manager, at his discretion, shall appoint an acting Village Manager who shall carry out the functions of the Village Manager during such time as the Village Manager is away from the Village, or temporarily incapacitated. Upon such appointment, the manager shall promptly notify the Village board in writing of the appointment. If the Village president should determine that the absence of the Village Manager will be for such a period to require an appointment of a temporary Village Manager, the Village president may do so and shall thereafter seek the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees. The acting manager must be an appointed officer or employee of the Village. 
(N)  Purchase and sale or trade in of personal property : The Village Manager shall have authority to: 
1.  Sell or purchase an item of personal property for the Village within the scope of the budget approved by the corporate authorities when such item of personal property is either sold or purchased for less than $20,000.00; 
2.  Trade in an item of personal property of the Village when the trade in value of such item of personal property is less than $20,000.00; and 
3.  Both trade in and purchase a replacement item of personal property for the Village when the trade in value and purchase price, less the value of the trade in, are individually each less than $20,000.00. 
(O)  Execute license agreements : 
1.  The manager shall have the power to execute license agreements to allow tables and chairs, vestibules, food carts, and other similar structures in the public right-of-way provided that the Village board has previously granted approval of a license agreement for the structure(s) at the location and the Village is permitted to terminate the agreement at any time by notifying licensee of its intention at least seven days prior to the termination date. 
2.  The manager shall have the power to execute license agreements to allow communications facilities in the public right-of-way subject to the facility's compliance with Title 8, Chapter 6 of this Code. 
(Ord. 1900, 10-28-1974; Ord. 2118, 8-28-1976; Ord. 2190, 4-25-1977; Ord. 3829, 4-22-1991; Ord. 5964, 10-10-2011; amd. Ord. 5751, 4-27-2009; Ord. 6143, 6-24-2013; Ord. 6494, 6-26-2017) 
1-7-2. - Village Clerk. 
(A)  Election; term of office: The Village Clerk shall be elected every other odd numbered year for a term of four years and serve as Village Clerk as provided by statute. A regular term shall commence and a newly elected Village Clerk who has otherwise qualified shall be inaugurated and begin the duties of office during the regular meeting of the Board of Trustees on the second Monday in the month of May, following the proclamation of the results of the regular municipal election at which the Village Clerk is elected. The inauguration shall be scheduled on the agenda under "other business" as that term is used in section 1-6-7 of this title. A Village Clerk who has not qualified at that time or a Village Clerk chosen to fill a vacancy shall take office upon qualification. 
(B)  Bond: Before entering upon the duties of his office, the Village Clerk shall execute a bond in an amount, and with such sureties, as may be required by the Board of Trustees, conditioned upon the faithful performance of his duties. 
(C)  Seal: The Village Clerk shall be the custodian of the corporate seal of the Village, and shall seal and attest all contracts and other documents on which the Village seal is required. 
The corporate seal of the Village shall be oval in form. In the outer margin shall be the words, "Village of Glen Ellyn 1834". In the center shall be a likeness of the clock tower of the Glen Ellyn civic center. 
(D)  Records: The clerk shall have custody and control of all papers belonging to the Village, and shall prepare and keep a record of all of the officers and regular employees of the Village. 
(E)  Duties: The Clerk shall attend all meetings of the corporate authorities, and keep a full record of all proceedings. 
(F)  Indexes: The Village Clerk shall keep and maintain a proper index to all documents and records kept by him so that ready access thereto and use thereof may be had. 
(G)  Appointment of Deputy Clerks: The Village Clerk may appoint up to two Deputy Clerks, who need not be residents of the Village and who shall be empowered to discharge the functions and duties of the Office of Village Clerk as provided by statute or as directed by the Village Clerk. 
(H)  Additional duties: In addition to the duties herein provided, the Clerk shall perform such other duties and functions as may be required by the Board of Trustees or by statute. 
(I)  Compensation: There is hereby established, as compensation for the Village Clerk, the amount of $0.00 per month, commencing on May 1, 2017. 
(1965 Code § 2.06; Ord. 4165, 8-8-1994; Ord. 5010, 11-13-2001; Ord. 5317, 12-20-2004; Ord. 6447, 10-24-2016) 
1-7-3. - Attorney for the Village. 
(A)  Appointment: The Attorney for the Village, an executive officer of the Village, shall be appointed by the Village Manager, subject to the approval of the Village Board. The Village President, by and with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees appoints the general contractor's law firm that will act as outside counsel to assist the Village Attorney. 
(B)  Duties: The Attorney for the Village shall: 
1.  Prosecute and defend any and all suits or actions at law or equity to which the Village may be a party or in which it may be interested; 
2.  See to the enforcement of all judgments or decrees rendered in favor of the Village; 
3.  Advise the President and Board of Trustees on all legal questions affecting the Village whenever requested so to do by any Village official, and reduce any such opinion to writing when requested by the President; 
4.  Institute and complete all special assessment proceedings authorized by ordinance; 
5.  Draft ordinances, contracts, leases and other documents to which the Village may be a party; and 
6.  Perform such other professional services incident to his office as may be required by the Board of Trustees or any of its committees. 
7.  The Attorney for the Village will work full time for the Village. Certain duties of the Attorney for the Village may be performed by a general contractor and the members of the general contractor's law firm. 
(Ord. 6247, 7-14-2014) 
1-7-4. - Village Prosecutor. 
The President may appoint, when authorized to do so by the Board of Trustees, a Village Prosecutor whose duties shall be to prosecute actions for the recovery of fines, forfeitures and penalties for the violation of provisions of this Code. He shall receive such compensation as may be authorized by the Board of Trustees. 
(1965 Code § 2.08) 
1-7-5. - Village Engineer. 
(A)  Appointment: The Village Engineer, an executive officer of the Village, shall be appointed by the Village President, subject to the approval of the Village Board. 
(B)  Duties: 
1.  The Village Engineer shall design such public works and other projects as the Village Engineer shall be directed to undertake by the Village Board or the Village Manager. The Village Engineer shall also review such designs prepared by others as are submitted to the Village as the Village Board or the Village Manager shall authorize. 
2.  The Village Engineer may work full time for the Village or the duties of the Village Engineer may be performed by a general contractor and the members of the general contractor's engineering firm. 
(C)  Independent contractor: The duties of the Village Engineer may also be performed by one or more independent contractors who shall be assigned, by the Village Manager, particular duties or functions as are specified to be performed by the Village Engineer within the Municipal ordinances or as may otherwise be required to be performed. 
(Ord. 3829, 4-22-1991; Ord. 5454, 4-10-2006; amd. Ord. 5751, 4-27-2009) 
1-7-6. - Village Collector. 
(Repealed by Ordinance 6108, January 14, 2013) 
1-7-7. - Building and Zoning Official. 
(Repealed by Ordinance 2852, January 24, 1983) 
1-7-8. - Public Works Director. 
(A)  Appointment: The Public Works Director, an executive officer of the Village, shall be appointed by the Village Manager, subject to the approval of the Village Board. The Village Manager shall serve as ex officio Public Works Director in the event of a vacancy in this office. 
(B)  Duties: 
1.  The Public Works Director shall have charge of, and supervision over, all public property of the Village, including streets, sidewalks and other property not specifically assigned to some other officer. 
2.  He shall have charge of and be responsible for the care, maintenance and operation of the water, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, and street lighting systems, public streets and sidewalks, and forestry activities. 
3.  The construction, repair or extension of any public building, pavement, sewer, lighting system and water mains, and any appurtenances thereto, shall be under the supervision of the Public Works Director, unless specific direction to the contrary is given by the Board of Trustees. 
4.  The Public Works Director shall also have charge of, and be responsible for, the condition of the motor vehicles, trucks and other equipment of the Village. 
(C)  Functions: The Public Works Director shall organize, direct and coordinate the activities including, but not limited to, the sewer, street and water maintenance and construction, mechanical maintenance and repair of Village vehicles. He shall determine departmental policies, plan long range programs, and make technical decisions, including the preparation of specifications for major projects and the approval of designs, under the general executive direction of the Village Manager. 
(Ord. 2120, 1976; amd. Ord. 5751, 4-27-2009) 
1-7-9. - Finance Director (formerly Management Services Director). 
(A)  Appointment: The Finance Director, an executive officer of the Village, shall be appointed by the Village Manager, subject to the approval of the Village Board. The Finance Director shall serve as Budget Officer and Treasurer for the Village. 
(B)  Bond: The Finance Director shall be bonded in such sum as may be required by the Board of Trustees, and the bond shall not be less than the amount fixed by statute. The bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance of his duties, and shall be conditioned to indemnify the Village for any loss resulting from any neglect of duty or wrongful act on the part of the Finance Director. The cost of the bond shall be paid by the Village. 
(C)  Duties: The Finance Director shall perform the following duties: 
1.  Prepare and encourage the use of efficient planning, budgeting, auditing, reporting, accounting and other fiscal management procedures. 
2.  Obtain such information from the Municipality, its Municipal departments, commissions and boards as may be useful for the purposes of compiling an annual budget, such information to be furnished by the Municipality, its Municipal departments, commissions and boards in the form required. 
3.  Compile an annual budget in accordance with 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-2-9.3 of the Illinois Municipal Code. 
4.  Establish and maintain such procedures as shall ensure that no expenditures are made by the Municipality, its Municipal departments, commissions or boards, except as authorized by the budget. 
5.  Receive all money paid into the Village Treasury, either directly from the person paying the same or from such other officers who may receive it, and pay out money only on vouchers or orders when signed by the proper Village officials. The President, Clerk, Manager and Finance Director shall be authorized to sign vouchers or orders as follows: 
(a)  Working cash fund: Any three of the above officials; 
(b)  Payroll fund: Any one of the above officials; 
(c)  Police pension fund: Any one of the above officials; 
(d)  All other funds of the Village: Any two of the above officials. 
6.  Deposit the Village funds; keep the Village funds separate and distinct from his own or any other funds; and not commingle his funds with Village funds nor make private or personal use of any Village funds. Earn for the Village the maximum amount possible under applicable state law and report to the President and Board of Trustees periodically the nature of investments being utilized. 
7.  Keep records of all monies received by him showing the source from which it is received and the purpose for which it is paid out; and such records shall, at all times, show the financial status of the Village. 
8.  Keep books and accounts in the manner required by the Board of Trustees. 
9.  Examine all books and records which relate to monies received, monies paid out, including debts and accounts receivable and amounts owed by or to the municipality, its municipal departments, commissions and boards. 
10.  Furnish, as often as required by the Board of Trustees, a full and detailed account of all receipts and disbursements of the Village as shown by his books up to the time of such report. 
11.  Keep a register of all warrants, describing each warrant by showing its date, amount and number, the fund from which paid, the name of the person to whom paid and when paid as required by statute. 
12.  Confer with and advise subordinates concerning work problems and development of an installation of new work procedures. 
13.  Supervise and review general procedures, methods and results of the various activities of the finance department, including budgeting, budgeting control, data processing, financial reporting, insurance, purchasing, collecting, treasury management and personnel assistance. 
(D)  Reference: All references of Management Services Director or Village Collector throughout this Code shall mean Finance Director or his/her designee. 
(Ord. 2615, 12-8-1980; amd. Ord. 5751, 4-27-2009; Ord. 6108, 1-14-2013) 
1-7-10. - Community Development Director. 
(A)  Appointment: The Community Development Director, an executive official of the Village, shall be appointed by the Village Manager subject to the approval of the Village Board. 
(B)  Duties: The Community Development Director shall perform the following duties: 
1.  Organize, direct and coordinate activities of the Community Development Department and the Building and Zoning Division. 
2.  Coordinate effective procedural administration of planning, building and zoning matters through the Plan Commission, Zoning Board of Appeals, Historic Preservation Commission, and Building Board of Appeals and other village departments. 
3.  Perform analysis of technical data and projection in the field of community planning. 
4.  Assist in development and administration of short and long range planning policies. 
(Ord. 2119, 8-28-1976; amd. Ord. 4723, 6-14-1999; Ord. 5751, 4-27-2009; Ord. 6519, 7-24-2017; Ord. 6674, 2-25-2019) 
1-7-11. - Recreation Director. 
(A)  Appointment: The Recreation Director, an executive officer of the Village, shall be appointed by the Village Manager, subject to the approval of the Village Board. 
(B)  Duties: The Recreation Director shall have charge of and supervision over all recreation property operated by the Village. The Recreation Director shall also be responsible for the care, operation and maintenance of the Village golf course, athletic facilities and parks. 
The Recreation Director shall serve as an ex officio member of and technical advisor to the Recreation Commission. 
(C)  Functions: The Recreation Director shall organize, direct, coordinate and plan the maintenance and operation of the Village golf course, athletic facilities and parks. The Recreation Director shall determine departmental procedures and make technical decisions including preparation of major projects under the general direction of the Village Manager. The Recreation Director shall develop long range programs in conjunction with the Recreation Commission. 
(Ord. 2339, 3-27-1978; Ord. 3829, 4-22-1991; amd. Ord. 4723, 6-14-1999; Ord. 5751, 4-27-2009) 
1-7-12. - Appointive officers. 
(A)  Term: Every appointive officer of the Village shall hold office for the term of one year, or until his successor is appointed and qualified, unless it is otherwise provided by ordinance. 
In the event of a vacancy in any office, the successor shall be named by the person who made the original appointment. 
(B)  Removal: Any appointive officer of the Village may be removed from office by the Village President, as provided in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-11-1 of the Illinois Municipal Code. 
(1965 Code § 2.17; amd. Ord. 4723, 6-14-1999) 
1-7-13. - Records. 
All records kept by an appointive officer, agent or employee of the Village shall be open to inspection by the President or any member of the Board of Trustees at all times, even though such records are not required to be kept by statute or ordinance. 
(1965 Code § 2.18; amd. Ord. 4723, 6-14-1999) 
1-7-14. - Disposition of money. 
Every officer or employee of the Village shall, as directed by the Board of Trustees, transmit money received by him in his official capacity to the Finance Director, with a statement showing the source from which such money was received. 
(1965 Code § 2.19; amd. Ord. 2615, 12-8-1980; Ord. 4723, 6-14-1999; Ord. 5751, 4-27-2009) 
1-7-15. - Oath of officers. 
Every elective officer of the Village shall, before entering upon his duties, take the oath prescribed by statute. 
(1965 Code § 2.20; amd. Ord. 4723, 6-14-1999) 
1-7-16. - Salary. 
Every officer, agent or employee of the Village shall receive such salary as may be provided by ordinance. 
(1965 Code § 2.21; amd. Ord. 4723, 6-14-1999) 
1-7-17. - Conservators of the peace. 
The Village President, members of the Police Department are hereby declared to be conservators of the peace, with such powers to make arrests as are given to conservators of the peace by statute. 
(1965 Code § 2.22; amd. Ord. 4723, 6-14-1999) 
1-7-18. - Termination of office. 
Every officer of the Village, upon termination of his office, shall deliver to his successor all property, books and records which are the property of the Village. If no successor is appointed within one week after termination of his office, such property shall be delivered to the Village Clerk or Village Manager. 
(1965 Code § 2.23; amd. Ord. 4723, 6-14-1999; Ord. 5751, 4-27-2009) 
1-7-19. - Personnel manual adopted. 
(A)  There is hereby adopted as the general regulations concerning the employees of the Village a "Personnel Manual", dated January 23, 1989, which manual is hereby adopted and incorporated as a part of this Code as if fully set out herein. 
(B)  The Village Manager shall annually review the provisions of the personnel manual adopted by this section and make recommendations to the President and Board of Trustees as to amendments and revisions the Village Manager deems necessary and advisable. 
(Ord. 3576, 1-23-1989, eff. 3-1-1989; amd. Ord. 4723, 6-14-1999; Ord. 5751, 4-27-2009) 
1-7-19-1. - Amendments to personnel manual. 
(Repealed by Ordinance 4459, January 13, 1997) 
1-7-20. - Pay plan adopted. 
(Repealed by Ordinance 2872, April 11, 1983, effective May 1, 1983) 
1-7-21. - Risk management manual adopted. 
There is hereby adopted the "Glen Ellyn Risk Management Manual" and said manual is incorporated as part of this Code as if fully set out at length herein. 
(Ord. 2524, 2-11-1980) 
Chapter 8 - ELECTIONS 

1-8-1. - Registration for elections. 
10 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/4-1 et seq., providing for a system of registration of voters to be maintained by the County Clerk of DuPage County, shall be applicable to all elections held in the Village for either the nomination at a primary or the election of officers of the Village. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 2.27) 
Chapter 9 - VILLAGE JAIL 

1-9-1. - Jail. 
The place in the Village hitherto established and used as the jail, or any other place which may hereafter be established by the Board of Trustees for that purpose is hereby declared to be the jail. 
(A)  The Police Chief shall be keeper of the jail, and shall have custody of all persons confined therein and of all property pertaining thereto. 
(B)  The jail shall be used for the incarceration of a person arrested for violating any laws of the State of Illinois, the United States of America, or provisions of this Code, until such person shall be brought before a proper officer for a hearing, or until such person shall be lawfully transferred to some other place of incarceration. 
(C)  Any person convicted of a violation of a Village Code provision, and sentenced to the payment of a fine, may be imprisoned for the nonpayment of such fine. Such person may be imprisoned either in the Village jail, in the DuPage County jail, or in such other place of incarceration to which the Board of Trustees has arranged to transfer prisoners. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 1.04; amd. 1975 Code) 
Chapter 10 - VILLAGE CONTRACTS 

1-10-1. - Contracts requiring competitive bidding. 
All purchase orders or contracts for labor, services or work, or for the purchase of personal property, materials, equipment or supplies, involving amounts estimated to be in excess of $20,000.00 made by or on behalf of the Village, shall be let only by competitive bidding after advertisement for bids to the lowest responsible bidder submitting a bid in conformance with the bid advertisement; provided, however, that the Board of Trustees by the affirmative vote of at least two-thirds of the Board of Trustees then in office may waive competitive bidding on specific contracts. 
(Ord. 5964, 10-10-2011) 
1-10-2. - Exceptions to competitive bidding. 
A purchase or contract that is by its nature not adapted to award by competitive bidding, as for example professional or other services requiring individual skill or expertise, utility services available from a single source or a unique item of property, may be excluded from the requirements of section 1-10-1 of this chapter and approved by the affirmative vote of at least two-thirds of the Board of Trustees then in office. 
(Ord. 5964, 10-10-2011) 
1-10-3. - Prohibition against subdivision. 
No contract or purchase shall be subdivided to avoid the requirements of section 1-10-1 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 5964, 10-10-2011) 
1-10-4. - Advertisement. 
When competitive bidding is required, it is the policy of the Village to seek as broad an advertisement for bids as is practical under the circumstances. As a minimum, advertisement for bids shall be as follows: 
(A)  Newspaper publication: Notice inviting bids shall be published once in at least one newspaper of general circulation in the Village and at least ten days preceding the last day set for the receipt of bid proposals. 
(B)  Scope of notice: The newspaper notice required herein shall include at least a general description of the work to be performed or the articles to be purchased, shall state where bid proposals forms and detailed specifications may be secured, and shall state the time and place for opening bids. 
(C)  Bidders' list or individual solicitation: Bids and proposals shall be solicited from all responsible prospective suppliers who have requested to be notified of purchases of the type being proposed or who are known to the Village to do work or provide supplies of the type being sought, by sending those responsible prospective suppliers a copy of the notice to acquaint them with the proposed purchase or sale. 
(D)  Village website: Bid announcements shall be advertised on the Village website. 
(Ord. 5964, 10-10-2011) 
1-10-5. - Lowest responsible bidder. 
Contracts shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder. In determining "lowest responsible bidder", in addition to the price, the Village may consider the following factors: 
(A)  The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the service required; 
(B)  Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the service promptly, or within the time specified, without delay or interference; 
(C)  The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and efficiency of the bidder; 
(D)  The quality of performance of previous contracts or services; 
(E)  The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws and ordinances relating to the contract or service; 
(F)  The sufficiency of the financial resources and the ability of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the service; 
(G)  The quality, availability and adaptability of the supplies or contractual services to the particular use required by the Village; 
(H)  The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and service for the use of the contract; and 
(I)  The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid, if any. 
(Ord. 5964, 10-10-2011) 
1-10-6. - Award to other than low bidder. 
When the award is not given to the lowest bidder, a full and complete statement of the reasons for placing the order elsewhere shall be made and preserved as a public record. 
(Ord. 5964, 10-10-2011) 
1-10-7. - Joint purchases with other governmental bodies. 
Pursuant to the provisions of the Governmental Joint Purchasing Act 1, the Village of Glen Ellyn hereby acknowledges and elects to participate with the United States government, the State of Illinois, DuPage County, and Municipal purchasing consortia in joint purchases and to adopt the competitive bidding procedures authorized by said statutory provisions and the appropriate rules and regulations of the General Services Administration of the United States government, the Department of Central Management Services of the State of Illinois, the Purchasing Division of DuPage County, and the purchasing divisions of the Municipal purchasing consortia or any of their successor agencies in lieu of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 5964, 10-10-2011) 
1-10-8. - Change orders. 
The Village Manager is authorized to approve any change order to a Village contract which is less than $10,000.00. Any change order in excess of $10,000.00 shall be submitted to the Village Board as an agenda item for the Board's approval. The Village Manager is also authorized to execute change orders above $10,000.00 in instances where the change order falls within a contract contingency authorized by the Village Board. 
(Ord. 6453, 11-14-2016) 
1-10-9. - Prompt payment act preempted. 
The Village, as a home rule municipality, shall not be bound by nor subject to any obligations set forth in the Local Government Prompt Payment Act 2. The provisions of the Local Government Prompt Payment Act are hereby preempted, and the obligations for payment shall be determined solely by contract between the Village and the parties providing goods or services to the Village. 
(Ord. 5964, 10-10-2011) 
Chapter 11 - ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING PROCEDURES 

1-11-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures for enabling persons to contest or dispute administrative actions to which these procedures are made applicable. 
(Ord. 2789, 6-28-1982) 
1-11-2. - Applicability of chapter. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided in this Code, the procedures set forth herein shall apply to enable persons to dispute or contest bills rendered for solid waste refuse services, water and sewer services and to contest or dispute any other administrative action taken by the Village or an officer or employee thereof to which this chapter is specifically made applicable. 
(Ord. 2789, 6-28-1982) 
1-11-3. - Definitions. 
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and application of this chapter: 
HEARING OFFICER: The presiding officer at any administrative hearing held pursuant to this chapter. 
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, corporation, association, governmental subdivision or public or private organization of any character. 
(Ord. 2789, 6-28-1982) 
1-11-4. - Appointment of Hearing Officer. 
The Village Administrator shall appoint an employee of the Village to act as a Hearing Officer at administrative hearings held pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2789, 6-28-1982) 
1-11-5. - Notice of administrative hearing procedure. 
(A)  Notice of the availability of an administrative hearing pursuant to this chapter shall be given to all persons being issued a shutoff notice for water and sewer service pursuant to title 7, chapter 11 of this Code or a notice of pending collection procedures for solid waste collection services pursuant to title 7, chapter 6 of this Code or to any other person designated hereafter by ordinance. 
(B)  Such notice shall include the following: 
1.  That any person may challenge the impending administrative action, whether termination of service or institution of collection proceedings or other action, by requesting an administrative hearing before a Hearing Officer pursuant to this chapter; 
2.  That a request for hearing may be made by completing a standard form available at the Office of the Village Collector within 15 days of the mailing by the Village of the notice of the impending administrative action, such as disconnection of service, institution of collection proceedings of the like; and 
3.  That failure to request an administrative hearing will result in the threatened action being taken within 30 days of the mailing of the notice of such pending action. 
(Ord. 2789, 6-28-1982; Ord. 3829, 4-22-1991) 
1-11-6. - Manner of requesting hearing. 
(A)  A standard form for requesting an administrative hearing pursuant to this chapter shall be available at the Village Collector's office during all regular business hours maintained by that office. 
(B)  The hearing request form shall include adequate space for any person requesting a hearing to provide the following information: 
1.  Name of person requesting hearing; 
2.  Address of person requesting hearing; 
3.  Address where service is provided, if different; 
4.  Telephone number of person requesting hearing; 
5.  A summary of the nature of the complaint or challenge to the pending administrative action; 
6.  A description of previous interaction or contacts with the Village concerning the complaint or challenge to the pending administrative action; and 
7.  A listing of three dates and times, all within 15 days following the filing of the request for hearing, at which the person requesting the hearing would be available to present the complaint or challenge to the Hearing Officer. 
(Ord. 2789, 6-28-1982) 
1-11-7. - Scheduling of hearings. 
(A)  Upon receipt of a request for hearing, the Village Administrator shall assign the request to a designated Hearing Officer for the purpose of conducting an administrative hearing pursuant to this chapter. 
(B)  The designated Hearing Officer shall schedule a hearing within 15 days of the filing of a request for hearing, preferably on one of the three dates and times identified in the request for hearing. 
(C)  The designated Hearing Officer shall cause written notice of the scheduled hearing to be mailed to the person requesting the hearing no later than seven days prior to the scheduled hearing or delivered in person no later than five days prior to the scheduled hearing, with a copy of the notice being retained by the Village Clerk with a notation thereon of the manner and date of service. 
(Ord. 2789, 6-28-1982) 
1-11-8. - Preliminary procedures. 
(A)  In addition to serving notice upon the person requesting an administrative hearing, the Hearing Officer shall also give written notice of the date and time of the scheduled hearing to the Management Services Director, and when deemed necessary in the opinion of the Hearing Officer, to the public works director, to the solid waste refuse contractor or to other affected Village departments. 
(B)  When deemed necessary in the opinion of the Hearing Officer, the Hearing Officer shall request the Management Services Director, the public works director, the solid waste refuse contractor or other affected Village departments to furnish copies of all written information pertinent to the person requesting the administrative hearing and pertinent to a description of the standard means utilized by the department or contractor for resolving complaints, requests or inquiries comparable to that or those of the person requesting the administrative hearing. 
(C)  Prior to the hearing, the Hearing Officer shall review all information pertinent to the circumstances of the person requesting the hearing and to the general procedures of the department or corporation. 
(D)  The Hearing Officer may request the Management Services Director, the public works director, the solid waste refuse contractor or other affected Village departments to attend, be available to attend or designate a departmental or corporate employee familiar with the circumstances of the person requesting the hearing and with the general complaint handling procedures of the department or corporation to attend or be available to attend the scheduled hearing. 
(E)  Any such request upon the Management Services Director, Public Works Director, the solid waste refuse contractor or other personnel of the Village to attend or be available to attend shall be made no later than three regular business days prior to the scheduled hearing. 
(F)  Any person requesting a hearing may submit a written request to have the scheduled hearing date continued to a date no later than 30 days subsequent to the initially scheduled date; however, upon a finding by the Hearing Officer that the reason for the requested continuance is beyond the control of the person requesting the hearing, the continuance may be to a date more than 30 days subsequent to the initially scheduled date. 
(Ord. 2789, 6-28-1982) 
1-11-9 - Conduct of the hearing. 
(A)  At the scheduled hearing, the Hearing Officer shall first give the person requesting the hearing adequate time to present and explain the complaint, request, inquiry or challenge to the impending administrative action. An adequate opportunity shall be afforded to all persons requesting a hearing to be represented by legal counsel, and to respond and present evidence and argument. 
(B)  The Hearing Officer shall afford the person requesting the hearing an opportunity to review and respond to all records provided by the department of management services, the department of public works, the solid waste refuse contractor, or other affected Village departments and shall afford an opportunity to the person requesting the hearing to question a representative of the department of management services, the department of public works, the solid waste refuse contractor or other affected Village departments concerning the documents presented by the department or contractor. 
(C)  The Hearing Officer shall afford the person requesting the hearing an opportunity to observe all statements by personnel of the Village or the solid waste refuse contractor that are pertinent to the Hearing Officer's resolution of the complaint, request, inquiry or challenge to the impending administrative action and shall afford such person an opportunity to cross examine the personnel of the Village or of the solid waste refuse contractor. 
(D)  Upon specific request of the person requesting the administrative hearing, the Hearing Officer may exclude other personnel of the Village or of the solid waste refuse contractor to afford the person requesting the hearing to make statements pertinent to the complaint, request, inquiry or challenge outside the presence of the personnel of the Village or of the solid waste refuse contractor. Further, the Hearing Officer shall endeavor to preserve the confidentiality of such statements out of the presence of the personnel of the Village or of the solid waste refuse contractor, unless disclosure of such statements is necessary to implement the findings and rulings of the Hearing Officer. 
(Ord. 2789, 6-28-1982) 
1-11-10. - Burden of proof in certain cases. 
(A)  Any person claiming to be exempt from the charges for the residential solid waste collection service has the burden of providing positive evidence of the methods utilized for the disposal of food wastes, paper, cans, bottles, trimmings from lawns, shrubs, trees or gardens or has the burden of providing positive evidence that the manner of occupancy of the residence does not result in the generation of any solid waste. To qualify for exemption from the residential solid waste collection service, the methods of disposal or manner of occupancy must not necessitate a single pick up by a licensed solid waste hauler or a single incident of the practices prohibited in sections 7-6-6 and 7-6-8 of this Code. 
(B)  The water meter or wastewater flow meter utilized in the water and sanitary sewer systems of the Village are presumed to be accurate. Any person claiming that the water usage or wastewater discharge recorded by a water meter or wastewater flow meter is inaccurate has the burden of providing positive evidence of structural fault with the water meter or wastewater flow meter or fault in the manner in which readings from said meters were obtained. 
(Ord. 2789, 6-28-1982) 
1-11-11. - Effect of request for hearing on pending administrative action. 
Upon the timely filing by any person of a request for hearing, challenging pending or threatened administrative action against that person, such as disconnection of service or initiation of collection procedures, such administrative action shall be delayed pending the decision of the Hearing Officer. 
(Ord. 2789, 6-28-1982) 
1-11-12. - Decision of the hearing officer. 
(A)  The Hearing Officer shall issue a decision in writing no later than seven days following the administrative hearing. 
(B)  No later than seven days following the hearing, a copy of the written decision of the Hearing Officer shall be mailed to the person requesting the hearing and shall be delivered to the director of management services, the Director of Public Works or the solid waste refuse contractor affected by the decision. 
(C)  The decision shall address all matters raised by the person requesting the hearing and shall be in sufficient detail to enable the person requesting the hearing, the Village personnel and any contractor affected by the decision to implement the decision reached by the Hearing Officer. 
(D)  The decision of the Hearing Officer may include, but is not limited to, an affirmation of the original billing, a reduction or rebate on the original billing, the approval of a deferred or budgeted payment plan, exemption from the residential solid waste service and removal from the billing list for such service, recommendation of repair or replacement of any water meter or wastewater flow meter, recommendation for maintenance required of a wastewater flow meter required to be maintained by the person requesting the hearing or other appropriate relief. 
(E)  A written record of the substance of the hearing and of the decision of the Hearing Officer shall be kept by the Village Clerk. Such records shall be clearly distinct and separate from records relating to the maintenance and provisions of Village services to the person requesting the hearing. Further, a person requesting a hearing may provide a court reporter or other means for recording the testimony presented to the Hearing Officer, and the Hearing Officer, if he deems it necessary, may provide means for recording all testimony or evidence presented. 
(Ord. 2789, 6-28-1982) 
Chapter 12 - ETHICS 

1-12-1. - Purpose of the Glen Ellyn Ethics Policy. 
It is the policy of the Village of Glen Ellyn to uphold, promote, and demand the highest standards of ethical behavior from all elected and appointed civil servants. Accordingly, all elected officials, advisory commissioners and board members, appointed volunteers, employees, and others regulated in this chapter, shall maintain the utmost standards of personal integrity, truthfulness, honesty and fairness in carrying out their public duties. All shall comply with all applicable laws, ordinances and policies, and never use their Village position or powers improperly, or for personal or private gain. Undisclosed and unmanaged conflicts of interest are undesirable because they may lead to the appearance that a civil servant is placing his or her interests above the public interest. 
The Village of Glen Ellyn and its civil servants share a commitment to ethical conduct in service to the community. The purpose of this ethics policy is to ensure that all persons associated with the Village as civil servants or others regulated in this chapter have clear guidance for carrying out their roles and responsibilities. 
(Ord. 5921, 2-28-2011) 
1-12-2. - Application of laws and policies. 
All civil servants of the Village of Glen Ellyn, as defined herein, are subject to the provisions of this ethics policy and applicable state law addressing ethics. In addition, the actions of civil servants, to the extent applicable, shall be subject to the provisions of the Village of Glen Ellyn personnel manual and any other rules of operation and performance, including written contracts, applicable to the performance of their duties. 
(Ord. 5921, 2-28-2011) 
1-12-3. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this policy, the following definitions shall apply: 
CIVIL SERVANT: Any individual who serves the Village of Glen Ellyn in an official capacity as an elected or appointed official, member of advisory commissions and boards, appointed volunteer or employee. 
FAMILY RELATIONSHIP OR FAMILY MEMBER: Any "relationship" defined as follows: spouse, domestic partner, parents, parents of spouse or domestic partner, siblings, siblings of spouse or domestic partner, children (including adopted), and children of spouse or domestic partner (including adopted). 
FINANCIAL INTEREST: Any economic interest or relationship, whether by ownership, trust, purchase, sale, lease, contract, option, investment, employment, gift, fee or otherwise; whether present, promised or reasonably expected; whether direct or indirect, including interests as consultant, representative or other person receiving (or who may be receiving) remuneration, either directly or indirectly, as a result of a transaction; whether in the person itself or in a parent or subsidiary corporation, or in another subsidiary of the same parent; whether such interest is held directly or indirectly by the civil servant, the spouse or minor child of such civil servant, or any other person with a family relationship with such civil servant owning or sharing the same household as the civil servant. Interest shall not include: 
a)  Interest in a mutual fund or managed account; 
b)  An ownership interest of less than five percent in any business entity; or 
c)  An interest of general applicability affecting others in similar situations. 
GIFT: Any gratuity, discount, entertainment, hospitality, loan, forbearance, or other tangible or intangible item having monetary value including, but not limited to, cash, food and drink, and honoraria for speaking engagements related to or attributable to government civil servants or the official position of a civil servant. 
NONFINANCIAL INTEREST: Any nonfinancial consideration that is substantial enough to affect a civil servant's judgment or that could lead to the appearance that the civil servant's judgment has been affected. Such interests may be direct or indirect, through business, investments, family or personal relationships. 
PERSONAL RELATIONSHIP: Any personal relationship that would prevent an individual from acting with impartiality. 
RECUSE: To refrain from participation in any official discussion, meeting or deliberation regarding a transaction and, where permitted to vote, to cast a vote of recusal when any vote is taken on such transaction. 
TRANSACTION: Any matter, including, without limitation, contracts, work or business with the Village, the sale or purchase of real estate by the Village and any requests for zoning, development or subdivision approvals, including, without limitation, rezonings, variations and special use permits, licenses or other requests, pending before the Village, with respect to which a civil servant performs an official act or action. 
(Ord. 5921, 2-28-2011) 
1-12-4. - Ethics Officer. 
(A)  The position of Ethics Officer is hereby established for the Village. The Ethics Officer shall be appointed by the Village President subject to the confirmation by the Village Board. The Ethics Officer must have training in the establishment and performance of ethical standards. The Ethics Officer shall receive the salary that is established by motion at the time of appointment or set from time to time. 
Should an ethics complaint be filed, the Ethics Officer will: 
1.  Determine whether or not the complaint presents a basis for investigation. 
2.  If the complaint is determined to not present a basis for investigation, no further action will be taken. 
3.  If the complaint is determined to present a basis for investigation, the Ethics Officer will conduct an investigation. 
4.  Upon the completion of the investigation, based on its findings, the Ethics Officer will either: 
(a)  Take no further action. 
(b)  Make a recommendation to the Village President and Village Board for consideration of one of the following courses of action: 
(1)  Referral of the matter to the Village Prosecutor for prosecution of violation(s) of local ordinances. 
(2)  Some lesser action deemed appropriate. 
The Village Board shall determine whether the matter should be referred to the Village Prosecutor, or whether some lesser action is appropriate. 
The Ethics Officer shall also reply to requests seeking an opinion as to whether a matter may represent a potential conflict of interest, or an actual conflict or other questions regarding this chapter. The Ethics Officer shall also carry out such other duties within the scope of this chapter as shall be specifically directed in writing by the Village President or action of the Village Board. 
(B)  Any complaint that a violation of this chapter has taken place shall be in writing, shall be signed and shall be filed with the Ethics Officer. If any other civil servant should receive a written and signed complaint, which has been mistakenly given or sent, it shall be promptly filed with the Ethics Officer. 
All civil servants shall avoid situations that present a conflict of interest, or a potential conflict of interest. It is the responsibility of all civil servants to solely serve the public interest of the Village of Glen Ellyn. To achieve that requirement it is necessary to avoid situations that present dual interests that can compromise, or appear to compromise the objectivity of decisions. 
(a)  Prohibited transactions: No civil servant shall participate in any transaction in which: 1) a "financial interest" as defined in this chapter would present a conflict of interest or a potential conflict of interest, 2) a "nonfinancial interest" as defined in this chapter would present a conflict of interest or a potential conflict of interest, 3) participation would constitute a conflict of interest under the statutes or common law of the State of Illinois. 
(b)  Recusal: Any civil servant shall recuse himself or herself in connection with any transaction that comes before such civil servant in the course of his or her duties, whenever such civil servant has: 1) any interest in the transaction; 2) any family relationship with a person having an interest in such transaction; or 3) any interest in an applicant appearing before the civil servant in an official capacity, even if the civil servant does not have an interest in the transaction itself. 
(c)  Notification: Upon becoming aware of any conflict of interest as described in subsection (a) of this section, any civil servant shall promptly provide written notification, within 48 hours, to the appropriate authority of such conflict and the civil servant's recusal from any official action with respect to the transaction, as follows: 
1.  Employees, appointed officers or appointed volunteers shall notify the director of the department and the Village Manager; 
2.  The Village Manager shall notify the Village President and the Board of Trustees; 
3.  Members of Boards and Commissions shall notify the Chairperson of such board or commission; 
4.  Chairpersons of boards and commissions shall notify the Village Manager, village president and the Board of Trustees; 
5.  The village president shall notify the Village Manager and the Board of Trustees; 
6.  Any person serving in an elected position shall notify the village president, Village Manager and the other members of the Board of Trustees. 
(d)  Nonappearance before same board or commission: No civil servant required to recuse himself or herself in connection with a transaction shall appear before the board or commission of which he or she is a member with respect to such transaction. 
(e)  Nonparticipation and disclosure before other board or commission: Any civil servant who has actual knowledge that he or she, individually or through a family relationship, has an interest in a transaction pending before a board or commission on which the civil servant does not serve as a member, either: 1) shall not appear or participate personally before the other board or commission on which he or she does not serve relating to such transaction; or 2) shall disclose such interest on the record prior to participating in any proceeding before a Village Board or Commission. 
(f)  Potential conflict of interest: The Glen Ellyn community has a right to expect that the public interest will be served by all individuals involved in local government. To maintain the public trust it is imperative that civil servants present an image of objectivity and fairness in all official actions. Civil servants have the continual and ongoing obligation to promptly disclose not only any known conflicts of interest but also to identify any issues that may have the potential for a conflict of interest, and if they are in doubt to seek the opinion of the Ethics Officer. When such advice is sought, the Ethics Officer will determine if the potential conflict requires the civil servant to take or refrain from taking some action. 
(Ord. 5921, 2-28-2011) 
1-12-6 - Gift ban. 
No civil servant or family member shall accept any prohibited gift, favor or consideration from any person or entity directly or indirectly involved in business dealings with the Village. Nor shall any civil servant accept any prohibited gift, favor or consideration of value that may influence, or has the appearance of influencing a civil servant in the performance of their public duties. 
(A)  Prohibited gifts: Except as otherwise provided in this section, no civil servant shall intentionally solicit or accept any gift from any prohibited source or in violation of any federal or state statute, rule, or regulation. A prohibited source shall be any person or entity who is seeking an action or inaction from the Village, is doing business or seeks to do business with the Village, conducts activities regulated by the Village or has interests that may be substantially affected by the performance or nonperformance of the civil servant. This ban applies to and includes the spouse of and immediate family living with the civil servant. No individual shall intentionally offer or make a gift that violates this section. 
(B)  Exceptions: The restrictions do not apply to the following: 
1.  Opportunities, benefits, and services that are available on the same conditions as for the general public. 
2.  Anything for which the civil servant pays the market value. 
3.  Any contribution that is lawfully made under the election code or under this chapter or activities associated with a fundraising event in support of a political organization or candidate. 
4.  A gift from a relative, meaning those people related to the individual as father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, uncle, aunt, great aunt, great uncle, first cousin, nephew, niece, husband, wife, grandfather, grandmother, grandson, granddaughter, father-in-law, mother-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, stepfather, stepmother, stepson, stepdaughter, stepbrother, stepsister, half brother, half sister, and including the father, mother, grandfather, or grandmother of the individual's spouse and the individual's fiance or fiancee. 
5.  Anything provided by an individual based on a personal friendship unless the civil servant has reason to believe that, under the circumstances, the gift was provided because of the civil servant's position and not because of the personal friendship. In determining whether a gift is provided on the basis of personal friendship the civil servant shall consider the circumstances under which the gift was offered, such as: 
(a)  The history of the relationship between the individual giving the gift and the recipient of the gift, including any previous exchange of gifts between those individuals; 
(b)  Whether to the actual knowledge of the civil servant the individual who gave the gift personally paid for the gift or sought a tax deduction or business reimbursement for the gift; and 
(c)  Whether to the actual knowledge of the civil servant the individual who gave the gift also at the same time gave the same or similar gifts to other civil servants. 
6.  Intragovernmental and intergovernmental gifts. For the purpose of this section, "intragovernmental gift" means any gift given to a civil servant from another civil servant of the Village, and "intergovernmental gift" means any gift given to a civil servant by an official of any other governmental entity. 
7.  If provided for in the Village's budget, the recognition of a civil servant's life event such as birth, death, marriage, illness, or retirement such as flowers or a donation. 
8.  Bequests, inheritances, and other transfers at death. 
9.  Food or refreshments not exceeding $75.00 per person in value on a single calendar day; provided that the food or refreshments are: a) consumed on the premises from which they were purchased or prepared or b) catered. For the purpose of this section, "catered" means food or refreshments that are purchased ready to eat and delivered by any means. 
10.  Any item or items from any one prohibited source during any calendar year having a cumulative total value of less than $100.00. 
11.  Each of the exceptions listed in this section is mutually exclusive and independent of one another. 
(C)  Gift ban; disposition of gifts: A civil servant does not violate this section if the civil servant promptly takes reasonable action to return the prohibited gift to its source or gives the gift or an amount equal to its value to an appropriate charity that is exempt from income taxation under section 501(c)(3) of the internal revenue code of 1986, as now or hereafter amended, renumbered, or succeeded. 
(Ord. 5921, 2-28-2011) 
1-12-7. - Political activity. 
(A)  Political activities: Employees shall not intentionally perform any political activity during any compensated time (other than vacation, personal, or compensatory time off). Employees shall not intentionally misappropriate any Village property or resources by engaging in any political activity for the benefit of any campaign for elective office or any political organization. 
(B)  Coerced political activity: At no time shall any elected civil servant or supervisory employee intentionally misappropriate the services of any employee by requiring that employee to perform any political activity as part of that employee's duties, as a condition of Village employment, or during any time off that is compensated by the Village (such as vacation, personal, or compensatory time off). 
(C)  Compensated political activity: A Village employee shall not be required at any time to participate in any political activity in consideration for that employee being awarded any additional compensation or employee benefit, in the form of a salary adjustment, bonus, compensatory time off, continued employment, or otherwise. 
(D)  Rewarded political activity: A Village employee shall not be awarded any additional compensation or employee benefit, in the form of a salary adjustment, bonus, compensatory time off, continued employment, or otherwise, in consideration for the employee's participation in any political activity, which is prohibited under subsection (A), (B) or (C) of this section. 
(E)  Exceptions: Nothing in this section prohibits activities that are otherwise appropriate for a Village employee to engage in as a part of his or her official employment duties or activities that are undertaken by an employee on a voluntary basis as permitted by law. 
(Ord. 5921, 2-28-2011) 
1-12-8. - Treatment of confidential and sensitive information. 
No civil servant or former civil servant shall disclose or improperly utilize any confidential information learned during employment with the Village without prior authorization. 
Authorization for disclosure by elected civil servants and the Village Manager shall be provided by the Village President in writing. Authorization for disclosure by employees shall be provided by the Village Manager in writing. 
"Confidential information" shall mean any nonpublic information, written or otherwise, including information exempt from disclosure pursuant to the open meetings act, the freedom of information act, or information exempt from disclosure pursuant to written agreement. 
(Ord. 5921, 2-28-2011) 
1-12-9. - Use of authority/influence. 
(A)  Use of position to influence employment for others: No elected civil servant shall directly or indirectly communicate with staff seeking to influence the hiring or termination of an employee or contractor. Such discussions shall be conducted with the Village President or Village Manager, or in accordance with the requirements of the open meetings act, with members of the Village Board. 
(B)  Use of position to seek favors for self or others: No civil servant shall directly or indirectly obtain or seek to obtain preferential treatment for himself or herself or any other individual or entity. Civil servants shall follow the same rules, regulations and processes that are applicable to the general public. Village staff shall maintain a record of all written or oral communications from all elected officials and department heads in which the requester appears to be directly or indirectly seeking to obtain preferential treatment for himself or herself or any other individual or entity. The communications from department heads should always be reported when they involve requests unrelated to that individual's duties in the Village. All such requests should be reported to the Village President and to the Village Manager, who may choose to inquire from the Ethics Officer or the prosecutor whether the communication constitutes a violation of this chapter. Village staff may also transmit communications from other civil servants which they believe may violate this code. 
(C)  Use of position to misrepresent official policy: No civil servant shall utilize his or her role to intentionally misrepresent the policy or position of the Village of Glen Ellyn. 
(D)  Discrimination: No civil servant shall engage in discriminatory behavior based upon race, age, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, religious affiliation, marital status or any other protected status under applicable law. 
(Ord. 5921, 2-28-2011) 
1-12-10. - Statement of economic interest. 
In accordance with state statutes, the Village Clerk annually prepares a list of civil servants who are required to file a statement of economic interest. All civil servants subject to the law are required to complete and file the statement in accordance with the deadlines established by the DuPage County clerk. 
(Ord. 5921, 2-28-2011) 
1-12-11. - Vendors. 
To the extent that vendors such as the supplier of goods or services to the Village perform tasks as representatives or agents of the Village, they shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter, as if they were civil servants. Their exposure as persons whose actions would subject them to violations of this chapter shall be limited to the actual times when they supply goods, or perform services for the Village and interact with persons or entities who are seeking or resisting municipal actions. 
(Ord. 5921, 2-28-2011) 
1-12-12. - General penalty. 
Any civil servant, excluding appointed volunteers, convicted of a violation of any section contained within this chapter shall be fined a sum of not more than $750.00 for each violation. A violation committed shall be considered a separate offense each day. In addition, violations of the provisions of this chapter may be utilized to take disciplinary action up to and including discharge for civil servants who are employees, serve in appointed offices, or are appointed volunteers. Elected officials, who violate any provisions of this chapter, may, upon conviction, be fined as provided for in this section, and such violations may be utilized by the corporate authorities to determine whether that person's actions should be censured. 
(Ord. 5921, 2-28-2011) 
Chapter 13 - ADMINISTRATIVE ORDINANCE HEARING DEPARTMENT 
ARTICLE A. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

1-13A-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for a fair and efficient system of enforcement of Village ordinances as may be allowed by law and directed by ordinance, through the administrative adjudication of violations of such Village ordinances and by establishing a schedule of fines and penalties, and authority and procedures for collection of unpaid fines and penalties. 
(Ord. 6456, 12-12-2016) 
1-13A-2. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the words described below shall have the meanings ascribed to them herein unless the context in which such terms are used requires otherwise: 
CODE: Any Municipal ordinance, law, rule, regulation or code set forth in titles 3 through 11, inclusive, of this Code except: a) such ordinances for which the potential penalty described therein includes a period of incarceration, and b) any offense under the Illinois Vehicle Code or a similar offense that is a traffic regulation governing the movement of vehicles and except for any reportable offense under section 6-204 of the Illinois Vehicle Code. 
CODE ADMINISTRATOR: Shall either be an employee of the Village of Glen Ellyn appointed by the Village Manager, or an independent contractor or agency contracted by the Village to perform such duties as enumerated herein. The Code Administrator is hereby authorized, empowered and directed to operate and manage the system of administrative adjudication of all Code violations as may be permitted by law. 
HEARING OFFICER: A person appointed by the Village President to preside over administrative hearings, as set forth in this chapter. 
INSPECTOR: A Village employee whose duties include the inspection or examination of buildings, structures and/or properties within the Village to determine if violations of any Municipal ordinance, law, rule, regulation or code set forth in titles 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 10 and/or 11 of this Code exist. 
OWNER: 
(A)  For the purpose of a violation relating to real property, the person to whom the County Collector sent the last ascertainable tax bill. 
(B)  For the purpose of a violation relating to motor vehicles, the person to whom the motor vehicle is registered, as provided by the records of the Secretary of State of Illinois. Any person so described herein may present evidence to overcome the presumption that such person is the owner of the property and/or motor vehicle for which the person received a notice of violation. 
(Ord. 6456, 12-12-2016) 
1-13A-3. - Nonexclusivity. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not preclude the Village from using other methods or proceedings to enforce this Code, including, but not limited to, the institution of any action in the Circuit Court of DuPage County, Illinois, or any administrative proceeding. 
(Ord. 6456, 12-12-2016) 
1-13A-4. - Code Hearing Department; establishment; jurisdiction. 
There is hereby created within the Village of Glen Ellyn a Code Hearing Department, which is authorized to provide for and operate a "system of administrative adjudication", as more fully described herein, which shall have jurisdiction over the adjudication and enforcement of any violation of this Code. 
(Ord. 6456, 12-12-2016) 
1-13A-5. - Code Hearing Department; organization. 
The Code Hearing Department shall be comprised of a Hearing Officer, two Code Administrators, the Chief of Police, or his/her designee, and any other duly appointed person or persons deemed necessary for the efficient administration of the Code Hearing Department, with the following powers and authority: 
(A)  Hearing Officer: 
1.  All adjudicatory hearings shall be presided over by a Hearing Officer. Prior to conducting administrative adjudication hearings, the Hearing Officer shall have successfully completed a training program which includes the following: 
(a)  Instruction on the rules of procedure of the administrative adjudication hearings that they will conduct and preside over; 
(b)  Orientation to each subject area of this Code for which they may adjudicate a violation; 
(c)  Observation of administrative adjudication hearings; and 
(d)  Participation in hypothetical cases, including ruling on evidence and issuing final orders. 
2.  In addition, a Hearing Officer must be an attorney in good standing licensed to practice law in the State of Illinois for at least three years. A Hearing Officer may not be an inspector or law enforcement officer employed by the Village. 
3.  Hearing Officers are hereby authorized, empowered and directed to: 
(a)  Hear testimony and accept evidence that is relevant to the existence of an ordinance violation; 
(b)  Issue subpoenas directing witnesses to appear and give relevant testimony or tangible items at an administrative adjudication hearing, upon the request of the parties or their representatives; 
(c)  Preserve and authenticate the record of the administrative adjudication hearings, including all exhibits and evidence introduced at the hearing; 
(d)  Issue a determination, based on the evidence presented at the administrative adjudication hearing, of whether a Code violation occurred or exists. The Hearing Officer's determination shall be in writing and shall include written findings of fact and law and an order, including the fine, penalty or other action with which the defendant must comply; and 
(e)  Impose penalties consistent with the applicable Code and assess costs upon finding a party liable for the charged violation, except, however, that in no event shall the Hearing Officer have authority: 1) to impose a penalty of incarceration, or 2) to impose a fine in excess of $50,000.00. The maximum monetary fine under this subsection (A)3.(e) shall be exclusive of costs of enforcement or costs incurred by the Village to secure compliance with this Code or an order issued under this chapter and shall not be applicable to cases to enforce the collection of any tax imposed and collected by the Village. 
(B)  Police Department Code Administrator: The Police Department Code Administrator shall either be an employee of the Village of Glen Ellyn appointed by the Village Manager based on the recommendation of the Chief of Police, or an independent contractor or agency contracted by the Village to perform such duties as enumerated herein. The Police Department Code Administrator shall serve as the Traffic Compliance Administrator described in chapter 11, article II of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-208.3. The Police Department Code Administrator is hereby authorized, empowered and directed to: 
1.  Operate and manage the system of administrative adjudication of all Code violations of any Municipal ordinance, law, rule, regulation or code set forth in titles 6 and 9 of this Code as may be permitted by law; 
2.  Adopt, distribute and process all notices as may be required under this chapter or as may reasonably be required to carry out the purpose of this chapter; 
3.  Collect monies paid as fines and/or penalties assessed after a final determination of liability; 
4.  Certify copies of final determinations of all Code violations adjudicated pursuant to this chapter, and any factual reports verifying the final determinations of liability which were issued in accordance with this chapter or the laws of the State of Illinois, including 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-208.3, as from time to time amended; 
5.  Certify reports to the Secretary of State concerning initiation of suspension of driving privileges in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and those of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-306.5; 
6.  Promulgate rules and regulations reasonably necessary for the efficient operation and maintenance of the system of administrative adjudication hereby established; and 
7.  Collect unpaid fines and penalties through private collection agencies that may be retained by the Village or by requesting the Village Prosecutor to act on behalf of the Village in pursuing all post-judgment remedies available under current law. 
(C)  Community Development Department Code Administrator: The Community Development Department Code Administrator shall either be an employee of the Village of Glen Ellyn appointed by the Village Manager, or an independent contractor or agency contracted by the Village to perform such duties as enumerated herein. The Community Development Department Code Administrator is hereby authorized, empowered and directed to: 
1.  Operate and manage the system of administrative adjudication of all Code violations of any Municipal ordinance, law, rule, regulation or code set forth in titles 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 10 and 11 of this Code as may be permitted by law; 
2.  Adopt, distribute and process all notices as may be required under this chapter or as may reasonably be required to carry out the purpose of this chapter; 
3.  Collect monies paid as fines and/or penalties assessed after a final determination of liability; 
4.  Certify copies of final determinations of all Code violations adjudicated pursuant to this chapter, and any factual reports verifying the final determinations of liability which were issued in accordance with this chapter; 
5.  Promulgate rules and regulations reasonably necessary for the efficient operation and maintenance of the system of administrative adjudication hereby established; and 
6.  Collect unpaid fines and penalties through private collection agencies that may be retained by the Village or by requesting the Village Prosecutor to act on behalf of the Village in pursuing all post-judgment remedies available under current law. 
(D)  Automation: The Code Administrators are hereby further authorized, empowered and directed to operate and maintain a computer program for the system of administrative adjudication hereby established, on a day to day basis, including, but not limited to: 
1.  Inputting of violation notice information; 
2.  Establishing hearing dates and notice dates; 
3.  Recording fine and penalty assessment and payments; 
4.  Issuing payment receipts; 
5.  Issuing all notices required by this chapter and the Illinois Vehicle Code. Nothing in this section is intended to preclude the Code Administrators from including one or more notices in the same notice report; and 
6.  Keeping accurate records of appearances and nonappearances at administrative adjudication hearing, pleas entered and fines and other penalties assessed and paid. 
(E)  Police personnel: The Chief of Police shall appoint and/or designate a Police Officer to provide security for the administrative adjudication hearings, and such officers are hereby authorized and directed to: 
1.  Maintain hearing room decorum; 
2.  Execute authority as granted to Courtroom Deputies of the Circuit Court; and 
3.  Perform such other duties or acts as may be reasonably required and as directed by the Hearing Officer or the Code Administrators. 
(Ord. 6456, 12-12-2016; Ord. 6674, 2-25-2019) 
1-13A-6. - Compensation of Code Hearing Department personnel. 
Authorization for compensation for each of the above stated positions shall be made by the Village Board through the annual budget or appropriation process. Compensation shall be determined by the Village Manager within approved appropriation limitations. 
(Ord. 6456, 12-12-2016) 
1-13A-7. - Commencement of hearings. 
(A)  A proceeding before a Hearing Officer shall be instituted upon the filing with the Code Administrator of a written sworn pleading, complaint or citation by any authorized official of the Village, including Police Officers, Code Enforcement Officers, and such other employees as authorized. 
In the event a complaint causing the initiation of a hearing is filed by a tenant or occupant of a dwelling who is not also the owner thereof, no action for eviction, abatement of a nuisance, forcible entry and detainer or other similar proceeding, whether it be civil or criminal, shall be threatened or instituted against such tenant or occupant solely because such tenant or occupant files such complaint or agrees to testify or present tangible evidence at an administrative adjudication hearing. The foregoing sentence shall not apply if the owner proves by a preponderance of the evidence that such tenant or occupant is the proximate cause of the violation for which the hearing is commenced. 
(B)  Defendants shall be served with a copy of the written sworn pleading, complaint or citation along with a notice of hearing in a manner reasonably calculated to give them actual notice of the proceeding instituted against them, by one or more of the following means: 
1.  Personal service upon a party or its employees or authorized agents; 
2.  Service by certified mail, return receipt requested, at the party's last known address; 
3.  Service by first class mail, postage prepaid, at the party's last known address; or 
4.  If the party's last known address cannot be ascertained after a diligent search, by posting a copy of the sworn pleading, complaint or citation in a conspicuous place upon the property or motor vehicle where the violation is found when the party is the owner of the property or motor vehicle. 
5.  Any notice presented by first class or certified mail, or by posting, shall be deemed served upon the deposit of such notice in the U.S. mail or the posting of such notice. 
(C)  Notices of hearing shall include: 
1.  The type and nature of the ordinance violation to be adjudicated, including a citation to the appropriate section of this Code; 
2.  The date and time of the administrative adjudication hearing or, for violations described in articles B and C of this chapter, of the opportunity to request a hearing; 
3.  The fines and/or penalties which may be assessed upon a finding of liability for the cited violation; 
4.  The penalties for failure to appear at the hearing and late payment penalties, if any; and 
5.  Any witnesses or complainants who may be called to testify for the Village who are not employees or officers thereof. 
6.  For violations described in articles B and C of this chapter, warnings that: a) failure either to pay the indicated fine and any applicable penalty, or to appear at a hearing on the merits in the time and manner specified, will result in a final determination of liability for the cited violation in the amount of either the fine or penalty indicated on the notice or a default judgment equal to the maximum fine amount permitted by section 1-4-1, "General Penalty", of this title and b) upon the occurrence of a final determination of liability and the failure, the exhaustion of, or failure to exhaust, available administrative or judicial procedures for review, any unpaid fine or penalty will constitute a debt due and owing the Municipality. 
(D)  Administrative adjudication hearings shall be scheduled and docketed by the Code Administrator no less than 15 and no more than 30 days after the notice of hearing is served on the defendant. 
(Ord. 6456, 12-12-2016) 
1-13A-8. - Hearing procedures. 
(A)  Hearings: Parties shall be provided with an opportunity for a hearing before or during which they may exercise any or all of the following rights: 
1.  Be represented by counsel, although defendants shall not be entitled to have an attorney appointed to represent them; 
2.  Present and cross examine witnesses; 
3.  Request the Hearing Officer to issue subpoenas to direct the attendance and testimony of relevant witnesses or the production of relevant tangible evidence. 
(B)  Rules of evidence shall not govern: The formal and technical rules of evidence shall not apply in an administrative adjudication hearing authorized under this chapter. Evidence, including hearsay, may be admitted only if it is the type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs. 
(C)  Standard of proof: Administrative adjudication hearings are civil in nature. The Village shall bear the standard of proof to prove by a preponderance of the evidence the occurrence or existence of a violation of this Code. For violations described in articles B and C of this chapter, a sworn, written pleading, complaint or citation shall constitute prima facie evidence of the violation. 
(D)  Recording of hearings: The Code Administrator shall cause all hearings conducted under this chapter to be audio recorded. Notwithstanding whether any person elects to audio or video record any hearing conducted under this chapter, the recording preserved by the Code Administrator shall be the official record of the proceedings. 
(E)  Defenses: It shall be a defense to a Code violation charged under this chapter if the owner, his attorney, or any other agent or representative proves to the Hearing Officer's satisfaction that: 
1.  The Code violation alleged in the notice did not in fact exist at the time of the citation, pleading or complaint; 
2.  The Code violation has been caused by the current property occupants and that in spite of reasonable attempts by the owner to maintain the dwelling free of such violations, the current occupants continue to cause the violations; or 
3.  An occupant or resident of the dwelling has refused entry to the owner or his agent to all or a part of the dwelling for the purpose of correcting the Code violation(s); 
4.  The Code violation alleged in the notice occurred before the owner became the owner of the real or personal property. Notwithstanding the foregoing sentence, any existing order to correct a Code violation and/or sanctions imposed by the Village as a result of a finding of a Code violation under this chapter shall attach to the property as well as to the owner of the property, so that a finding of a Code violation against one owner cannot be avoided by conveying or transferring the property to another owner. Any subsequent transferee or owner of the property takes the same subject to the findings, decision and order of a Hearing Officer under this chapter. 
(F)  Continuances: No continuances shall be authorized by a Hearing Officer for any administrative adjudication hearing commenced under this chapter except in cases where a continuance is necessary to protect the due process rights of the defendant or owner. Lack of preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance authorized by a Hearing Officer shall not extend beyond the next scheduled hearing date. 
(G)  Judicial review: Any final decision by a Hearing Officer that a Code violation does or does not exist shall constitute a final determination for purposes of judicial review and shall be subject to review under the Illinois Administrative Review Law, 735 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-101 et seq., or as hereinafter amended. Any person filing for judicial review under the Administrative Review Law shall be subject to the assessment of costs for the preparation and certification of the record of proceedings before the Hearing Officer. Such cost shall be assessed to recompense the Village for its actual cost of producing and certifying the record of proceedings. Any failure to pay such fee shall subject the party seeking review to the provisions of 735 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-109, including dismissal of the complaint on motion of the Village. 
(Ord. 6456, 12-12-2016) 
1-13A-9. - Enforcement of judgment. 
(A)  Any fine, other sanction or costs imposed, or part of any fine, other sanction or cost imposed, remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of or the failure to exhaust judicial review procedures under the Illinois Administrative Review Law are a debt due and owing the Village of Glen Ellyn and may be collected in accordance with applicable law. 
(B)  Failure of the defendant to pay such fine or penalty after the exhaustion of or the failure to exhaust judicial review procedures under the Illinois Administrative Review Law may result in, if applicable: 1) the immobilization of the person's vehicle for failure to pay fines or penalties for five or more parking violations and 2) the suspension of the person's driver's license for failure to pay fines or penalties for ten or more parking violations. 
(C)  After expiration of the period in which judicial review under the Illinois Administrative Review Law may be sought for a final determination of an ordinance violation, unless stayed by a court of competent jurisdiction, the findings, decision and order of the Hearing Officer may be enforced in the same manner as a judgment entered by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(D)  In any case in which a defendant has failed to comply with a judgment ordering that defendant to correct an ordinance violation or imposing any fine or other sanction as a result of an ordinance violation, any expenses incurred by the Village to enforce the judgment entered against that defendant, including, but not limited to, attorney fees, court costs, and costs related to property demolition or foreclosure, after they are fixed by a court of competent jurisdiction or a Hearing Officer, shall be a debt due and owing the Village of Glen Ellyn and may be collected in accordance with applicable law. 
Prior to any expenses being fixed by the Hearing Officer pursuant to this subsection (D), the Code Administrator shall serve a notice to the defendant that states that defendant shall appear at a hearing before the Hearing Officer to determine whether the defendant has failed to comply with the judgment. The notice shall set forth the date for such hearing, which shall not be less than seven days from the date service is effective, as provided in section 1-13A-7 of this article. 
(E)  Upon being recorded in the manner required by article XII of the Illinois Code of Civil Procedure, or by the Uniform Commercial Code, a lien shall be imposed on the real estate or personal property, or both, of the defendant in the amount of any debt due and owing the Village under this chapter. The lien may be enforced in the same manner as a judgment lien pursuant to a judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(F)  The Hearing Officer may set aside any judgment entered by default and set a new hearing date, upon a petition filed by the defendant within 21 days after the issuance of the order of default, if the Hearing Officer determines that the defendant's failure to appear at the hearing was for good cause, or at any time if the defendant establishes, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the Village did not provide proper service of process. The petitioner shall appear with appropriate evidence, so that if the petition is granted, he is prepared to proceed immediately with a hearing on the merits. 
For the purpose of violations described in articles B and C of this chapter, the grounds for the petition may include: 1) the person not having been the owner or lessee of the cited vehicle on the date the violation notice was first issued; or 2) the person having already paid the fine or penalty for the parking violation in question. 
If any judgment is voluntarily dismissed pursuant to this subsection, the Hearing Officer shall have authority to enter an order extinguishing any lien which has been recorded for any debt due and owing the Village as a result of the vacated default judgment. 
(G)  In any hearing conducted under this chapter for which the Hearing Officer determines it is appropriate to assess costs, the costs shall be for not more than $35.00. 
(H)  If respondent fails to pay such debt within 21 days after service of the notice of debt, the Village may take the following actions in addition to any debt collection authorized by law: 
1.  Decline to issue, renew or provide any license, permit, zoning variance, or permission applied for or requested by respondent under this Code or under any other code or ordinance of the Village until respondent pays such fine or penalty; or 
2.  Decline to issue or renew parking permits, or any other permit required and applied for by respondent under this Code or any other code or ordinance of the Village, until respondent pays such fine or penalty. 
(Ord. 6456, 12-12-2016) 
ARTICLE B. - ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO MOTOR VEHICLE CITATIONS AND ADMINISTRATIVE TOWING/IMPOUNDMENT SERVICES 

1-13B-1. - Enforcement of motor vehicle violations; citations. 
(A)  Whenever any vehicle is parked, maintained, used or operated in violation of any provision of title 9 of this Code, the owner shall be prima facie responsible for the violation and subject to the penalty therefor. 
(B)  Whenever any vehicle is parked, maintained, used or operated in violation of any provision of title 9 of this Code, any police officer, community service officer, other designated member of the Police Department or other person designated by the Code Administrator observing such violation may issue a violation notice, and serve the notice on the owner of the vehicle by handing it to the operator of the vehicle, if he is present, or by affixing it to the vehicle in a conspicuous place. 
(C)  The violation notice shall contain the identification number of the issuing officer, the particular regulation allegedly violated, the make and State registration number of the cited vehicle, and the place, date, time and nature of the alleged violation. In addition, all notices shall state the applicable fine as provided herein, the monetary penalty which shall be automatically assessed for late payment, that vehicle immobilization and driver's license suspension may be imposed if fines and penalties are not paid in full, that payment of the indicated fine, and of any applicable penalty for late payment, shall operate as a final disposition of the violation, and information as to the availability of an administrative adjudication hearing in which the violation may be contested on its merits and the manner in which such hearing may be had. The officer issuing the violation notice shall certify the correctness of the specified information by signing his name as provided in section 11-208.3 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-208.3, as amended. 
(D)  The officer issuing the violation shall deliver the original or a copy of the violation notice to the Code Administrator so that the Code Administrator may send the notice of hearing described in subsection 1-13A-7(C) of this chapter; provided the Code Administrator shall not serve a notice of hearing related to a violation described in this article less than seven days after the violation notice was served in the manner described in subsection (B) of this section. 
(E)  It shall be unlawful for any person, other than the owner of the vehicle or his designee, to remove from a vehicle a violation notice affixed pursuant to this chapter. 
(F)  The Code Administrator shall distribute violation notices to the Police Department community service officers, police officers and other persons authorized to issue parking violation notices for issuance pursuant to these provisions. The Chief of Police shall be responsible for the distribution of the notice forms within the Police Department, shall maintain a record of each set of notices issued to individual members of the Department and shall retain a receipt for every set so issued. 
(G)  The Code Administrator shall compile and maintain complete and accurate records relating to all violation notices issued and the dispositions thereof, whether by payment of the fine or by final determination of the Hearing Officer. In addition, the Code Administrator shall make certified reports to the Secretary of State pursuant to section 6-306.5 of the Illinois Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. 6456, 12-12-2016) 
1-13B-2. - Determination of liability; motor vehicle citations. 
(A)  Notice of violation: Any person on whom a violation notice has been served in the manner described in section 1-13B-1 of this article shall within seven days from the date of the notice of hearing described in subsection 1-13A-7(C) of this chapter: 1) pay the indicated fine; or 2) request an administrative adjudication hearing as provided by this chapter to contest the charged violation. A response by mail shall be deemed timely if postmarked within seven days of the issuance of the notice of violation. 
(B)  Administrative hearing: If the respondent requests an administrative hearing to contest the cited violation, the Code Administrator shall notify the owner in writing of the location and time available for a hearing in accordance with provisions of subsection 1-13A-7(C) of this chapter. 
(C)  Payment of fine: Where a respondent who has requested an administrative hearing either fails to pay the indicated fine prior to the hearing or fails to appear at a hearing a final determination of liability shall be entered in the amount of the fine indicated on the notice of violation. Failure to pay the fine within 21 days of issuance of a Hearing Officer's final determination of liability will result in the imposition of a late payment penalty pursuant to subsection (D) of this section. 
(D)  Late payment penalty: Failure by any respondent to pay or mail payment of the fine for a parking violation within 21 days of the issuance of the final determination of liability will automatically subject the respondent to a penalty for late payment. The penalty for late payment shall be $50.00. Failure to pay or mail payment of a fine within each subsequent 21-day period after the issuance of the determination of liability will automatically subject the respondent to an additional penalty of $30.00. 
(E)  Defenses: In addition to the defenses described in subsection 1-13A-8(E) of this chapter, a person charged with a violation of title 9 of this Code may contest the charge on one or more of the following grounds with appropriate evidence to support: 
1.  That the respondent was not the owner or lessee of the cited vehicle at the time of the violation; 
2.  That the cited vehicle or its State registration plates were stolen at the time the violation occurred; 
3.  That the relevant signs prohibiting or restricting parking were missing; 
4.  That the relevant parking meter was inoperable or malfunctioned through no fault of the respondent; 
5.  That the facts alleged in the violation notice are inconsistent or do not support a finding that the specified regulation was violated. 
(Ord. 6456, 12-12-2016) 
1-13B-3. - Lessor of vehicle; liability 
In accordance with section 11-1306 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, no person who is the lessor of a vehicle pursuant to a written lease agreement shall be liable for a violation of any standing or parking regulation involving such vehicle during the period of the lease if upon receipt of a notice of violation he shall, within 60 days thereafter, provide to the Code Administrator the name and address of the lessee. Upon receipt of a lessor's notification of the name and address of his lessee, pursuant to section 11-1305 or 11-1306 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, the Code Administrator shall cause a notice of violation to be sent to the lessee as provided herein. If the lessor fails to provide the Code Administrator with the name and address of the lessee within 60 days of receiving notice, the lessor shall, upon a determination of liability by the Hearing Officer, be liable for the full amount of the violation and late penalties, and a final determination will be issued. 
(Ord. 6456, 12-12-2016) 
1-13B-4. - Notice of final determination of liability. 
A notice of final determination of liability shall be sent to the owner and lessee, if applicable, following a final determination of liability and the conclusion of judicial review procedures taken under this chapter. The notice shall state that the unpaid fine or penalty is a debt due and owing the Municipality. The notice shall contain warnings that failure to pay any fine or penalty due and owing the Village within the time specified may result in the Village filing of a petition in the Circuit Court of DuPage County to have the unpaid fine or penalty rendered a judgment as provided by this chapter, or may result in the immobilization and towing of the owner's vehicle for failure to pay fines and penalties for five or more violations or the suspension of the owner's driver's license for failure to pay fines or penalties for ten or more violations. 
(Ord. 6456, 12-12-2016) 
1-13B-5. - Immobilization and towing program. 
(A)  The Code Administrator is hereby authorized to direct and supervise a program of vehicle immobilization and towing for the purpose of enforcing the parking, seizure and impoundment regulations set forth in title 9 of this Code. The terms and conditions of this chapter are supplemental and complementary to, and not mutually exclusive with, the provisions of title 9, chapter 6 of this Code. 
If a vehicle is parked or left in violation of any provision of title 9 of this Code for which such vehicle is subject to an immediate tow, or in any place where it constitutes an obstruction or hazard, or where it impedes Village workers during such operations as snow removal, the Code Administrator or the Police Chief, or their respective designees, may cause the eligible vehicle to be towed to a vehicle pound or relocated to a legal parking place and there restrained. 
The program of vehicle immobilization shall provide for immobilizing any eligible vehicle, as defined in subsection (B) of this section, by placement of a restraint in such a manner as to prevent its operation. 
(B)  When the registered owner of a vehicle has accumulated five or more final determinations of liability for which the fines and penalties, if applicable, have not been paid in full, the Code Administrator shall cause a notice of impending vehicle immobilization to be sent as prescribed in this chapter. 
The notice of impending vehicle immobilization shall state the name and address of the registered owner, the State registration number of the vehicle or vehicles registered to such owner, and the serial numbers of violation notices which have resulted in final determination of liability for which the fines or penalties remain unpaid. Failure to request a hearing or pay the fines and penalties owed within 21 days from the date of the notice will result in the inclusion of the State registration number of the vehicle or vehicles of such owner on an immobilization list. A person may challenge the validity of the notice of impending vehicle immobilization by requesting a hearing and appearing in person to submit evidence which would conclusively disprove liability. Placement of the State registration number of the vehicle or vehicles of such owner on an immobilization list shall be tolled pending the hearing only if one is timely requested. Upon a request for a hearing, the Code Administrator shall schedule the hearing for the next regular hearing date. Documentary evidence which would conclusively disprove liability shall be based on the following grounds: 
1.  That all fines and penalties for the parking violations cited in the notice have been paid in full; or 
2.  That the registered owner has not accumulated five or more final determinations of liability which were unpaid at the time the notice of impending vehicle immobilization was issued. 
(C)  Upon immobilization of an eligible vehicle, a notice shall be affixed to the vehicle in a conspicuous place. Such notice shall warn that the vehicle is immobilized and that any attempt to move the vehicle may result in its damage. The notice shall also state that the unauthorized removal of or damage to the immobilizing restraint is a violation of sections 16-1 and 21-1 of the Illinois Criminal Code. The notice shall also provide information specifying how release of the immobilizing restraint may be had, and how the registered owner may obtain an immobilization hearing. If the restraint has not been released within 24 hours of its placement, the restraint shall be released and the vehicle towed and impounded. 
(D)  The Code Administrator shall, within five business days after a vehicle is seized and impounded pursuant to either subsection (C) of this section, or title 9, chapter 6 of this Code, send a written notice by first class mail to all owners of the vehicle listed in the State records as the owner. Copies of the notice shall be sent to any lienholder or lessee or lessor, if determinable using reasonable efforts. 
1.  The notice shall: a) state that the motor vehicle was seized and impounded; b) contain all pertinent facts relating to the date, time and reason for the seizure and impoundment; c) specify the procedures by which possession of the vehicle may be regained; d) state that the failure to regain possession of the vehicle shall result in the vehicle being disposed of pursuant to law; and e) explain the right to request a hearing. In the event a hearing has previously been requested, then the notice shall provide the date and time of the scheduled hearing and the identity of the person requesting the hearing. 
2.  The notice shall not be mailed if: a) the administrative and public safety fee described in section 9-6-4 of this Code has been paid, and possession of the vehicle has been regained by an owner, within five (5) business days after the vehicle is seized and impounded; or b) possession of the vehicle may not be regained due to the vehicle being retained by the Village of Glen Ellyn Police Department pursuant to the provisions of section 9-6-8 of this Code. 
(E)  The owner of an immobilized vehicle or other authorized person may secure the release of the vehicle by paying the immobilization, towing and storage fees provided in subsection (G) of this section, and all fines and penalties remaining due on each final determination of liability issued to such person. The owner of a vehicle seized under title 9, chapter 6 of this Code may secure the release of the vehicle in the manner described therein. 
(F)  The owner of any vehicle which has been immobilized, seized and/or towed, either under this chapter or title 9, chapter 6 of this Code, shall have the right to a prompt post-deprivation hearing to determine whether the immobilization, seizure and/or towing and impoundment was erroneous, if the owner files a written request for a hearing with the Code Administrator within ten days after the notice sent pursuant to subsection (D) of this section. Any hearing sought under this paragraph shall take place no longer than 15 days after the demand therefor and shall take priority over all other hearings provided for under this chapter. Administrative hearing procedures shall be as follows: 
1.  All parties shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present testimony and evidence at the hearing. Continuances of the hearing date must be made in person before the Hearing Officer and may be granted upon a showing of good cause. The formal rules of evidence will not apply at the hearing, and hearsay evidence shall be admissible in the same manner described in subsection 1-13A-8(B) of this chapter. 
2.  The Village shall not be required to produce any Police Officer or other witness at the hearing. The Village may file any and all documents, records or other tangible items prepared or maintained in the normal course of business that it desires the Hearing Officer to consider at the hearing. The filing of the documents, records or items shall be accompanied by a certification from a Village of Glen Ellyn Police Officer, certifying that the records, documents or items were prepared or maintained in the normal course of business. Any records, documents or items filed and certified, shall be admitted as evidence at the hearing, and the facts and contents contained therein shall be presumed true and correct without the need for any additional foundation. 
3.  If an owner appears at the hearing and the Hearing Officer determines that the seizure and impoundment was proper, the case will be disposed of at that time. If the owner does not appear at the hearing, then the Hearing Officer, upon a review of the file, shall make a determination on the question of whether the seizure and impoundment was proper. 
4.  If the Hearing Officer determines by a preponderance of evidence that the seizure and impoundment was proper, the Hearing Officer shall enter a final order finding the owner of the vehicle liable to the Village for the applicable fees provided for under subsection (G) of this section. In the event a bond was posted, it will be retained by the Village as final payment of the administrative and public safety fee. If the Hearing Officer finds that the seizure and impoundment was not proper, the bond will be returned to the owner and the Police Department shall issue a release for the vehicle, if still impounded. A finding that the seizure and impoundment was not proper shall not have any bearing on whether the owner is obligated to pay the towing and storage fees and costs, and the owner must pay all fees and costs owed to the private towing company. 
5.  The decision by the Hearing Officer on the issue of whether the seizure and impoundment was proper, shall constitute a final determination for purposes of judicial review and shall be subject to review pursuant to the Illinois Administrative Review Act, 735 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-101 et seq., as now or hereafter amended. A party must exhaust its administrative remedies prior to seeking judicial review. In the event that the Administrative Review Act shall not apply, the decision of the Hearing Officer may be appealed to the Circuit Court under any available method. 
(G)  The fee for immobilization shall be $50.00. The fee for seizure and towing arising from the immobilization, as described in this section, shall be $300.00. The administrative and public safety fee for any seizure and towing arising under title 9, chapter 6 of this Code shall be as provided for therein. No Village fees shall be assessed for any immobilization, seizure or tow which has been determined to be erroneous. All immobilization and towing fees are separate and distinct from, and in addition to, any fine assessed upon being found liable or culpable for the underlying offense and fees or costs owed by the owner to a private towing company for the towing and storage of the vehicle. 
(H)  It shall be unlawful to relocate or tow any vehicle restrained by an immobilization device without the approval of the Code Administrator or his designee. The registered owner of the immobilized vehicle and any person who relocates an immobilized vehicle in violation of this subsection shall each be subject to a penalty of $750.00 for such violation. 
(Ord. 6456, 12-12-2016) 
1-13B-6. - Driver's license suspension. 
(A)  When a person has failed to pay any fine or penalty due and owing on final determinations of liability for ten or more parking violations, the Code Administrator shall cause a notice of impending driver's license suspension to be sent in the form as required by the Secretary of State. The notice shall state that failure to pay the amount owing within 45 days of the date of the notice will result in the Village's notifying the Secretary of State that the person is eligible for initiation of suspension proceedings pursuant to section 6-306.5 of the Illinois Vehicle Code. 
(B)  If a person sent a notice pursuant to subsection (A) of this section fails to pay the amount owing within the time stated on the notice, the Code Administrator may file with the Secretary of State, a certified report, in accordance with section 6-306.5(c) of the Illinois Vehicle Code, that the person is eligible for initiation of suspension proceedings. The Code Administrator shall assess a $20.00 filing fee against the person named in the certified report to reimburse the Village for the expense of preparing and filing the certified report with the Secretary of State. 
(C)  A person named in a certified report filed pursuant to subsection (B) of this section may, within 21 days of the date of the notice sent by the Secretary of State pursuant to section 6-306.5(b) of the Illinois Vehicle Code, file with the Code Administrator a written statement and supporting documentation to challenge the report; provided, however, the grounds for such challenge shall be limited to: 1) the person not having been the owner or lessee of the vehicle or vehicles receiving ten or more parking violations notices on the date or dates such notices were issued or 2) the person having already paid the fine and penalty for the ten or more violations indicated on the report. The Code Administrator shall send notice of the decision on the challenge of the report after receipt thereof. 
(D)  If a person named in a certified report has paid the previously reported fine or penalty or if the report is determined by the Code Administrator to be in error, the Code Administrator shall notify the Secretary of State in accordance with section 6-306.5(d) of the Illinois Vehicle Code. A certified copy of such notification shall be given, upon request and at no charge, to the person named therein. 
(E)  An administrative hearing to contest an impending suspension or suspension may be had upon filing a written request with the Secretary of State. The filing fee for this hearing shall be $20.00, to be paid at the time the request is made. The Village shall reimburse the Secretary of State for all reasonable costs incurred by the Secretary as a result of filing a certified report, including, but not limited to, the costs of providing the required notice and the costs incurred by the Secretary in any hearing conducted with respect to the report and any appeal from such a hearing. 
(Ord. 6456, 12-12-2016) 
ARTICLE C. - ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO REAL PROPERTY CITATIONS 

1-13C-1. - Enforcement of real property violations; citations. 
(A)  Whenever any building, structure or property is found to be in violation of any provision of titles 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 10 and/or 11 of this Code, the owner shall be prima facie responsible for the violation and subject to the penalty therefor. 
(B)  Whenever any building, structure or property is found to be in violation of any provision of titles 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 10 and/or 11 of this Code, any inspector or other person designated by the Code Administrator observing such violation may issue a notice of violation (ordinance complaint and citation), and serve the notice on the owner of the building, structure or property in accordance with subsection 1-13A-7(B) of this chapter. 
(C)  The inspector issuing the violation shall deliver the original or a copy of the violation notice to the Code Administrator so that the Code Administrator may send the notice of hearing described in subsection 1-13A-7(C) of this chapter; provided the Code Administrator shall not serve a notice of hearing related to a violation described in this article less than seven days after the violation notice was served in the manner described in subsection (B) of this section. 
(D)  It shall be unlawful for any person, other than the owner of the building, structure or property or his designee, to remove from a building, structure or property a violation notice affixed pursuant to this chapter. 
(E)  The Code Administrator shall distribute sets of violation notice forms to the Community Development Department inspectors for issuance pursuant to these provisions. The Building and Zoning Official shall be responsible for the distribution of the notice forms within the Community Development Department, shall maintain a record of each set of notices issued to individual members of the Department and shall retain a receipt for every set so issued. 
(F)  The Code Administrator shall compile and maintain complete and accurate records relating to all violation notices issued and the dispositions thereof, whether by payment of the fine or by final determination of the Hearing Officer. 
(G)  Abatement of the violation, payment of the indicated fine, and of any applicable penalty for late payment, shall operate as a final disposition of the violation. 
(Ord. 6456, 12-12-2016; Ord. 6674, 2-25-2019) 
1-13C-2. - Determination of liability; real property citations. 
(A)  Notice of violation: Any person on whom a violation notice has been served in the manner described in subsection 1-13A-7(B) of this chapter shall attend the hearing held on the date and time indicated on the notice of violation and file a notice of appearance for respondent. Failure to appear at the hearing and file such notice shall result in the issuance of a default judgment in the amount of $500.00 against the respondent. 
(B)  Representation at hearings: The case for the respondent may be presented by the respondent or by an attorney. An attorney appearing at an adjudicatory hearing on behalf of a respondent shall present the Hearing Officer with a signed appearance form stating, on oath or affirmation, that he or she has been authorized by the respondent to represent the respondent at the hearing. 
(C)  Administrative hearing: 
1.  If the respondent requests an advanced administrative hearing by filing a motion to advance, upon approval of the request by the Code Administrator, the Code Administrator shall notify the owner in writing of the location and time available for a hearing in accordance with provisions of subsection 1-13A-7(C) of this chapter. 
2.  At any time prior to the start of the administrative hearing, the issuing inspector may request that a motion to voluntarily dismiss the case be entered based on justifiable cause. Upon review of the request, the Hearing Officer may grant the request, at which time the case is closed, or deny the request and the case is then heard. 
3.  On the day of and prior to the start of the administrative hearing, the respondent shall file an appearance for respondent form with the Hearing Officer. 
4.  All administrative hearings shall be conducted on the date set for hearing. A case may be continued only in accordance with section 1-13A-8 of this chapter. 
5.  All parties shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present testimony and evidence at the hearing. Requests for a continuance of the hearing date must be made in person before the Hearing Officer and may be granted upon a showing of good cause. The formal rules of evidence will not apply at the hearing, and hearsay evidence shall be admissible in the same manner described in subsection 1-13A-8(B) of this chapter. 
6.  The Village shall not be required to produce any inspector or other witness at the hearing. The Village may file any and all documents, records or other tangible items prepared or maintained in the normal course of business that it desires the Hearing Officer to consider at the hearing. The filing of the documents, records or items shall be accompanied by a certification from a Village of Glen Ellyn Inspector, certifying that the records, documents or items were prepared or maintained in the normal course of business. Any records, documents or items filed and certified, shall be admitted as evidence at the hearing, and the facts and contents contained therein shall be presumed true and correct without the need for any additional foundation. 
7.  Upon determining that the issuance of the citation was proper, and by a preponderance of evidence that a respondent has violated one or more charged Code provisions, the Hearing Officer shall impose fines and penalties, and such other actions that the Hearing Officer determines to be necessary and appropriate for the correction of the violation of the specific Code provision(s) found to have been violated. However, in no event shall the Hearing Officer have authority to: a) impose a penalty of incarceration, or b) impose a fine in excess of $50,000.00 exclusive of costs of enforcement or costs imposed to secure compliance with this Code, except, however, that the maximum fine amount of $50,000.00 does not apply to cases brought to enforce the collection of any tax imposed and collected by the Village. 
8.  Each day a Code provision is found to have been violated by the respondent shall constitute a separate offense, and each separate offense subjects the respondent to the fine and penalty provided by the governing penalty provision. 
9.  Upon the Hearing Officer's closing of the hearing, the Hearing Officer shall provide the respondent with a Final Decision and Order which shall indicate the amount of any imposed fine and order for abatement of the violation, which determination shall constitute a final determination for purposes of judicial review. The Hearing Officer also may dismiss the case with or without prejudice on a properly made motion by the Village. 
10.  Final determinations of a Hearing Officer are subject to review under the Illinois Administrative Review Law. 
(D)  Payment of fine: Failure to pay any fine within 21 days of issuance of a Hearing Officer's final determination of liability will result in the imposition of a late payment penalty pursuant to subsection (E) of this section. 
(E)  Late payment penalty: Failure by any respondent to pay or mail payment of any fine for a property violation within 21 days of the issuance of the final determination of liability will automatically subject the respondent to a penalty for late payment. The penalty for late payment shall be $50.00. Failure to pay or mail payment of a fine within each subsequent 21-day period after the issuance of the final determination of liability will automatically subject the respondent to an additional penalty of $30.00. 
(F)  Expenses: In any case in which a defendant has failed to comply with a judgment ordering that defendant to correct an ordinance violation or imposing any fine or other sanction as a result of an ordinance violation, any expenses incurred by the Village to enforce the judgment entered against that defendant, including, but not limited to, attorney fees, court costs, and costs related to property demolition or foreclosure, after they are fixed by a court of competent jurisdiction or a Hearing Officer, shall be a debt due and owing the Village of Glen Ellyn and may be collected in accordance with applicable law. 
Prior to any expenses being fixed by the Hearing Officer pursuant to this subsection (F), the Code Administrator shall serve a notice to the defendant that states that defendant shall appear at a hearing before the Hearing Officer to determine whether the defendant has failed to comply with the judgment. The notice shall set forth the date for such hearing, which shall not be less than seven days from the date service is effective, as provided in section 1-13A-7 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 6456, 12-12-2016) 
1-13C-3. - Default. 
(A)  If at the time set for hearing, the respondent, or his or her attorney, fails to appear, the Hearing Officer may enter a default judgment of liability against the respondent and impose fines, assess costs, and make any other lawful order. A copy of the default judgment shall be served in the same manner as the service of a notice of violation permitted by this article and applicable to the violation. A copy of the default judgment, which is a final determination, shall be mailed to the respondent along with a notice apprising the respondent of the procedure for setting aside the default judgment and also shall apprise the respondent of the availability of an appeal of the default judgment to the Circuit Court of DuPage County. The default judgment and notice of judgment shall be promptly served on the respondent as provided by subsection 1-13A-7(B) of this chapter. 
(B)  A respondent against whom a default judgment has been entered may file a motion with the Office of Adjudication to vacate the default judgment. 
(Ord. 6456, 12-12-2016) 
1-13C-4. - Notice of final determination of liability. 
A notice of final determination of liability shall be sent to the owner following the conclusion of judicial review procedures taken under this chapter. The notice shall state that the unpaid fine or penalty is a debt due and owing the Municipality. The notice shall contain warnings that failure to pay any fine or penalty due and owing the Village within the time specified may result in the Village filing of a petition in the Circuit Court of DuPage County to have the unpaid fine or penalty rendered a judgment as provided by this chapter, and may result in the cessation of certain Village services in accordance with provisions of subsection 1-13A-9(H) of this chapter. 
(Ord. 6456, 12-12-2016) 
1-13C-5. - Violations of orders; contempt. 
Any person, having received notice and an opportunity for a hearing as provided in this chapter, who knowingly fails to comply with an order issued by an Hearing Officer under this chapter, including the issuance of a subpoena, shall, if the order is not stayed by a court of competent jurisdiction prior to its effective date, be guilty of contempt. Contempt shall be enforceable only by the DuPage County judicial system and shall be punishable by applicable law. Each day that the violation continues shall be considered a separate and distinct offense. In a prosecution under this section, it shall not be a defense that a person came into compliance with an order, sought judicial review of it, or made efforts to comply with an order, subsequent to its effective date. 
(Ord. 6456, 12-12-2016) 
1-13C-6. - Setting aside a final determination of liability. 
(A)  Within 14 days after the issuance of notice of final determination of liability, the respondent may file a petition to set aside a determination of liability. The petition must be in writing and filed with the Code Administrator in person or by mail. A petition will be deemed timely filed if it is postmarked or received by the Code Administrator within 14 days after the date of the notice of final determination of liability. 
(B)  Upon receipt of a timely filed petition to set aside a determination of liability, the Code Administrator will assign a hearing date and cause a notice of hearing to be sent to the petitioner in accordance with subsection 1-13C-1(B) of this article. The notice shall inform the petitioner of the date, time and place of the hearing on the petition to set aside a determination of liability. 
(Ord. 6456, 12-12-2016) 
Chapter 14 - MUNICIPAL PROPERTY FOR REDEVELOPMENT 

1-14-1. - Property transfer. 
In addition to any powers granted to the Village by state law, to transfer ownership or other interest in real estate, the Village may make such transfers in whole or in part, in accordance with an economic development plan, to a private party or to a unit of government. The economic development plan shall constitute a contract between the Village and the party or parties to whom the full or partial transfer is to be made. The Village may, at such times as it deems expedient, in conjunction with a development or redevelopment proposal or plan, enter into a contract with any public or private agency, entity, corporation, or person pertaining to the lease or sale of municipal property. The Village may, at such times as it deems expedient, also transfer and sell the fee simple title, or such lesser estate, as the Village may own or possess, all or any part of the municipal real property within the area of a development or redevelopment project to any public or private agency, entity, corporation, or person pursuant to such terms and provisions as the Village deems appropriate and in the best interests of its citizens, after a duly noticed public hearing, upon the vote of three-fourths of the corporate authorities pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-76-1. Specifically, the Village will not be required to advertise the proposed sale of real estate and will not be required to solicit bids for the sale of real estate. 
(Ord. 6302, 2-23-2015) 
1-14-2. - Development plan. 
The transfer of ownership or other interest in real estate owned by the VILLAGE, pursuant to an economic development plan, shall be authorized by an ordinance. Either the ordinance or the development plan or both shall contain the compensation which the Village is to receive in return for the transfer. In determining whether to make a transfer pursuant to an economic development plan, the Village shall consider whether the compensation received for the real estate whether money or other compensation, along with other economic benefits which the Village will receive relating to jobs, anticipated taxes, area improvements or other benefits, justify the transfer of the real estate. The ordinance or the development plan shall contain a finding or findings to support the transfer. 
(Ord. 6302, 2-23-2015) 
TITLE 2 - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 
Chapter 1 - BOARD OF FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSIONERS 

2-1-1. - Appointment; terms. 
A Board of Fire and Police Commissioners, consisting of three members, shall be appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees. All Commissioners shall reside, own property, or work in the Village. The Village President may choose Commissioners with special knowledge or special interest in the Village of Glen Ellyn who are not currently residing, property owners, or working within the Village. Each member shall serve for a term of three years. All terms shall expire on May 31. 
(Ord. 5919, 2-14-2011; amd. Ord. 6041, 6-25-2012) 
2-1-2. - Powers. 
Except as provided for below, the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall have the powers and authority granted under section 5/10-2.1 of the Illinois municipal code, except that it shall not have the power to appoint the Police Chief and the Chief of the Fire Department, which appointments shall be made by the Village Manager, subject to the approval of the Village Board. The Police Chief may appoint up to two deputy chiefs of police, subject to the approval of the Village Manager. Charges brought against police officers shall only be initiated by the Police Chief or the Village President. In addition to the powers granted by statute to suspend or discharge a police officer, the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall also have the power to demote a police officer to the next lowest rank. 
(Ord. 4667, 12-14-1998; amd. Ord. 5751, 4-27-2009) 
2-1-3. - Bond. 
Each member of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall file an oath and a fidelity bond in the sum of $1,000.00 with such sureties as the President and Board of Trustees shall approve conditioned for the faithful performances of the duties of their office and deliver the same to the Village. 
(Ord. 2319, 2-13-1978) 
2-1-4. - Reemployment of police officers. 
The Village may consider the reemployment of a police officer who has resigned from the Police Department after at least completing a probationary period if such request is made within a period of three years after the date of such resignation. Application shall be made to the Police Chief, who shall notify the applicant within 14 days thereafter whether the application will be considered. The Village may consider an applicant who has left the police service in good standing and without a settlement agreement to resolve past disagreements. The Police Chief may also consider the needs of the department for the specific skills and experience possessed by the resigned officer and whether reinstatement of the officer would serve the employment needs of the Village. 
The Police Chief shall make a recommendation to the Village Manager. If the Police Chief and the Village Manager concur that the application shall be considered, they shall notify the applicant who shall, if requested, appear for an interview before the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners. Based upon a positive recommendation from both the Police Chief and the Village Manager, the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners, by an affirmative vote of all of the Commissioners then in office, may approve the reinstatement of the applicant. If the matter reaches the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners, the applicant shall receive written notice of the decision of the board, including such terms and conditions as the board may impose upon reinstatement. An applicant shall not be reinstated at a pay amount higher than the amount in effect at the time of the resignation. An applicant shall not be returned at a rank higher than the rank at the time of the resignation, and the return of the applicant may be subject to a probationary period not in excess of one year. There shall not be any reduction in force to permit the applicant to return. 
(Ord. 5862, 5-10-2010) 
2-1-5. - Collaboration of staff and board. 
Village Administrative Staff including Human Resources professionals shall be required to collaborate with members of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners and assist and participate in the candidate recruitment and review process without exercising influence on the decisions, duties and/or responsibilities of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners. 
(Ord. 6652, 12-10-2018) 
Chapter 2 - ELECTRICAL COMMISSION 
(Repealed by Ordinance 5586, July 23, 2007) 
Chapter 3 - LIBRARY BOARD 

2-3-1. - Election; term. 
There shall be elected a Library Board of Trustees consisting of seven members, as provided by statute authorizing cities, villages, and incorporated towns and townships to establish and maintain free public libraries and reading rooms. The Trustees shall serve terms of four years and until their successors are elected and qualified. A regular term shall commence and a newly elected Trustee who has otherwise qualified shall be inaugurated and begin the duties of the office during the regular meeting of the Village Board of Trustees on the second Monday in May, following the proclamation of the results of the regular Municipal election at which the Trustee was elected. The inauguration shall be scheduled on the agenda under "other business" as that term is used in section 1-6-7 of this Code. A Trustee who has not qualified at that time or a Trustee chosen to fill a vacancy shall take office upon qualification. 
(Ord. 5751, 4-27-2009) 
2-3-2. - Powers and duties. 
The Library Board of Trustees shall have such powers and duties as are given to them by statute. 
(Ord. 3829, 4-22-1991) 
2-3-3. - Special tax. 
A special library tax shall be collected and levied each year, as is provided by statute. 
(1965 Code § 2.13) 
2-3-4 - Reports. 
The Library Board of Trustees shall make a report of the financial condition of the library within 30 days after the termination of each fiscal year of the Village, as is provided by statute. The Library Board of Trustees shall also make such other reports as may be requested by the Village Board of Trustees. 
(Ord. 3829, 4-22-1991) 
2-3-5. - Rules and regulations. 
The Library Board of Trustees shall have the power to make reasonable rules and regulations governing the use of the library, and may exclude therefrom any person or persons who willfully and continually violate such rules. 
(Ord. 3829, 4-22-1991) 
Chapter 4 - PLAN COMMISSION 

2-4-1. - Creation of commission. 
There is hereby created a Plan Commission which shall be advisory to the Village Board. 
(Ord. 5751, 4-27-2009) 
2-4-2. - Intent and purpose. 
It shall be the intent and purpose of the Plan Commission to provide for the continued comprehensive development of the Village according to the most recent copy of the Comprehensive Plan of the Village and to review and recommend changes in the Comprehensive Plan. 
(Ord. 5694, 8-25-2008) 
2-4-3. - Commission membership. 
(A)  Appointment: The Plan Commission shall consist of nine members who shall be appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, to serve without compensation. A member of the Board of Trustees to be appointed by the President shall serve as an ex officio, nonvoting member for a term of two years. All Commissioners shall reside, own property, or work in the Village. The Village President may choose Commissioners with special knowledge or special interest in the Village of Glen Ellyn who are not currently residing, property owners, or working within the Village. 
(B)  Terms: Each member shall serve for a term of three years. All terms shall expire on May 31. 
(C)  Vacancies: Vacancies on said Commission shall be filled for the unexpired term of the member whose place has been vacant in the same manner in which original appointments are required to be made. 
(D)  Removal: A Commission member may be removed by a majority vote of the Village President and Board of Trustees. 
(E)  Chairman: The Village President with the advice and consent of a majority of the Village Board shall designate one of the members of the Commission to be Chairman. The Chairman shall be appointed annually in June of each year. 
(F)  Secretary: The Commission shall have a Secretary who is not a member of the Commission, and shall be provided by the Village Clerk's Office. 
(Ord. 5694, 8-25-2008; Ord. 6041, 6-25-2012; amd. Ord. 6064, 8-27-2012; Ord. 6508, 6-12-2017) 
2-4-4. - Meetings. 
(A)  Regular meetings: Regular meetings of the Commission shall be held twice a month. 
(B)  Special meetings: Special meetings of the Commission may be called by the Chairman from time to time. Members of the Commission must receive notice not less than 48 hours prior to a special meeting. Notice of said special meeting must be posted in the Civic Center not less than 48 hours before said meeting. Special meetings may also be called by the written request of any two members of the Commission. Such written request shall be received by the Chairman no less than five days prior to the requested date of meeting. 
(C)  Public hearings: Public hearings are to be held, when necessary, after due and proper publication, no more than 30 nor less than 15 days prior to the date of hearing. This notice shall contain the time and place of hearing, name and address of the applicant, address and legal description of the property affected and a description of the relief sought by the applicant. 
(D)  Quorum: The presence of a majority of the Commission members then in office shall be necessary to constitute a quorum to transact any Commission business at any regular or special meeting of the Commission. 
(E)  Manner of acting: The act of a majority of the members present at a meeting at which a quorum is present shall be the act of the members. 
(F)  Rules of procedure: The Commission shall enact rules of behavior not inconsistent with ordinances or statutes that further enhance the purposes of the Commission. 
(Ord. 5694, 8-25-2008; Ord. 5751, 4-27-2009) 
2-4-5. - Duties. 
(A)  To review the Comprehensive Plan of the Village, and to prepare and recommend changes to the Comprehensive Plan to the Village Board of Trustees. 
(B)  To hold public hearings, make written findings of fact and submit the same with recommendations to the Village Board on those matters identified in title 10, chapter 10 of this Code. 
(C)  To hold public hearings, make written findings of fact and submit the same with recommendations to the Village Board of Trustees on applications for variations from regulations of the Sign Code in the manner prescribed by and subject to the standards established in Title 4, Chapter 5, of the Municipal Code of the Village of Glen Ellyn entitled "Sign Code". 
(D)  To study the provisions of the text of the Zoning Code and review the zoning map pursuant to the Zoning Code, from time to time but not less frequently than annually, so that this chapter and the map pursuant thereto may be duly filed and updated annually. 
(E)  To act on all matters referred to it by the Village Board or upon which it is required to act under the Zoning Code and Subdivision Regulations Code as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. 5694, 8-25-2008; Ord. 6519, 7-24-2017) 
2-4-6. - Reports and records. 
(A)  The Commission shall keep permanent records and minutes of its meetings, showing the vote of each member upon each topic submitted to it. 
(B)  The Commission shall prepare and submit minutes of each meeting to the Village Clerk in a timely manner. 
(C)  The Commission shall submit all recommendations to the Village Board in writing. 
(D)  A minority report may be attached to the majority recommendation. 
(Ord. 5694, 8-25-2008) 
Chapter 5 - CIVIL DEFENSE ORGANIZATION 

2-5-1. - Establishment. 
There is hereby created the local Municipal Civil Defense Organization to prevent, minimize, repair and alleviate injury or damage resulting from disaster caused by enemy attack, sabotage or other hostile action, or from natural disaster, in accordance with the "Illinois civil defense act of 1951", as amended. 
This Civil Defense Organization shall consist of the coordinator and additional members to be selected by the coordinator. 
(1975 Code) 
2-5-2. - Coordinator. 
The coordinator of the local Civil Defense Organization shall be appointed by the President, with the consent of the Board of Trustees, and shall serve until removed by the same. 
The coordinator shall have direct responsibility for the organization, administration, training and operation of the Civil Defense Organization, subject to the direction and control of the President, as provided by statute. 
In the event of the absence, resignation, death or inability to serve of the coordinator, the President, or any person designated by him, shall be and act as coordinator until a new appointment is made as provided in this chapter. 
(1975 Code) 
2-5-3. - Functions. 
The Civil Defense Organization shall perform such civil defense functions within the Village as shall be prescribed in and by the state civil defense plan and program prepared by the governor, and such orders, rules and regulations as may be promulgated by the governor, and in addition shall perform such duties outside the corporate limits as may be required pursuant to any mutual aid agreement with any other political subdivision, municipality or quasi-municipality entered into as provided by the "Illinois Civil Defense Act of 1951", as amended. 
(1975 Code) 
2-5-4. - Mobile support team. 
All or any members of the Civil Defense Organization may be designated as members of a mobile support team created by the state Director of Civil Defense as provided by law. 
The leader of such mobile support team shall be designated by the coordinator of the local Civil Defense Organization. 
Any member of a mobile support team who is a Village employee or officer while serving on call to duty by the governor, or the state Director of Civil Defense, shall receive the compensation and have the powers, duties, rights and immunities incident to such employment or office. Any such member who is not a paid officer or employee of the Village, while so serving, shall receive from the state reasonable compensation as provided by law. 
(1975 Code) 
2-5-5. - Mutual aid agreements. 
The coordinator of the Civil Defense Organization may negotiate mutual aid agreements with other Municipal corporations or political subdivisions of the state, but no such agreement shall be effective until it has been approved by the Board of Trustees and by the state Director of civil defense. 
(1975 Code) 
2-5-6. - Emergency action. 
If the governor declares that a civil defense emergency exists in the event of actual enemy attack upon the United States or the occurrence within the state of Illinois of major disaster resulting from enemy sabotage or other hostile action or from natural disaster, it shall be the duty of the local Civil Defense Organization to cooperate fully with the state office of civil defense and with the governor in the exercise of emergency powers as provided by law. 
(1975 Code) 
2-5-7. - Compensation. 
Members of the Civil Defense Organization who are paid employees or officers of the Village, if called for training by the state Director of Civil Defense, shall receive for time spent in such training the same rate of pay as is attached to the position held; members who are not such Village employees or officers shall receive for such training time such compensation as may be established by the Board of Trustees. 
(1975 Code) 
2-5-8. - Reimbursement by state. 
The state treasurer may receive and allocate to the appropriate fund any reimbursement by the state to the Village for expenses incident to training members of the Civil Defense Organization, compensation for services and expenses of members of a mobile support team while serving outside the Village in response to a call by the governor or state Director of Civil Defense, as provided by law, and any other reimbursement made by the state incident to civil defense activities, as provided by law. 
(1975 Code) 
2-5-9. - Purchases and expenditures. 
The Board of Trustees may, on recommendation of the coordinator of civil defense, authorize any purchase or contracts necessary to place the Village in a position to combat effectively any disaster resulting from the explosion of any nuclear or other bomb or missile, and to protect the public health and safety, protect property and provide emergency assistance to victims in the case of such disaster, or from natural disaster. 
In the event of enemy caused or natural disaster, the coordinator of civil defense is authorized, on behalf of the Village, to procure such services, supplies, equipment or material as may be necessary for such purposes, in view of the emergency, without regard to the statutory procedures of formalities normally prescribed by law pertaining to Village contracts or obligations, as authorized by the "Illinois Civil Defense Act of 1951", as amended, provided that, if the Board of Trustees meets at such time, he shall act subject to the directions and restrictions imposed by that body. 
(1975 Code) 
2-5-10. - Oath. 
Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the Civil Defense Organization shall, before entering upon his duties, subscribe to the following oath, which shall be filed with the coordinator: 
I _______, as a member of the Civil Defense Organization of the Village of Glen Ellyn, Illinois, do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and defend and bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of Illinois, and the territory, institutions and facilities thereof, both public and private, against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I take this obligation freely without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and faithfully discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter, and I do further swear (or affirm) that I do not advocate, nor am I nor have I been a member of any political party or organization that advocated the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this State by force or violence; and that during such time as I am affiliated with the Glen Ellyn Civil Defense Organization, I will not advocate nor become a member of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this State by force or violence. 
(1975 Code) 
2-5-11. - Office. 
The President is authorized to designate space in the Civic Center or elsewhere, as may be provided for by the Board of Trustees for the Civil Defense Organization as its office. 
(1975 Code) 
2-5-12. - Appropriation; levy of taxes. 
The Village Board may have an appropriation for civil defense purposes in the manner provided by law, and may levy in addition for civil defense purposes only, a tax not to exceed $0.05 for $100.00 of the assessed value of all taxable property in addition to all other taxes, as provided by the "Illinois civil defense act of 1951", as amended; provided, however, that the amount collectible under such levy shall be in no event $0.25 per capita. 
(1975 Code) 
Chapter 6 - CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS COMMISSION 

2-6-1. - Creation of commission. 
There is hereby created the Capital Improvements Commission, which shall be advisory to the Village Board. 
(Ord. 4962, 6-25-2001) 
2-6-2. - Intent and purpose. 
It shall be the intent and purpose of the Capital Improvements Commission to study and develop plans for the capital improvements necessary to provide Municipal services to the citizens of Glen Ellyn. 
(Ord. 4962, 6-25-2001) 
2-6-3. - Commission membership. 
(A)  Appointment: The Capital Improvements Commission shall consist of nine members who shall be appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, to serve without compensation. A member of the Board of Trustees to be appointed by the President shall serve as an ex officio nonvoting member for a term of two years. Also, the Village Manager and/or assistant to the Village Manager, the Public Works Director, and the professional engineer shall be ex officio nonvoting members of the Commission. All Commissioners shall reside, own property, or work in the Village. The Village President may choose Commissioners with special knowledge or special interest in the Village of Glen Ellyn who are not currently residing, property owners, or working within the Village. 
(B)  Terms: Each member shall serve for a term of three years. All terms shall expire on May 31. 
(C)  Vacancies: Vacancies on said Commission shall be filled for the unexpired term of the member whose place has been vacant in the same manner in which original appointments are required to be made. 
(D)  Removal: A Commission member may be removed by a majority vote of the Village President and Board of Trustees. 
(E)  Chairperson: The Village President, with the advice and consent of a majority of the Village Board, shall designate one of the members of the commission to be Chairperson. The Chairperson shall be appointed annually in June of each year. 
(F)  Secretary: The Commission shall have a secretary who is not a member of the Commission and shall be provided by the Village Manager's office. 
(Ord. 4962, 6-25-2001; Ord. 5919, 2-14-2011; Ord. 6041, 6-25-2012; amd. Ord. 6064, 8-27-2012) 
2-6-4. - Meetings. 
(A)  Regular meetings: Regular meetings shall be held monthly on a day certain as determined by a majority of the Commission members. 
(B)  Special meetings: The Chairperson may call special meetings of the Commission from time to time. Members of the Commission must receive notice not less than hours prior to a special meeting. Notice of said special meeting must be posted in the Civic Center not less than hours before said meeting. Special meetings may also be called by the written request of any two members of the Commission. The Chairperson shall receive such written request no less than five days prior to the requested date of meeting. 
(C)  Quorum: The presence of a majority of the Commission members then in office shall be necessary to constitute a quorum to transact any Commission business at any regular or special meeting of the Commission. 
(D)  Manner of acting: The act of a majority of the members present at a meeting at which a quorum is present shall be the act of the members. 
(E)  Rules of procedure: The Commission shall enact rules of behavior not inconsistent with ordinances or statutes that further enhance the purposes of the Commission. 
(Ord. 4962, 6-25-2001; Ord. 5751, 4-27-2009) 
2-6-5. - Duties. 
(A)  To identify public works services that require capital expenditures by the Village of Glen Ellyn. 
(B)  To identify Municipal capital projects and programs required to provide efficient and effective delivery of services noted in subsection (A) of this section. 
(C)  To study the Village's effectiveness and efficiency of providing those services. 
(D)  To review requests to provide additional services other than those identified in subsection (A) of this section. 
(E)  To review the effectiveness and efficiency of existing services and requests for new services and recommend modifications to the current priorities of those services to the Village Board. 
(F)  To take into account all pertinent studies and plans for Village Public Works facilities and services, including the official Comprehensive Plan, Master Stormwater Plan, 20-year Street Capital Improvement Plan, and 20-year Water and Sewer Improvement Plan. 
(G)  To gather information and consider all funding options available to implement the programs and projects identified in subsection (A) of this section. 
(H)  To receive public input, make written findings of fact and submit the same with recommendations to the Board of Trustees on applications for exceptions from design criteria and policies associated with the reconstruction of roadways in the Village of Glen Ellyn as outlined in resolution 01-12 or as modified by the Village Board. 
(I)  To review the annual or other update of the plans referenced in subsection (F) of this section. 
(Ord. 4962, 6-25-2001) 
2-6-6. - Reports and records. 
(A)  The Commission shall keep permanent records and minutes of its meetings, showing the vote of each member upon each topic submitted to it. 
(B)  The Commission shall prepare and submit minutes of each meeting to the Village Board in a timely manner. 
(C)  The Commission shall submit a written report to the Board of Trustees setting forth the recommendations of the Commission relative to any changes in the services outlined in section 2-6-5 of this chapter, including: 
1.  Recommendations for improving the effectiveness and efficiency of providing those services. 
2.  Recommendations for steps that may be taken to provide additional services the Commission believes are warranted. 
3.  Recommendations for the implementation of capital expenditures, including a timetable, an enumeration of the financial requirements involved and contemplated financial sources for such capital improvements. 
4.  Recommendations for the annual or other update of the plans referenced in subsection 2-6-5(F) of this chapter. 
5.  Recommendations in response to requests for exceptions to the design criteria and policies associated with the reconstruction of roadways in the Village of Glen Ellyn as outlined in resolution 01-12 or as modified by the Village Board. 
(D)  A minority report may be attached to the majority recommendation. 
(Ord. 4962, 6-25-2001) 
Chapter 7 - BUILDING BOARD OF APPEALS 

2-7-1. - Creation of board. 
There is hereby created the Building Board of Appeals, which shall be advisory to the Village Board. 
(Ord. 1923, 2-10-1975) 
2-7-2. - Intent and purpose. 
It shall be the intent and purpose of the Building Board of Appeals to provide a hearing body for appeals from administrative decisions of the Building and Zoning Official and to advise the Village Board regarding amendments to the Building Codes for the Village. 
(Ord. 5586, 7-23-2007) 
2-7-3. - Board membership. 
(A)  Appointment: The Building Board of Appeals shall consist of seven members who are qualified by experience and training to pass upon matters pertaining to building construction. Members shall be appointed by the Village President, with the approval of a majority of the Board of Trustees, to serve without compensation. A member of the Board of Trustees to be appointed by the President shall serve as an ex officio nonvoting member for a term of two years. 
(B)  Terms: Each member shall serve for a term of three years. All terms shall expire on May 31. 
(C)  Vacancies: Vacancies on said board shall be filled for the unexpired term of the member whose place has been vacant in the same manner in which original appointments are required to be made. 
(D)  Removal: A board member may be removed by a majority vote of the Village President and Board of Trustees. 
(E)  Chairman: The Village President with the advice and consent of a majority of the Village Board shall designate one of the members of the board to be Chairman. The Chairman shall be appointed annually in June of each year. 
(F)  Secretary: The board shall have a secretary who is not a member of the board, and shall be provided by the Administrator's Office. 
(G)  Membership: The Building Board of Appeals shall consist of seven members who are qualified by experience or training to review matters pertaining to building, mechanical, electrical, plumbing or fire protection construction. The members of the board shall have some experience or education in one or more of the following: 
Builder/developer/general contractor. 
Building inspector. 
Engineer/architect. 
Mechanical/electrical/plumbing/fire protection contractor. 
Or related field. 
Five of the members shall be appointed by the Village President. 
The remaining two members of the board shall consist of a Village staff member from the building or facilities maintenance division and the fire chief or another officer of the Fire Company. Neither of these two members can serve as a chair or vice chair of the board, and neither of them shall take any role in appeals brought under subsection 2-7-5(B) of this chapter. Their activities shall be limited to the review of amendments and recommendations under subsection 2-7-5(A) of this chapter. All board members shall reside, own property, or work in the Village. The Village President may choose board members with special knowledge or special interest in the Village of Glen Ellyn who are not currently residing, property owners, or working within the Village. 
(Ord. 1923, 2-10-1975; Ord. 2251, 9-12-1977; amd. Ord. 3282, 12-15-1986; Ord. 5751, 4-27-2009; Ord. 5919, 2-14-2011; Ord. 6041, 6-25-2012; Ord. 6064, 8-27-2012) 
2-7-4. - Meetings. 
(A)  Regular meetings: There shall be at least one meeting of the board at the call of the Chairman to review the amendments to the Building Codes for the Village. 
(B)  Special meetings: Special meetings of the board may be called by the Chairman from time to time. Members of the board must receive notice not less than 48 hours prior to a special meeting. Notice of said special meeting must be posted in the Civic Center not less than 48 hours before said meeting. Special meetings may be called by the written request of any two members of the board. Such written request shall be received by the Chairman no less than five days prior to the requested date of meeting. 
(C)  Quorum: The presence of a majority of the board members then in office shall be necessary to constitute a quorum to transact board business identified in subsection 2-7-5(A) of this chapter at any regular or special meeting of the board. 
The presence of a majority of the board members eligible to participate as designated in subsection 2-7-3(G) of this chapter shall be necessary to constitute a quorum to transact board business identified in subsection 2-7-5(B) of this chapter at any regular or special meeting of the board. 
(D)  Manner of acting: The act of a majority of the members present at a meeting at which a quorum is present shall be the act of the members. 
(E)  Rules of procedure: The board shall enact rules of behavior not inconsistent with ordinances or statutes that further enhance the purposes of the board or Commission. 
(Ord. 1923, 2-10-1975; amd. Ord. 5586, 7-23-2007; Ord. 5941, 6-27-2011) 
2-7-5. - Duties. 
(A)  To review annually the amendments to the Building Codes for the Village and recommend to the Village Board any amendments deemed necessary. 
(B)  To hear appeals from persons, firms or corporations from the administrative decisions of the Building and Zoning Official. 
(Ord. 1923, 2-10-1975; Ord. 5586, 7-23-2007) 
2-7-6. - Reports and records. 
(A)  The board shall keep permanent records and minutes of its meetings, showing the vote of each member upon each topic submitted to it. 
(B)  The board shall prepare and submit minutes of each meeting to the Village Board in a timely manner. 
(C)  The board shall submit its recommendations to the Village Board in writing. 
(D)  A minority report may be attached to the majority recommendation. 
(Ord. 1923, 2-10-1975) 
Chapter 8 - ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW COMMISSION 
(Repealed by Ordinance 6519, July 24, 2014) 
Chapter 9 - CIVIC CENTER COMMISSION 

2-9-1. - Creation of Commission. 
There is hereby created a Civic Center Commission, which shall be advisory to the Village Board. 
(Ord. 1926, 2-10-1975) 
2-9-2. - Intent and purpose. 
It shall be the intent and purpose of the Civic Center Commission to schedule for public use the Civic Center space and facilities other than governmental offices and perform other duties as requested by the Village Board. 
(Ord. 3829, 4-22-1991) 
2-9-3. - Commission membership. 
(A)  Appointment: The Civic Center Commission shall consist of five members appointed by the Village President, with the approval of a majority of the Board of Trustees, to serve without compensation. All Commissioners shall reside, own property, or work in the Village. The Village President may choose Commissioners with special knowledge or special interest in the Village of Glen Ellyn who are not currently residing, property owners, or working within the Village. 
(B)  Terms: Each member shall serve for a term of three years. All terms shall expire on May 31. 
(C)  Vacancies: Vacancies on said Commission shall be filled for the unexpired term of the member whose place has been vacant in the same manner in which original appointments are required to be made. 
(D)  Removal: A Commission member may be removed by a majority vote of the Village President and Board of Trustees. 
(E)  Chairman: The Village President with the advice and consent of a majority of the Village Board shall designate one of the members of the Commission to be Chairman. The Chairman shall be appointed annually in June of each year. 
(F)  Secretary: The Commission shall have a secretary who is not a member of the Commission, and shall be provided by the Administrator's Office. 
(Ord. 1926, 2-10-1975; Ord. 2255, 9-12-1977; amd. Ord. 3282, 12-15-1986; Ord. 5919, 2-14-2011; Ord. 6041, 6-25-2012; amd. Ord. 6064, 8-27-2012) 
2-9-4. - Meetings. 
(A)  Regular meetings: The Commission shall meet in January and July of each year, on such dates as the Commission may fix by resolution. 
(B)  Special meetings: Special meetings of the Commission may be called by the Chairman from time to time. Members of the Commission must receive notice not less than 48 hours prior to a special meeting. Notice of said special meeting must be posted in the Civic Center not less than 48 hours before said meeting. Special meetings may also be called by the written request of any two members of the Commission. Such written request shall be received by the Chairman no less than five days prior to the requested date of meeting. 
(C)  Quorum: A majority of the Commission members shall be necessary to constitute a quorum to transact any Commission business at any regular or special meeting of the Commission. 
(D)  Manner of acting: The act of a majority of the members present at a meeting at which a quorum is present shall be the act of the members. 
(E)  Rules of procedure: The Commission shall enact rules of behavior not inconsistent with ordinances or statutes that further enhance the purposes of the board or Commission. 
(Ord. 1926, 2-10-1975; Ord. 1947, 1975) 
2-9-5. - Duties. 
(A)  Subject to the approval of the Village Board to: 
1.  Schedule and allot space and time among the organizations requesting the use of the Civic Center, always giving preference to the needs of the Board of Trustees. 
2.  Promulgate rules, regulations and restrictions which shall be observed by those who use the center. 
3.  Fix the days and times when the center shall be open for public use and any such user fees as shall be deemed appropriate. 
(B)  To require indemnification for damage to the building and its equipment and for injuries to persons or property. 
(C)  Require adult supervision for any function in which minors participate. 
(D)  Perform such other duties as the Village Board shall from time to time request. 
(Ord. 3829, 4-22-1991) 
2-9-6. - Reports and records. 
(A)  The Commission shall keep permanent records and minutes of its meetings, showing the vote of each member upon each topic submitted to it. 
(B)  The Commission shall prepare and submit minutes of each meeting to the Village Board in a timely manner. 
(C)  The Commission shall submit its recommendations to the Village Board in writing. 
(D)  A minority report may be attached to the majority recommendation. 
(Ord. 1926, 2-10-1975) 
Chapter 10 - COMMUNITY RELATIONS COMMISSION 

2-10-1. - Creation of Commission. 
There is hereby created the Community Relations Commission, which shall be advisory to the Village Board. 
(Ord. 1972, 2-10-1975) 
2-10-2. - Intent and purpose. 
It shall be the intent and purpose of the Community Relations Commission to: 
(A)  Review problems or concerns - either initiated by members of the Community Relations Commission, presented to it by individuals, organizations and groups, or as requested by the Board of Trustees - relating to human relations and the well being of Village residents. 
(B)  Promote equality among all persons so that each will have an opportunity to live in the Village and/or secure employment of a fair and equal basis. 
(C)  Foster effective community relations among all residents. 
(D)  Perform such other functions and responsibilities as the Board of Trustees may request of it. 
(Ord. 2043, 2-23-1976) 
2-10-3. - Commission membership. 
(A)  Appointment: The Community Relations Commission shall consist of nine members appointed by the Village President, with the approval of a majority of the Board of Trustees, to serve without compensation. A member of the Board of Trustees to be appointed by the President shall serve as an ex officio nonvoting member for a term of one year. All Commissioners shall reside, own property, or work in the Village. The Village President may choose Commissioners with special knowledge or special interest in the Village of Glen Ellyn who are not currently residing, property owners, or working within the Village. 
(B)  Terms: Each member shall serve for a term of three years. All terms shall expire on May 31. 
(C)  Vacancies: Vacancies on said Commission shall be filled for the unexpired term of the member whose place has been vacant in the same manner in which original appointments are required to be made. 
(D)  Removal: A Commission member may be removed by a majority vote of the Village President and Board of Trustees. 
(E)  Chairman: The Village President with the advice and consent of a majority of the Village Board shall designate one of the members of the Commission to be Chairman. The Chairman shall be appointed annually in June of each year. 
(F)  Secretary: The commission shall have a secretary who is not a member of the commission, and shall be provided by the Administrator's Office. 
(Ord. 1927, 2-10-1975; Ord. 2252, 9-12-1977; amd. Ord. 3282, 12-15-1986; Ord. 5919, 2-14-2011; Ord. 6041, 6-25-2012; amd. Ord. 6064, 8-27-2012) 
2-10-4. - Meetings. 
(A)  Regular meetings: Regular meetings shall be monthly on a day certain as determined by the Chairman of the Commission. 
(B)  Special meetings: Special meetings of the Commission may be called by the Chairman from time to time. Members of the Commission must receive notice not less than 48 hours prior to a special meeting. Notice of said special meeting must be posted in the Civic Center not less than 48 hours before said meeting. Special meetings may also be called by the written request of any two members of the Commission. Such written request shall be received by the Chairman no less than five days prior to the requested date of meeting. 
(C)  Quorum: A majority of the Commission members shall be necessary to constitute a quorum to transact any Commission business at any regular or special meeting of the Commission. 
(D)  Manner of acting: The act of a majority of the members present at a meeting at which a quorum is present shall be the act of the members. 
(E)  Rules of procedure: The Commission shall enact rules of behavior not inconsistent with ordinances or statutes that further enhance the purposes of the board or Commission. 
(Ord. 1927, 2-10-1975) 
2-10-5. - Duties. 
(A)  To perform those duties required of it pursuant to title 6, chapter 4 of this Code (ordinances 1593 and 1696) as amended from time to time, commonly known as the Fair Housing Ordinance. 
(B)  To receive and act upon community programs or projects intended to further the well being of all segments of the Village population. If needed, seek opinion from appropriate sources or appoint appropriate committees to aid in the discharge of this duty. 
(Ord. 2043, 2-23-1976) 
2-10-6. - Reports and records. 
(A)  The Commission shall keep permanent records and minutes of its meetings, showing the vote of each member upon each topic submitted to it. 
(B)  The Commission shall prepare and submit minutes of each meeting to the Village Board in a timely manner. 
(C)  The Commission shall submit its recommendations to the Village in writing. 
(D)  A minority report may be attached to the majority recommendation. 
(Ord. 1927, 2-10-1975) 
Chapter 11 - ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION 

2-11-1. - Creation of Commission. 
There is hereby created an Environmental Commission, which shall be advisory to the Village Board. 
(Ord. 1929, 2-10-1975) 
2-11-2. - Intent and purpose. 
It shall be the intent and purpose of the Environmental Commission to: 
(A)  Protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
(B)  Conserve natural resources and protect the environment. 
(C)  Acquire and disseminate technical information relative to the environment and natural resources. 
(Ord. 1929, 2-10-1975) 
2-11-3. - Commission membership. 
(A)  Appointment: The Environmental Commission shall consist of nine members who shall be appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, to serve without compensation. A member of the Board of Trustees to be appointed by the President shall serve as an ex officio nonvoting member for a term of two years. All Commissioners shall reside, own property, or work in the Village. The Village President may choose Commissioners with special knowledge or special interest in the Village of Glen Ellyn who are not currently residing, property owners, or working within the Village. 
(B)  Terms: Each member shall serve for a term of three years. All terms shall expire on May 31. 
(C)  Vacancies: Vacancies on said Commission shall be filled for the unexpired term of the member whose place has been vacant in the same manner in which original appointments are required to be made. 
(D)  Removal: A Commission member may be removed by a majority vote of the Village President and Board of Trustees. 
(E)  Chairman: The Village President with the advice and consent of a majority of the Village Board shall designate one of the members of the Commission to be Chairman. The Chairman shall be appointed annually in June of each year. 
(F)  Secretary: The Commission shall have a secretary who is not a member of the Commission, and shall be provided by the Administrator's Office. 
(Ord. 1929, 2-10-1975; Ord. 2259, 9-12-1977; amd. Ord. 3282, 12-15-1986; Ord. 5919, 2-14-2011; Ord. 6041, 6-25-2012; Ord. 6064, 8-27-2012) 
2-11-4. - Meetings. 
(A)  Regular meetings: Regular meetings shall be monthly on a day certain as determined by the Chairman of the Commission. 
(B)  Special meetings: Special meetings of the Commission may be called by the Chairman from time to time. Members of the Commission must receive notice not less than 48 hours prior to a special meeting. Notice of said special meeting must be posted in the Civic Center not less than 48 hours before said meeting. Special meetings may be called by the written request of any two members of the Commission. Such written request shall be received by the Chairman no less than five days prior to the requested date of meeting. 
(C)  Quorum: The presence of a majority of the Commission members then in office shall be necessary to constitute a quorum to transact any Commission business at any regular or special meeting of the Commission. 
(D)  Manner of acting: The act of a majority of the members present at a meeting at which a quorum is present shall be the act of the members. 
(E)  Rules of procedure: The Commission shall enact rules of behavior not inconsistent with ordinances or statutes that further enhance the purpose of the board or Commission. 
(Ord. 1929, 2-10-1975; Ord. 5751, 4-27-2009) 
2-11-5. - Duties. 
(A)  To collect general environmental and/or technical information as may pertain to the quality of life within the Village and to make such material available to the Village President and Board of Trustees. 
(B)  To alert the Village President and Board of Trustees to state and federal laws relative to the environment which may require attention and/or action on the part of the board. 
(C)  To make recommendations to the Village President and Board of Trustees for adoption of policies, programs and/or goals which would improve or sustain the environment of the Village and which would not conflict with state or federal laws. 
(D)  To perform such other duties and functions as may be requested of it by the Village Board of Trustees which are within the Commission's ordinance. 
(Ord. 4030, 6-28-1993) 
2-11-6. - Reports and records. 
(A)  The Commission shall keep permanent records and minutes of its meetings, showing the vote of each member upon each topic submitted to it. 
(B)  The Commission shall prepare and submit minutes of each meeting to the Village Board in a timely manner. 
(C)  The Commission shall submit its recommendations to the Village Board in writing. 
(D)  A minority report may be attached to the majority recommendation. 
(Ord. 1929, 2-10-1975) 
Chapter 12 - RECREATION COMMISSION 

2-12-1. - Creation of Commission. 
There is hereby created a Recreation Commission, which shall be advisory to the Village Board. 
(Ord. 1942, 4-28-1975) 
2-12-2. - Intent and purpose. 
It shall be the intent and purpose of the Recreation Commission to advise the Village Board on matters relating to the Village Links and all recreation areas owned by the Village. 
(Ord. 1942, 4-28-1975) 
2-12-3. - Commission membership. 
(A)  Appointment: The Recreation Commission shall consist of seven members who shall be appointed by the Village President, by and with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, to serve without compensation. 
(B)  Terms: Each member shall serve for a term of three years. All terms shall expire on May 31. 
(C)  Vacancies: Vacancies on the Recreation Commission shall be filled for the unexpired term of the member whose place has been vacant in the same manner in which original appointments are required to be made. 
(D)  Removal: A Commission member may be removed by a majority vote of the Village President and Board of Trustees. 
(E)  Chairman: The Village President with the advice and consent of a majority of the Village Board shall designate one of the members of the Commission to be Chairman. The Chairman shall be appointed annually in June of each year. 
(F)  Secretary: The Commission shall have a Secretary who is not a member of the Commission, and shall be provided by the Administrator's Office. 
(Ord. 1942, 4-28-1975; Ord. 2258, 9-12-1977; amd. Ord. 3282, 12-15-1986; Ord. 6041, 6-25-2012; Ord. 6064, 8-27-2012; Ord. 6403, 5-23-2016) 
2-12-4. - Meetings. 
(A)  Regular meetings: Regular meetings shall be monthly on a day certain as determined by the Chairman of the Commission. 
(B)  Special meetings: Special meetings of the Commission may be called by the Chairman from time to time. Members of the Commission must receive notice not less than 48 hours prior to a special meeting. Notice of said special meeting must be posted in the Civic Center not less than 48 hours before said meeting. Special meetings may also be called by the written request of any two members of the Commission. Such written request shall be received by the Chairman no less than five days prior to the requested date of meeting. 
(C)  Quorum: The presence of a majority of the Commission members then in office shall be necessary to constitute a quorum to transact any Commission business at any regular or special meeting of the Commission. 
(D)  Manner of acting: The act of a majority of the members present at a meeting at which a quorum is present shall be the act of the members. 
(E)  Rules of procedure: The Commission shall enact rules of behavior not inconsistent with ordinances or statutes that further enhance the purpose of the Board or Commission. 
(Ord. 1942, 4-28-1975; Ord. 5751, 4-27-2009) 
2-12-5. - Duties. 
(A)  To counsel and advise the Village Board of Trustees on all matters pertaining to the planning, operation and maintenance of the Village Links and all recreation areas owned by the Village and developed for the use and enjoyment of the public. 
(B)  To perform such other duties and functions as may be requested of it by the Village Board of Trustees. 
(Ord. 1942, 4-28-1975) 
2-12-6. - Reports and records. 
(A)  The Commission shall keep permanent records and minutes of its meetings, showing the vote of each member upon each topic submitted to it. 
(B)  The Commission shall prepare and submit its recommendations to the Village Board in writing. 
(C)  A minority report may be attached to the majority recommendation. 
(Ord. 1942, 4-28-1975) 
Chapter 13 - HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION 

2-13-1. - Purpose of provisions. 
It is hereby declared necessary for the general welfare of the citizens of the Village to protect and encourage the continued utilization of areas, districts, places, buildings, structures, works of art, and other similar objects within the Village, including "Stacy's Tavern", eligible for designation by ordinance as "Glen Ellyn landmarks". This declaration of intent shall incorporate the following purposes: 
(A)  To identify, preserve, protect, enhance and encourage the continued utilization and the rehabilitation of such areas, districts, places, buildings, structures, works of art and other objects having a special historical, community, architectural or aesthetic interest or value to the Village and its citizens; 
(B)  To safeguard the Village's historic and cultural heritage, as embodied and reflected in such areas, districts, places, buildings, structures, works of art and other objects determined eligible for designation by ordinance as "Glen Ellyn landmarks"; 
(C)  To preserve the character and vitality of the neighborhoods and central area, to promote economic development through rehabilitation, and to conserve and improve the property tax base of the Village; 
(D)  To foster civic pride in the beauty and noble accomplishments of the past as presented in such "Glen Ellyn landmarks"; 
(E)  To protect and enhance the attractiveness of the Village to homeowners, home buyers, tourists, visitors, businesses and shoppers, and thereby to support and promote business, commerce, industry, and tourism and to provide economic benefit to the Village; 
(F)  To foster and encourage preservation, restoration, and rehabilitation of areas, districts, places, buildings, structures, works of art and other objects, including entire districts and neighborhoods, and thereby prevent future urban blight and in some cases reverse current urban deterioration; 
(G)  To foster the education, pleasure, and welfare of the people of the Village through the designation of "Glen Ellyn landmarks"; 
(H)  To encourage the continuation of surveys and studies of Glen Ellyn's historical and architectural resources and the maintenance and updating of a register of areas, districts, places, buildings, structures, works of art and other objects which may be worthy of landmark designation; 
(I)  To encourage public participation in identifying and preserving historical and architectural resources through public hearings on proposed designations, building permits, and economic hardship variations; 
(J)  To aid in the development and restoration of "Stacy's Tavern" as it existed during the period between the years 1846 and 1850. 
(Ord. 3825, 4-22-1991) 
2-13-2. - Commission on Glen Ellyn Landmarks. 
(A)  Creation, membership; terms: 
1.  Creation and membership: There is hereby continued in existence the Historic Preservation Commission of the Village of Glen Ellyn, which commission shall be empowered to recommend the designation of historical and architectural landmarks within the Village in compliance with the powers and duties enumerated herein. The Commission shall consist of seven members, appointed by the President with the approval of a majority of the Board of Trustees, to serve without compensation, except that the members of the Historic Preservation Commission as it existed at the time of enactment of this chapter shall continue as members of said Commission. Thereafter, an effort shall be made to select as members persons who are professionals in the disciplines of history, architecture, historic architecture, planning, archaeology, real estate, historic preservation, or related fields, or who have demonstrated special interest, knowledge or experience in architecture, history, neighborhood preservation, or related disciplines. A member of the Board of Trustees to be appointed by the President shall serve as an ex officio, nonvoting member for a term of two years. The Village President, with the advice and consent of a majority of the Village Board, shall designate one of the members as Chairman. The Chairman shall be appointed annually in June of each year. A secretary, who is not a member of the Commission, shall be provided by the manager's office. All Commissioners shall reside, own property, or work in the Village. The Village President may choose Commissioners with special knowledge or special interest in the Village of Glen Ellyn who are not currently residing, property owners, or working within the Village. 
2.  Terms: Each member shall serve for a term of three years. All terms shall expire on May 31. 
3.  Vacancies: Vacancies on the Commission shall be filled for the unexpired term of the member whose place has been vacant in the same manner in which original appointments are required to be made. 
4.  Removal: A Commission member may be removed by a majority vote of the Village President and Board of Trustees. 
(B)  Meetings; voting: 
1.  Regular meetings: Regular meetings shall be monthly on a day certain as determined by the Chairman of the Commission. 
2.  Special meetings: Special meetings of the Commission may be called by the Chairman from time to time. Members of the Commission must receive notice not less than 48 hours prior to a special meeting. Notice of said special meeting must be posted in the Civic Center not less than 48 hours before said meeting. Special meetings may be called by the written request of any two members of the Commission. Such written request shall be received by the Chairman no less than five days prior to the requested date of meeting. 
3.  Notice of meetings: Whenever any action affecting an owner of property proposed or designated as a landmark is to be considered at a regular or special meeting of the Commission, the owner shall be provided at least seven days' advance written notice of such meeting except where different notice provisions are specified elsewhere in this chapter. 
4.  Quorum: The presence of a majority of the Commission members then in office shall be necessary to constitute a quorum to transact any Commission business at any regular or special meeting of the Commission. 
5.  Manner of acting: Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the act of a majority of the members present at a meeting at which a quorum is present shall be the act of the members. 
6.  Rules of procedure: The Commission shall enact rules of procedure and regulations not inconsistent with ordinances or statutes that further enhance the purpose of the Commission. 
(C)  Reports and records: The Commission shall keep permanent records and minutes of its meetings, showing the vote of each member upon each topic submitted to it, and of all public hearings. The Commission shall prepare and submit minutes of each meeting to the Village Board in a timely manner. The Commission shall submit its recommendations to the Village Board in writing. A minority report may be attached to the majority recommendation. 
(D)  Commission powers and duties: The commission shall have and may exercise the following duties, powers, and responsibilities: 
1.  To conduct an ongoing survey of the Village for the purpose of identifying those areas, districts, places, buildings, structures, works of art and other objects of historic or architectural significance; 
2.  Upon consent of the owner or owners thereof, to hold hearings and to recommend that the Village Board designate by ordinance areas, districts, places, buildings, structures, works of art and other objects as official "Glen Ellyn landmarks", if they qualify as defined hereunder, and to recommend that such designation include all or some portion of the property or any improvements thereon; 
3.  To cause plaques to be manufactured and installed that identify the significance of designated landmarks and landmark districts; 
4.  To prepare and publish maps, brochures and other descriptive and educational materials and to advise and assist residents about Glen Ellyn's landmarks and landmark districts and their designation and protection; 
5.  Subject to provisions set forth in subsection 2-13-10(A) of this chapter, to review permit applications for alteration, construction, reconstruction, erection, demolition, relocation or work of any kind affecting landmarks and structures or unimproved sites in landmark districts and to require the presentation of such plans, drawings, elevations and other information as may be necessary to review those applications; 
6.  To advise and assist owners or prospective owners of designated or potential landmarks or structures in landmark districts on technical and financial aspects of preservation, renovation and rehabilitation and to establish standards and guidelines therefor; 
7.  To apply for and accept any gift, grant or bequest from any private or public source, including government agencies, upon approval by the Village Board, for any purpose authorized by these provisions; 
8.  To spend and disburse such sums as may be appropriated for its use, upon approval of the Village Board; 
9.  To make recommendations to the Village Board concerning means to preserve, protect, enhance, rehabilitate and perpetuate landmarks and structures in landmark districts; 
10.  To adopt, publish and make available rules of procedure and other regulations for the conduct of Commission meetings, hearings and other business; 
11.  To prepare and present nominations of landmarks and historic districts to any State or Federal Registers of Historic Places; 
12.  To assume whatever responsibility and duties may be assigned to it by the State under certified local government provisions of the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, as amended; 
13.  To cooperate with and enlist the aid of persons, organizations, corporations, foundations and public agencies in matters involving historic preservation, renovation, rehabilitation and reuse; 
14.  To advise any Village department or agency concerning the effect of its actions, programs, capital improvements or activities on designated or potential landmarks; 
15.  To hold hearings and make recommendations to the Village Board regarding applications for permits to alter, relocate or demolish landmarks or proposed landmarks and applications of property owners for economic hardship exceptions; 
16.  To exercise any other power or authority necessary or appropriate to carry out the purpose of these provisions. 
(Ord. 3825, 4-22-1991; Ord. 5751, 4-27-2009; Ord. 5919, 2-14-2011; Ord. 6041, 6-25-2012; amd. Ord. 6064, 8-27-2012; Ord. 6637, 11-12-2018) 
2-13-3. - Designation of landmark or landmark district; recommendation and preliminary determination. 
(A)  Criteria for designation: The Commission shall familiarize itself with areas, districts, places, buildings, structures, works of art and other objects within the Village which may be considered for designation by ordinances as "Glen Ellyn landmarks", and maintain a register thereof. Areas, districts, places, buildings, structures, works of art and other objects within the Village being considered for landmarking will have authenticity of historic identity, evidenced by the survival of physical characteristic that existed during the period of its significance. In making its recommendation to the Village Board for designation, the Commission shall limit its consideration solely to the following criteria concerning such area, district, place, building, structure, work of art and other objects: 
1.  It be of an age of at least 50 years, in whole or in part; and that two or more of the following conditions exist: 
(a)  It be listed on the National or State Register of Historic Places; or 
(b)  Its integrity of location, design, materials and workmanship make it worthy of preservation or restoration; or 
(c)  Its value as an example of the architectural, cultural, economic, historic, social or other aspect of the heritage of the Village of Glen Ellyn, the State of Illinois, or the United States; or 
(d)  Its certain distinguishing characteristic of architecture is inherently valuable for the study of a time period, type of property, method of construction or use of indigenous materials; or 
(e)  Its location as a site of an important archaeological, significant historic, or natural event; or 
(f)  Its identification with a person or persons who significantly contributed to architectural, cultural, economic, historic, social or other aspect of the development of the Village of Glen Ellyn, the State of Illinois, or the United States; or 
(g)  It be one of the few remaining examples of a particular architectural style; or 
(h)  Its exemplification of an architectural type or style distinguished by innovation, rarity, uniqueness or overall quality of design, detail, materials or craftsmanship; or 
(i)  Its identification as the work of an architect, designer, engineer or builder whose individual work is significant in the history or development of the Village of Glen Ellyn, the State of Illinois, or the United States; or 
(j)  Its representation of an architectural, cultural, economic, historic, social or other theme expressed through distinctive areas, districts, places, buildings, structures, works of art or other objects that may or may not be contiguous; or 
(k)  Its unique location or distinctive physical appearance or presence representing an established and familiar visual feature of a neighborhood, community or the Village. 
2.  In the case of residences, the Commission shall limit its consideration of landmark status to the exterior of the structure. 
(B)  Recommendations of landmarks and landmark districts; preliminary determination: The Commission or any person may recommend districts, places, buildings, structures, works of art and other objects for landmark designation. If other than the Commission, such person shall complete and submit a form provided by the Community Development Department. Following a recommendation, the Commission may, by resolution, make a preliminary determination of landmark designation; provided, that the proposed area, district, place, building, structure, work of art or other object meets the age requirement and two or more of the criteria for landmark designation. 
(Ord. 6449, 11-14-2016; Ord. 6674, 2-25-2019) 
2-13-4. - Notice of preliminary determination; request for owner consent. 
Within 15 days of its preliminary determination, the Commission shall, by certified mail, return receipt requested, notify the owner(s) of the property of the reasons for and effects of the proposed designation and request that the owner(s) consent in writing to the proposed designation, and shall forward a copy of such notice to the Village Board. The owner(s) shall have 45 days from the date of mailing of the request to respond to the request. 
(A)  Proposed designation of building, etc.: In the case of the proposed designation of an area, place, building, structure, work of art or other object, an owner may, within the 45-day period, request an extension of time, not to exceed 90 days, to submit a response. 
(B)  Proposed designation of district: In the case of the proposed designation of a district, an owner or any Trustee may, within the 45-day period, request an extension of time, not to exceed 90 days, for owners of property within the district to submit responses. Of all owners in a proposed landmark district, 66? percent of the property owners within the proposed landmark district must consent before the Commission may proceed under sections 2-13-5 through 2-13-7 of this chapter. 
For purposes of this chapter, a "district" shall mean an area which contains, within definable geographic boundaries, one or more landmarks along with such other buildings, places, or areas which, while not of such historic significance to be designated as landmarks, nevertheless contribute to the overall visual characteristics of the landmark(s) located within the district; and/or an area which contains within definable geographic boundaries such buildings, places, or areas which, while not of such individual significance to be designated as landmarks, nevertheless, as an aggregate, possess historic significance for the Village in: 
1.  Establishing a sense of time and place unique to the Village; and/or 
2.  Exemplifying or reflecting the cultural, social, economic, political, or architectural history of the Nation, the State, or the Village; and/or 
3.  Representing distinguishing characteristics of an architectural type which is inherently valuable for studying a period, style, method of construction, indigenous materials, or unique craftsmanship. 
(C)  Owner consent: If the owner of a proposed individual landmark or if 66? percent of owners in a proposed landmark district fail(s) or refuse(s) to consent to the proposed designation within the applicable time periods, the designation process shall terminate as to that property without further action, and the subject of the proposed designation shall not be reconsidered for a period of two years. If the owner (s) consent(s) within the applicable time period, the Commission shall schedule a public hearing on the proposed designation pursuant to section 2-13-6 of this chapter to be held within 60 days of receipt of consent by the Commission. 
(Ord. 3825, 4-22-1991; amd. Ord. 4458, 1-13-1997; Ord. 5266, 6-14-2004) 
2-13-5. - Request for planning report. 
Upon adoption of a resolution making a preliminary determination, and receipt of owner's consent in writing, the Commission shall advise the Board of Trustees of such resolution and consent and shall request a report from the Community Development Director which evaluates the relationship of the proposed designation to the Comprehensive Plan of the Village and the effect of the proposed designation on the surrounding neighborhood. The report shall also include the Director's opinion and recommendation regarding any other planning consideration relevant to the proposed designation and the Director's recommendation of approval, rejection or modification of the proposed designation. The report shall be submitted to the Commission within 45 days of the request, if the proposed designation is of an area, place, building, structure, work of art or other object, or within 60 days, if the proposed designation is a district, and shall become part of the official record concerning the proposed designation. The Commission may make such modifications concerning the proposed designation and recommendation as it deems necessary. If the Director fails to submit a report within the time provided herein, the Commission may proceed with the designation process. 
(Ord. 3825, 4-22-1991; Ord. 6674, 2-25-2019) 
2-13-6. - Public hearing; recommendation of Commission. 
(A)  Notice requirements: Prior to conducting a public hearing as provided hereunder, the Commission shall give at least 15 days' written notice of the date, time and place of the hearing to any owner of the subject property. The Commission shall also cause to be posted, for a period of not less than 15 days immediately preceding the hearing, a placard stating the time, date, place and matter to be considered at the hearing and such other information as directed by the Community Development Director. The placard shall be prominently displayed on the place, building, object or structure, or on the public ways abutting the property, and, in the case of designation of areas or districts, the placards shall be placed on the principal boundaries thereof. In addition, not more than 30 nor less than 15 days prior to the hearing, the Commission shall cause a legal notice to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the Village setting forth the nature of the hearing, the property, area or district involved, and the date, time and place of the scheduled public hearing. 
(B)  Presentation of evidence; designation of parties: The Commission shall provide a reasonable opportunity for all interested persons to present testimony or evidence under such rules as the Commission may adopt governing the proceedings of a hearing. The hearing may be continued to a date certain, and a transcript and record shall be kept of all proceedings. A person, organization or other legal entity whose use or whose members' use or enjoyment of the area, district, place, building, structure, work of art or other object proposed for designation may be injured by the designation or the failure of the Commission to recommend designation, may become a party to the proceeding. The foregoing shall include, without limitation, persons, organizations or other legal entities residing in, leasing or having an ownership interest in real property located within 250 feet of the property line of the proposed or designated landmark or landmark district. 
(C)  Commission recommendation following hearing; objections; vote of commission: No later than its next regular meeting after the conclusion of the public hearing, the Commission shall vote upon whether to recommend the proposed landmark designation to the Board of Trustees. The affirmative vote of five members of the Commission shall be required to recommend a designation to the Board of Trustees. If the Commission recommends a designation, it shall set forth its recommendation in writing, including findings of fact relating to the criteria for designation in subsection 2-13-3(A) of this chapter that constitutes the basis for its decision. The Commission shall include with its written report the official record of its proceedings. If the proposed designation is of an area, place, building, structure, work of art or other object, the Commission shall transmit its report to the Board of Trustees within 60 days from the conclusion of the public hearing. If the proposed designation is of a district, the Commission shall transmit its report to the Board of Trustees within 90 days from the conclusion of the public hearing. Copies of the Commission report shall be sent to the owner of the property and placed on file with the Village Clerk. 
(Ord. 3825, 4-22-1991; Ord. 6674, 2-25-2019) 
2-13-7. - Consideration of recommended designation by Village Board of Trustees; plaques. 
Within 45 days of receipt of the Commission recommendation, the Board of Trustees shall review and give due consideration to the findings, recommendations and record of the Commission in making its determination with respect to the proposed designation of any area, district, place, building, structure, work of art or other object having a special historical, community, architectural or aesthetic interest or value and shall vote upon such recommendation. The Board of Trustees may, by passage of an ordinance within 45 days of the Commission recommendation, designate an area, district, place, building, structure, work of art or other object meeting one or more of the criteria stated in subsection 2-13-3(A) of this chapter as a "Glen Ellyn landmark". The Village Board shall direct that a suitable plaque or plaques be created by the Commission appropriately identifying said landmark and the owner(s) of the designated landmark shall affix said plaque to the property. 
(Ord. 3825, 4-22-1991) 
2-13-8. - Landmarks; notice of official designation. 
The Commission shall, within ten days of official landmark designation, send a certified copy of the ordinance designating the property and a summary of the effects of designation to the owner(s) of the property by certified mail, return receipt requested. The Commission shall also file with the recorder of deeds of DuPage County, the assessor of DuPage County, the Village Clerk, the Department of Public Works of the Village, and all other relevant Village departments, a certified copy of the designating ordinance. 
(Ord. 3825, 4-22-1991) 
2-13-9. - Amendment, rescission and reconsideration of designation. 
Any designation of an area, district, place, building, structure, work of art or other similar object as a "Glen Ellyn landmark" shall only be amended or rescinded in the same manner and procedure as the original designation was made. If the Commission votes not to recommend a proposed designation to the Village Board, or if the Commission has failed to issue its recommendations on a proposed designation within the time provided, or if the Village Board has refused to designate a proposed "Glen Ellyn landmark", then the Commission may not reconsider the proposed designation for a period of one year from the date of the negative Commission vote, or from the date of expiration of the time limitation for Commission action, or from the date of the Village Board's refusal to designate, whichever is applicable. 
(Ord. 3825, 4-22-1991) 
2-13-10. - Alteration, relocation or demolition of landmarks. 
(A)  Application for permit; review requirements: All permits for alterations, construction, erection, demolition, relocation or other work on the exterior of the structure shall be reviewed by staff in the administration or Community Development departments within 15 days of receipt thereof. The report will evaluate the impact of the permit application on the landmark structure and the effect on the surrounding neighborhood. The report shall also include staff's opinion and recommendation regarding any other planning consideration relevant to the permit application and staff's recommendation of approval, rejection or modification of the permit application. Staff will then forward a report and recommendation regarding the permit application to the Commission within 15 days of receipt thereof. 
No permit for alteration, construction, reconstruction, erection, demolition, relocation or any other work affecting exterior appearance shall be issued to any applicant by any department of the Village without the written approval of the Commission for any area, district, place, building, structure, work of art or other object for which the Commission has made a preliminary determination of landmark status or which has been designated as a "Glen Ellyn landmark": 1) where such permit would allow the alteration or reconstruction of or addition to any exterior improvement which constitutes all or a part of a landmark or proposed landmark; or 2) where such permit would allow the demolition of any improvement which constitutes all or a part of a landmark or proposed landmark; or 3) where a permit would allow the construction or erection of any addition to any improvement or the erection of any new structure or improvement on any land within a landmark district; or 4) where a permit would allow the construction or erection of any sign or billboard within the public view which may be placed on, in or immediately adjacent to any improvement which constitutes all or part of any landmark or proposed landmark. 
Where the permit application involves a proposed landmark and the owner has submitted written consent to designation, the Commission may initiate the review process provided hereunder or it may impose a moratorium on the issuance of any permits until the designation process is completed. Where the proposed or officially designated landmark is a residence, the Commission shall concern itself solely with applications pertaining to alteration or reconstruction of the exterior, to the exterior of any proposed additions, and to the effect such addition will have on the character and appearance of the exterior in its entirety. 
Any Village department which receives an application for a permit as defined in this section shall forward the application, including copies of all detailed plans, designs, elevations, specifications and documents relating thereto, to administration or Community Development staff within 15 days of receipt thereof, which will then be sent to the Commission within 15 days of receipt thereof. It shall be a violation of this chapter for an owner to perform, authorize or allow work or other acts requiring review without a permit. 
(B)  Exception for preexisting work, ordinary maintenance and hazardous conditions: 
1.  Erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration or demolition work begun pursuant to a properly issued permit prior to a preliminary determination of landmark status shall not be subject to review by the commission unless such permit has expired, been canceled or revoked, or the work is not diligently proceeding to completion in accordance with the Glen Ellyn building code. 
2.  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the ordinary repair and maintenance of any exterior elements of a property or structure designated or proposed as a landmark or located within a designated or proposed landmark district. 
3.  Where property conditions pose an immediate threat to safety, the commission shall approve necessary work as provided in subsection (C)2. of this section. 
(C)  Application for permit; preliminary decision by Commission: Within 15 days of its receipt of a permit application from the relevant Village department, the Commission shall, by motion taken at a regular or special meeting, decide whether to preliminarily approve or disapprove the application and shall send written notice to the applicant and the appropriate Village department(s) of its preliminary decision. 
1.  Preliminary approval by commission: If the Commission finds that the proposed work will not adversely affect any significant historical or architectural feature of the improvement or of the district, and is in accord with the standards for rehabilitation set forth by the United States secretary of the interior at 36 CFR 67, as amended, as well as the Commission's published procedures and regulations, the Commission shall issue a preliminary approval of the application and shall notify the appropriate Village department(s) which shall proceed in its usual manner to review the application. If the Village department approves the building, demolition or other requested permit, it shall be issued in accordance with and governed by applicable Village Codes and regulations, including the 18 month limitation for commencement of authorized construction. 
2.  Preliminary disapproval by Commission: If the Commission finds that the proposed work will adversely affect or destroy any significant historical or architectural feature of the improvement or the district, or is inappropriate or inconsistent with the designation or design of the structure, area or district, or is not in accordance with the spirit and purposes of this chapter, or does not comply with the standards for rehabilitation established by the secretary of the interior, the Commission shall issue a preliminary decision disapproving the application for permit; provided, however, that if the construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair or demolition of any improvement would remedy conditions imminently dangerous to life, health or property, as determined in writing by the Community Development department, the Commission shall approve the work, notwithstanding other considerations relating to its designation as a "Glen Ellyn landmark" or to the fact that the Commission has made a preliminary determination of landmark status. Notice of preliminary disapproval shall be sent to the applicant by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
3.  Informal conference following preliminary disapproval: Within ten days after receiving the Commission's notice of preliminary disapproval, the applicant for permit may request in writing an informal conference before the Commission for the purpose of securing compromise regarding the proposed work so that the work will not, in the opinion of the Commission, adversely affect any significant historical or architectural feature of the improvement or district and will be appropriate and consistent with the spirit and purposes of this chapter. The Commission shall hold such conference within 15 days after receipt of the request. The Commission shall consider with the applicant every reasonable means for substantially preserving, protecting, enhancing and perpetuating the special historical or architectural feature of the improvement or district, including investigating the possibility of modifying the proposed work, the possibility of any alternative private use of the structure or structures that would substantially preserve its special features, and the possibility of public incentives for enhancing the use of the structure or structures or district involved. If the Commission and the applicant for permit reach accord through the informal conference, as evidenced by a written agreement, the Commission shall issue its approval of the application for permit as modified and so notify the applicant and the appropriate Village departments which shall proceed with their own review. 
(D)  Public hearing; consideration of economic hardship exception: 
1.  If the Commission and applicant for permit have failed to reach accord by means of the informal conference, or if the applicant fails to request an informal conference, the Commission shall hold a public hearing on the permit application in accordance with procedures set forth in section 2-13-6 of this chapter. 
2.  Said hearing shall be held within 45 days following the conclusion of the conference or the owner's failure to request a conference. Any person, organization or other legal entity whose use or enjoyment of the area, district, place, building, structure, work of art or other object designated as a landmark may be injured by the approval or disapproval of a proposed alteration, construction, reconstruction, erection, demolition or relocation of a proposed or designated landmark, may become a party to a permit application proceeding. 
3.  In conjunction with such hearing, the applicant may file a request for an economic hardship exception on the basis that a denial of the permit applied for will result in the loss of reasonable and beneficial use of or return from the property. Failure of the applicant to request this exception and present pertinent evidence at the hearing shall be deemed a voluntary waiver of this right and preclude the applicant from raising the issue at any subsequent hearings before the Commission or the Village Board. Evidence to be submitted prior to and presented at the hearing and considered by the Commission in the event the Commission recommends disapproval of the permit shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(a)  The amount paid for the property and the date of purchase. 
(b)  The assessed value of the land and improvements thereon according to the two most recent assessments. 
(c)  Real estate taxes for the previous two years. 
(d)  Annual debt service, if any, for the previous two years. 
(e)  All appraisals obtained within the previous two years by the owner or applicant in connection with his purchase, financing or ownership of the property. 
(f)  Any listing of the property for sale or rent, price asked and offers received, if any. 
(g)  Any consideration by the owner as to profitable adaptive uses for the property. 
(h)  If the property is income producing, the annual gross income from the property for the previous two years, itemized operating and maintenance expenses for the previous two years, and annual cash flow, if any, during the same period. 
4.  The Commission shall first consider the permit application on its merits. If the Commission recommends disapproval, it shall then consider and decide the request for an economic hardship exception. 
(E)  Commission decision approving or disapproving permit application and economic hardship exception: Within 30 days after the conclusion of the hearing, the Commission shall issue a written report approving or disapproving the permit application and, where applicable, granting or denying the request for an economic hardship exception. The report shall contain the findings of fact that constitute the basis for the decisions consistent with the criteria in subsection (C)1. of this section. The Commission shall send written notice of its report to the applicant by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the appropriate Village departments and to the Village Board. 
1.  Approval: If the Commission approves the permit, it shall recommend issuance of the permit; provided, the appropriate Village departments have authorized its issuance. Said decision shall be deemed a final decision of the Commission. 
2.  Disapproval; commission recommendation; plan to relieve hardship: If the Commission recommends permit disapproval, it shall then determine whether denial of the permit would deprive the applicant of reasonable and beneficial use of or return from the property and shall issue and forward to the Village Board a written recommendation and report pertaining to its disapproval of the permit and approving or denying the requested exception. In the case of a finding of economic hardship, the report shall be accompanied by a recommended plan to relieve any economic hardship. This plan may include, but is not limited to, property tax relief, loans or grants from the Village or other public or private sources, acquisition by purchase or eminent domain, Building Code modifications, changes in applicable zoning regulations including a transfer of development rights, or relaxation of the provisions of this chapter sufficient to allow reasonable beneficial use of or return from the property. 
(F)  Village Board decision: Within 30 days following the Commission's recommendation, the Village Board shall affirm, reverse or modify the recommendation of the Commission regarding permit disapproval and the economic hardship exception. If the Village Board affirms the Commission recommendation to disapprove the permit and deny an economic hardship exception, no permit shall issue. If the Village Board approves a plan to relieve economic hardship, it shall be by ordinance, and if the plan requires that any action be taken by Village departments or agencies, the action shall be initiated within 30 days following passage of the ordinance. If the Village Board does not approve a plan to relieve economic hardship within the time specified, the plan to relieve economic hardship shall be deemed to be denied and the permit shall issue. 
(G)  Failure of the commission to act: The Commission's failure to act upon an application for permit within the applicable time periods shall constitute approval by the Commission and no other evidence shall be needed. 
(Ord. 3825, 4-22-1991; Ord. 5266, 6-14-2004; Ord. 6674, 2-25-2019) 
2-13-11. - Penalties and remedies for violations. 
The following penalties and remedies shall be applicable to violations of this chapter: 
(A)  Penalties: Failure to perform any act required by the ordinance codified in this chapter or performance of any action which is prohibited by said sections shall constitute a violation thereof. Every day on which a violation exists shall constitute a separate violation and a separate offense. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less than $500.00 nor more than $1,000.00 for each offense. In addition, if the owner of property designated a "Glen Ellyn landmark" willfully or through gross negligence causes all or any part of the property to be demolished or substantially destroyed or altered without the approval of the Village Board or the Commission, as the case may be, then no permit to construct a new structure or improve said structure shall be issued for said property or for the land upon which the landmark stood within five years of the date of the demolition or alteration. Thereafter for a period of 20 years, commencing at the end of the five-year period hereinbefore stated, any application for a building permit on the subject premises shall follow the procedure heretofore set out in section 2-13-10 of this chapter. 
(B)  Remedies: Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (A) of this section, in the event any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, added to or demolished in violation of this chapter, the Village may institute appropriate proceedings to prevent or remedy such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, addition or demolition. 
(Ord. 3825, 4-22-1991) 
2-13-12. - Severability. 
If any provision of this chapter or application thereof to any person or circumstance is invalid, such invalidation shall not affect other provisions or applications of this chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable. 
(Ord. 3825, 4-22-1991) 
Chapter 14 - ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS 

2-14-1. - Creation of Board. 
There is hereby created a Zoning Board of Appeals, which shall be advisory to the Village Board on all matters assigned to it, except appeals from any final order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official charged with enforcement of the zoning code. 
(Ord. 5919, 2-14-2011) 
2-14-2. - Intent and purpose. 
It shall be the intent and purpose of the Zoning Board of Appeals to perform those functions required by Illinois Compiled Statutes or the Glen Ellyn zoning code with reference to the administration and enforcement of all zoning ordinances and codes of the Village. 
(Ord. 5919, 2-14-2011) 
2-14-3. - Board membership. 
(A)  Appointment: The Zoning Board of Appeals shall consist of seven members who shall be appointed by the Village President with the advice and consent of a majority of the Board of Trustees, to serve without compensation. All of the members shall be from within the corporate limits of the Village. All board members shall reside, own property, or work in the Village. 
(B)  Terms: Each member shall serve for a term of three years. All terms shall expire on May 31. 
(C)  Vacancies: Vacancies on the board during a term shall be filled for the unexpired term of the member whose place has been vacant in the same manner in which original appointments are required to be made. 
(D)  Removal: A board member may be removed by a majority vote of the Village President and Board of Trustees for nonperformance of duty, misconduct or other good cause. 
(E)  Chairman: The Village President with the advice and consent of a majority of the Village Board shall designate one of the members of the board to be Chairman. The Chairman shall be appointed annually in June of each year. 
(F)  Secretary: The board shall have a secretary who is not a member of the board, and shall be provided by the manager's office. 
(Ord. 5919, 2-14-2011; amd. Ord. 6041, 6-25-2012; Ord. 6064, 8-27-2012) 
2-14-4. - Meetings. 
(A)  Regular meetings: Regular meetings shall be monthly on a day certain as determined by the Chairman of the board. 
(B)  Special meetings: Special meetings of the board may be called by the Chairman from time to time. Members of the board must receive notice not less than 48 hours prior to a special meeting. Notice of said special meeting must be posted in the Civic Center not less than 48 hours before said meeting. Special meetings may also be called by the written request of any two members of the board. Such written request shall be received by the Chairman no less than five days prior to the requested date of meeting. 
(C)  Public hearings: Public hearings are to be held when necessary, after due and prior notice given in the manner specified in the zoning code or in Illinois Compiled Statutes. 
(D)  Quorum: The presence of four board members shall be necessary to constitute a quorum to transact any business at any regular or special meeting of the board, including the conduct of a public hearing. 
(E)  Manner of acting: The act of a majority of the members of the board shall be the act of the board. 
(F)  Rules of procedure: The board shall enact rules of procedure not inconsistent with ordinances or statutes that further enhance the purposes of the board. 
(Ord. 5919, 2-14-2011) 
2-14-5. - Duties. 
(A)  To establish a time for and conduct public hearings on and make written findings of fact and recommendations to the Village Board concerning applications for variation, in the manner prescribed by and subject to the standards established in the zoning code; 
(B)  To hear and decide appeals from any final order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official charged with the enforcement of the zoning code; 
(C)  To hear and decide all matters referred to it by the Village Board or upon which it is required to act under the zoning code, or as prescribed by the applicable provision of Illinois Compiled Statutes. 
(Ord. 5919, 2-14-2011) 
2-14-6. - Reports and records. 
(A)  The board shall keep permanent records and minutes of its meetings, showing the vote of each member upon each topic submitted to it. 
(B)  The board shall prepare and submit minutes of each meeting to the Village Board in a timely manner 
(C)  The board shall provide for the services of a court reporter to prepare and submit in a timely manner a verbatim transcript of all public hearings. This transcript shall be submitted to the Village Board along with the board's recommendations, in all cases where the board does not have jurisdiction to make a final administrative decision. 
(D)  All recommendations submitted to the Village Board shall be in writing. 
(E)  The board shall file an annual report with the President and Board of Trustees setting forth its transactions and recommendations on December 31 of each year. 
(F)  A minority report may be attached to any majority recommendation to the Village Board. 
(Ord. 5919, 2-14-2011) 
Chapter 15 - TECHNOLOGY ADVISORY COMMISSION 

2-15-1. - Creation of Commission. 
There is hereby created the Technology Advisory Commission, which shall be advisory to the Village Board. 
(Ord. 4706, 5-10-1999) 
2-15-2. - Intent and purpose. 
It shall be the intent and purpose of the Technology Advisory Commission to oversee the installation and operation of cable communications and other telecommunications systems within Glen Ellyn, pursuant to the regulations established by this Code and pursuant to the grant of any franchise and to advise the President and Village Board of Trustees on various matters as they relate to telecommunications, other technologies, and utilities as defined herein. 
(Ord. 4706, 5-10-1999) 
2-15-3. - Commission membership. 
(A)  Appointment: The Technology Advisory Commission shall consist of seven members who shall be appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, to serve without compensation. Initial membership of the Commission shall consist of the current members of the cable communications Commission as of its dissolution and creation of this Commission plus sufficient members to fill the newly created Commission. In addition to the membership of the Commission, a member of the Board of Trustees, to be appointed by the President, shall serve as an ex officio nonvoting member. Also, the Village administrator/manager, or his designee, shall be an ex officio nonvoting member of the Commission. All Commissioners shall reside, own property, or work in the Village. The Village President may choose Commissioners with special knowledge or special interest in the Village of Glen Ellyn who are not currently residing, property owners, or working within the Village. 
(B)  Terms: Each member shall serve for a term of three years. All terms shall expire on May 31. 
(C)  Vacancies: Vacancies on said Commission shall be filled for the unexpired term of the member whose place has been vacant in the same manner in which original appointments are required to be made. 
(D)  Removal: A Commission member may be removed by the Village President, with the approval of a majority vote of the Board of Trustees. 
(E)  Chairman: The Village President shall designate one of the members of the commission to be Chairman. The Chairman shall be appointed annually in January of each year. 
(F)  Secretary: The Commission shall have a secretary who is not a member of the Commission and shall be provided by the administrator/manager's office. 
(Ord. 4706, 5-10-1999; Ord. 5919, 2-14-2011; Ord. 6041, 6-25-2012; amd. Ord. 6064, 8-27-2012) 
2-15-4. - Meetings. 
(A)  Regular meetings: Regular meetings shall be monthly on a day certain as determined by the Chairman of the Commission and publicly announced at the beginning of each calendar year. 
(B)  Special meetings: Special meetings of the Commission may be called by the Chairman from time to time. Members of the Commission must receive notice not less than 48 hours prior to a special meeting. Notice of said special meeting must be posted in the Civic Center not less than 48 hours before said meeting or in accordance with the Illinois open meetings act, whichever is greater. Special meetings may also be called by the written request of any two members of the Commission. Such written request shall be received by the Chairman no less than five days prior to the requested date of meeting. 
(C)  Quorum: A majority of the Commission members shall be necessary to constitute a quorum to transact any Commission business at any regular or special meeting of the Commission, including the conduct of public hearings. 
(D)  Manner of acting: The act of a majority of the members present at a meeting at which a quorum is present shall be the act of the members. Any member who is absent at a public hearing, who has read the transcript of the public hearing, may act at a subsequent public meeting upon any question or recommendation on which evidence was received at the public hearing. 
(E)  Rules of procedure: The Commission may enact rules of behavior and procedure not inconsistent with ordinances or statutes that further enhance the purpose of the Commission. In the absence of any contrary rules, "Robert's Rules Of Order" shall govern the deliberations of the Commission. 
(Ord. 4706, 5-10-1999) 
2-15-5. - Duties. 
(A)  To counsel and advise the President and Board of Trustees on all matters pertaining to technology within the Village, including cable communications, telephone and telephony, computers and the internet, and wireless communications. 
(B)  To oversee the installation and operation of a cable or wireless (or telecommunications) communications system by a franchisee, including arranging for any technical tests required or advisable to assure compliance by any franchisee with all requirements of the cable communications regulations contained in this Code or contained in an ordinance granting a franchise or contained within any rules, documents, or regulations incorporated into either a franchise, permit, or an ordinance granting a franchise or permit. 
(C)  To conduct public hearings as required by various Village regulations, state or federal law, or individual agreements between the Village and providers and report to the President and Board of Trustees on the findings. 
(D)  To recommend to the President and Board of Trustees any proposed changes in the regulations deemed necessary or advisable by the Commission, including those related to public and private land use, building construction, or other local regulation. 
(E)  To advise the Village Board on issues related to the future of various electronic technologies in the Village of Glen Ellyn. 
(F)  To receive and consider applications for franchises or renewal of franchises, conduct public hearings on such applications, and make recommendations thereon to the President and Board of Trustees. 
(G)  To review issues related to other users of right of way, including electrical utilities and gas utilities, as directed by the Village Board. 
(H)  To perform such other duties and functions as may be requested of it by the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Glen Ellyn. 
(Ord. 4706, 5-10-1999) 
2-15-6. - Reports and records. 
(A)  The Commission shall keep permanent records and minutes of its meetings, showing the vote of each member upon each topic submitted to it 
(B)  The Commission shall prepare and submit minutes of each meeting to the President and Board of Trustees in a timely manner. 
(C)  The Commission shall submit its recommendations to the President and Board of Trustees in writing, together with any findings of fact necessary to support said recommendations. 
(D)  A minority report may be attached to the majority recommendation. 
(Ord. 4706, 5-10-1999) 
Chapter 16 - FINANCE COMMISSION 

2-16-1. - Creation of Commission. 
There is hereby created a Finance Commission, which shall be advisory to the Village Board. 
(Ord. 5776, 7-13-2009) 
2-16-2. - Intent and purpose. 
It shall be the intent and purpose of the Finance Commission to provide advisory recommendations to the Village Board on financial matters that are generally long term in nature. The committee's role shall not include responsibilities of day to day operational oversight. 
(Ord. 5776, 7-13-2009) 
2-16-3. - Commission membership. 
(A)  Appointment: The Finance Commission shall consist of nine members who shall be appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, to serve without compensation. A member of the Board of Trustees to be appointed by the President shall serve as an ex officio, nonvoting member for a term of two years. In addition, the Village Manager and/or finance Director shall be ex officio nonvoting members of the Commission. All Commissioners shall reside, own property, or work in the Village. The Village President may choose Commissioners with special knowledge or special interest in the Village of Glen Ellyn who are not currently residing property owners, or working within the Village. 
(B)  Terms: Each member shall serve for a term of three years. All terms shall expire on May 31. Starting in 2013, all members of the Finance Commission shall be appointed to one, two or three year terms until they are staggered (two or three members' terms expire each year). Once the members' terms are staggered, all subsequent terms shall return to three years. 
(C)  Vacancies: Vacancies on said Commission shall be filled for the unexpired term of the member whose place has been vacant in the same manner in which original appointments are required to be made. 
(D)  Removal: A Commission member may be removed by a majority vote of the Village President and Board of Trustees. 
(E)  Chairperson: The Village President, with the advice and consent of a majority of the Village Board, shall designate one of the members of the Commission to be Chairperson. The Chairperson shall be appointed annually in May of each year. 
(F)  Secretary: The Commission shall have a secretary who is not a member of the Commission and shall be provided by the Village Manager's office. 
(G)  Vice Chairperson: The Village President, with the advice and consent of a majority of the Village Board, shall designate one of the members of the Commission to be vice Chairperson. The vice Chairperson shall be appointed annually in May of each year. 
(Ord. 5776, 7-13-2009; Ord. 6041, 6-25-2012; amd. Ord. 6108, 1-14-2013; Ord. 6239, 6-9-2014) 
2-16-4. - Meetings. 
(A)  Regular meetings: Regular meetings shall be held monthly on a day certain as determined by a majority of the Commission members. 
(B)  Special meetings: The Chairperson may call special meetings of the Commission from time to time. Members of the Commission must receive notice not less than 48 hours prior to a special meeting. Notice of said special meeting must be posted in the Civic Center not less than 48 hours before said meeting. Special meetings may also be called by the written request of any two members of the Commission. The Chairperson shall receive such written request no less than five days prior to the requested date of meeting. 
(C)  Quorum: A majority of the Commission members shall be necessary to constitute a quorum to transact any Commission business at any regular or special meeting of the Commission. 
(D)  Manner of acting: The act of a majority of the members present at a meeting at which a quorum is present shall be the act of the members. 
(E)  Rules of procedure: The Commission shall enact rules of behavior not inconsistent with ordinances or statutes that further enhance the purposes of the Commission. 
(Ord. 5776, 7-13-2009) 
2-16-5. - Duties. 
(A)  To review and make recommendations concerning the Village's long term financial strategy, focusing upon multiyear trends with revenues, expenditures and future service delivery. 
(B)  To review and make recommendations concerning Village purchasing policies, borrowing or debt issuance, revenue generation, management reporting and/or investments. 
(C)  To review and make recommendations concerning development incentives, special taxing districts, SSAs, TIFs or other multiyear funding intended for development or redevelopment. 
(D)  To review and make recommendations concerning the Village's financial policies. 
(E)  To review the comprehensive annual financial report. 
(F)  To undertake special projects that may be assigned from time to time. 
(Ord. 5776, 7-13-2009) 
2-16-6. - Reports and records. 
(A)  The Commission shall keep permanent records and minutes of its meetings, showing the vote of each member upon each topic submitted to it. 
(B)  The Commission shall prepare and submit minutes of each meeting to the Village Board in a timely manner. 
(C)  The Commission shall submit a written report to the Board of Trustees setting forth the recommendations of the Commission relative to any matters outlined in section 2-16-5 of this chapter. 
(D)  A minority report may be attached to the majority recommendation. 
(Ord. 5776, 7-13-2009) 
TITLE 3 - BUSINESS REGULATIONS 
Chapter 1 - LICENSES AND PERMITS 

3-1-1. - Applicability of chapter. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided in this Code, licenses and permits shall be issued as prescribed in this chapter. 
(1965 Code § 9.01) 
3-1-2. - Application. 
Each application shall state the name of the applicant, the permit or license desired, the location to be used, if any, the license period, and the fee to be paid. Each application shall give such additional information as may be needed for the guidance of the Village official responsible for issuing the permit or license applied for. 
(1965 Code § 9.02; amd. Ord. 4458, 1-13-1997) 
3-1-3. - Forms. 
Forms for applications, licenses and permits shall be prepared and kept on file by the Cashier's Office and Village Clerk. 
(1965 Code § 9.03; amd. Ord. 4458, 1-13-1997) 
3-1-4. - Signatures. 
Each license or permit issued shall bear the signature of the Village Clerk or such other signatures as may be directed by the Board of Trustees. 
(1965 Code § 9.04; amd. Ord. 4458, 1-13-1997) 
3-1-5. - Investigations. 
Upon receipt of an application for a license or permit, where the provisions of this Code necessitate an inspection or investigation before issuance, the same shall be referred to the proper official within 48 hours to make the investigation. 
The official charged with the duty of making the investigation or inspection shall make a report thereon within ten days after receipt of the application. 
(1965 Code § 9.05) 
3-1-6. - Fees. 
All fees and charges for licenses or permits shall be paid at the time application is made. 
When application for any annual license is made after the expiration of six months of the current license year, the license fee for the remainder of the year shall be one-half of the annual fee. 
(1965 Code § 9.06) 
3-1-7. - Termination of license. 
All annual licenses shall terminate on December 31 in the year in which they are issued, unless otherwise specifically provided in this Code. 
The Cashier's Office shall mail to all licensees, three weeks prior to the expiration date of an annual license, notice of such expiration date. Failure on the part of the Cashier's Office to send such notice, or failure of the licensee to receive it, does not excuse the licensee for failing to obtain a new license, or a renewal; and it shall not be a defense to an action for operating without a license. 
(1965 Code § 9.07; amd. Ord. 4458, 1-13-1997) 
3-1-8. - Building and premises. 
No license or permit shall be issued for the conduct of any business or act, if the building and premises to be used for the purpose do not fully comply with the requirements of the provisions of this Code. 
No license or permit shall be issued for the conduct of any business or the performance of any act which would involve a violation of the zoning ordinance. 
The Community Development Director shall have administrative approval authority to grant approval to allow existing uses operating prior to June 1, 2006, that require but do not have special use permits to achieve the status of a legal nonconforming use until there is a change in use or an expansion of the use, at which time the owner must apply for and receive approval of the requisite special use permit. The Community Development Director shall have no obligation to grant any such administrative approval and may at his or her discretion require the submission of a special use permit application or proceed with enforcement action if deemed appropriate. In determining whether to grant such an approval, the Director shall consider the compatibility of the use with other nearby uses, any complaints received about the operations of the use and the actions of the Village Board in granting other special uses. 
(1965 Code § 9.08; Ord. 5704, 10-13-2008; Ord. 6674, 2-25-2019) 
3-1-9. - Transfer; change of location. 
Licenses may be transferred by the original licensee, provided written notice thereof is given to the Cashier's Office ten days prior to the transfer, and no more than one transfer of any license shall be made within the license year. 
However, it shall be unlawful to transfer any hotel, alcoholic liquor, chauffeur's, itinerant merchant's, solicitor's or peddler's license or permit; and any attempted transfer thereof shall have no effect. 
The location of any licensed business or occupation, or of any permitted act, may be changed, provided ten days' written notice thereof is given to the Cashier's Office. 
(Ord. 6163, 9-9-2013) 
3-1-10. - Frontage consents. 
(A)  Whenever the consent of an adjoining or neighboring owner is required as a prerequisite to the conduct of any business or occupation, or the location of any establishment, such consents must be obtained by securing the necessary signatures to a written consent petition, which shall be filed with the Village Clerk. 
(B)  Consents once given and filed shall not be withdrawn and need not be renewed for the continuous conduct of the same business, whether by the original proprietor or a successor. 
(C)  It shall be unlawful to forge any name to a consent petition. 
Each consent, when filed, shall be accompanied by the affidavit of the person securing the signatures that they were signed in his presence and are genuine, and that the petition contains the necessary number of signatures. 
(D)  No frontage consent petition shall be construed to permit the erection of a structure or building, or the conduct of a business, or the Commission of any act, where such structure, building or act is prohibited by the zoning ordinance. 
(1965 Code § 9.10) 
3-1-11. - Nuisances. 
(A)  No business, whether licensed or not, shall be so operated as to be, or create, a nuisance. 
(B)  No occupant of land operating a patio used in conjunction with a restaurant on nonresidential private property for any purpose, whether such occupant is licensed or not under this title, shall operate a patio on private property for any purpose at any time before 8:00 a.m. on Monday through Friday and 9:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday and shall close at or before 10:00 p.m. on Sunday through Thursday and 11:00 p.m. on Friday through Saturday if such patio and any area of the private property serving the patio area is situated immediately adjacent to a residential land use containing 12 or more units that can be used for residential purposes. For the purposes of this provision, "patio" is defined as private property containing a structure or improvement, including, but not limited to, outdoor and pathways, walks, waste storage areas, emergency and nonemergency ingress and egress (including through the principal use) and other accessory structures. Restaurants which have liquor licenses shall also limit the use of any patio in accordance with the restrictions contained within the grant of the liquor licenses. Operation in violation of this subsection is hereby declared a nuisance. 
This provision shall not affect garbage hauling operations by a waste hauler, private or public utility activities, activities pursuant to a permit issued by the Village under its Building Code or any activities by the Village or another governmental unit or agency. 
(Ord. 5783, 7-27-2009) 
3-1-12. - Inspections. 
(A)  Whenever inspection of the premises used for or in connection with the operation of a licensed business or occupation is required to ensure compliance with any code provision, or to detect violation thereof, it shall be the duty of the licensee, or the person in charge of the premises, to admit thereto, for the purpose of making such inspection, at any reasonable time, the officer or employee of the Village who is authorized or directed to make such inspection. 
(B)  Whenever an analysis of any commodity or material is reasonably necessary to ensure conformance with any code provision, it shall be the duty of the licensee to give to the authorized officer or employee of the Village, upon request, sufficient samples of such material or commodity. 
(C)  In addition to any other penalty, the Village President may revoke the license of any licensee who refuses to permit any inspection under this section, or who interferes with any Village officer or employee making the inspection. 
(1965 Code § 9.12) 
3-1-13. - Revocation. 
Any license or permit may be revoked by the Village President at any time during the term of such license or permit for any violation by the licensee of the Code provisions relating to the license or permit, and such revocation is in addition to any fine imposed. 
(1965 Code § 9.13) 
3-1-14. - Posting license. 
Any person conducting a licensed business in the Village shall keep his license posted in a prominent place on the premises in which he conducts such business. 
(1965 Code § 9.14) 
3-1-15. - Penalty. 
To the extent that licenses are renewable on an annual basis, any owner or operator of a business licensed or permitted by this title failing to pay the annual fees prescribed herein within 30 days of receipt of the bill shall pay double the amount of the fee billed, up to 60 days, with an additional $5.00 per day after 60 days until paid, but not more than $500.00. 
(Ord. 2290, 12-12-1977, eff. 7-1-1978) 
Chapter 2 - AMUSEMENTS 

3-2-1. - Application of provisions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all public shows, theatricals, circuses and other amusements in the Village, whether licensed specifically in any section of this chapter or not. 
(1965 Code § 4.01) 
3-2-2. - Order. 
The audience of any amusement show or theatrical shall be orderly and quiet at all times; and it shall be unlawful to create or permit a disturbance at a performance. 
(1965 Code § 4.02) 
3-2-3. - Crowding. 
It shall be unlawful to permit or gather a crowd to witness any amusement or performance which, by its size, would be endangered in the event of fire or other disaster. 
(1965 Code § 4.03) 
3-2-4. - Building. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful to conduct or hold any public performance or theatrical in any building or premises which does not comply with the requirements of the Building Code. 
(B)  It shall be unlawful to conduct or hold any performance or exhibition in any place not equipped with adequate exits which are free and unobstructed. 
(1965 Code § 4.04) 
3-2-5. - Obscene shows. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to present, exhibit or conduct any obscene show, theatrical, motion picture or exhibition. 
(Ord. 2997, 5-29-1984) 
3-2-6. - Exhibition of criminals. 
It shall be unlawful to exhibit any criminal, or the body of any criminal or other person who shall have become notorious because of the Commission of a crime, in a theatrical, exhibit, show or other type of public amusement. 
(1965 Code § 4.06) 
3-2-7. - Riots. 
It shall be unlawful to present any public amusement or show of any kind which tends to, or is calculated to cause or promote any riot or public disturbance. 
(1965 Code § 4.07) 
3-2-8. - Inspections. 
It shall be the duty of the Police Chief and the Chief of the Fire Department to see to the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. One member of each department shall be admitted free to each public show, exhibit or amusement for the purpose of enforcing provisions of this chapter. 
(1965 Code § 4.08) 
3-2-9. - Amusement licenses. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful to conduct or operate any amusement which is open to the public, and for which an admission fee is charged, without first obtaining a license therefor. 
(B)  The fee for such license shall be as set forth in other sections of this Code. 
(1965 Code § 4.09) 
3-2-10. - Billiard and pool halls. 
(A)  License required: No person shall operate, maintain or conduct a billiard, pool, bagatelle or pigeonhole table, open to the public, without first having secured a license therefor as herein provided. 
The application for such license shall state thereon the intended location of the place of business and the number and type of table to be used therein. 
(B)  Fee: The annual license fee shall be $3.75 for each table. 
(C)  Minors: Minors under the age of 18 years shall not frequent, loiter, go into or remain in any hall licensed hereunder unless on some lawful errand, and sent by the direction, and with the consent and knowledge, of the parent, guardian or other person having the lawful custody of the minor. 
It shall be unlawful for the proprietor of any hall so licensed to allow or permit any minor to frequent, loiter or remain within the hall, in violation of this section. 
(D)  Hours for operation: Pool or billiard halls open to the public shall be closed for all purposes, and cease doing business: 
Each weekday between 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m., and 
On Sunday between 1:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon. 
(E)  Special regulation: No person conducting or operating a pool or billiard hall shall allow or permit any screens, curtains, blinds, partitions or other obstructions to be placed between the front windows and the back or rear wall of such room, but an unobstructed view of the entire interior shall be maintained at all times. This provision, however, shall not be construed to preclude the maintenance of washrooms or toilet rooms or of closets for storage purposes exclusively; nor shall it apply to buildings owned and operated by park districts, school districts or other governmental agencies. 
(F)  Location: It shall be unlawful to conduct or operate any billiard or pool hall where a majority of the buildings lying wholly within a radius of 400 feet are used for residential purposes exclusively. 
(1965 Code § 4.10; Ord. 2290, 12-12-1977, eff. 7-1-1978) 
3-2-11. - Bowling alleys. 
(A)  License required: No person shall maintain or operate for profit a bowling, pin or ball alley, without first obtaining a license therefor. 
(B)  Fee: The annual license fee shall be $7.50 for each lane or alley. 
(C)  Hours of operation: No person shall keep open, operate or play upon a bowling, pin or ball alley: 
On a weekday between 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m., and On Sunday between 1:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon. 
(D)  Sanitation: It shall be the duty of every person operating a bowling, pin or ball alley in the Village to keep the premises in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(E)  Noise: It shall be unlawful for any person operating a bowling, pin or ball alley to permit the patrons to make loud and boisterous noises so as to disturb the peace of the neighborhood, or to congregate on the sidewalk or street outside the premises in such manner or numbers as to obstruct foot or vehicular traffic. 
(F)  Gambling: It shall be unlawful for any person to gamble, bet or tolerate any form of gambling or betting in any premises used for bowling, pin or ball alley. 
(G)  Location: It shall be unlawful to conduct or operate any bowling alley anywhere in the Village where a majority of the buildings lying wholly within a radius of 400 feet are used for residential purposes exclusively. 
(1965 Code § 4.11; Ord. 2290, 12-12-1977, eff. 7-1-1978) 
3-2-12. - Carnivals. 
(A)  Definition: "Carnival" means and includes an aggregation of attractions, whether shows, acts, games, vending or amusement devices, whether conducted under one or more managements or independently, which are temporarily set up or conducted in a public place or upon private premises accessible to the public, with or without admission fee, and which, from the nature of the aggregation, attracts attendance and causes a promiscuous intermingling of persons in the spirit of merrymaking. 
(B)  License required: No person shall set up, run, operate or conduct a carnival without having obtained a license therefor. 
(C)  Application; fee: The application for such license shall specify the place in or on which the carnival is to be conducted. 
The fee for a carnival license is $37.50 for each day the carnival is set up and open to the public. 
(D)  Prohibitions: There shall not be set up or operated any gambling device, lottery, number wheel, number board, punch board or other game of chance, or any lewd, lascivious or indecent show or attraction making an indecent exposure of the person or offering lewdness or immorality. 
(E)  Inspection: Police officers shall have free access to the grounds and all booths, shows and concessions at all times; and it shall be the duty of all officers present at such carnival to enforce all the provisions of this section. 
(F)  Insurance required: Any person conducting or operating a carnival shall furnish evidence to the Village Clerk that public liability insurance policies, in amounts of not less than $100,000.00 for one person and $500,000.00 for any one accident, are in force and effect during the time the carnival is set up and open to the public. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 4.12; 1965 Code § 4.12; Ord. 2290, 12-12-1977, eff. 7-1-1978) 
3-2-13. - Circuses. 
(A)  License required: No person shall conduct or operate a circus in the Village without having obtained a license therefor. 
(B)  Application; fee: The application for such license shall specify the place in or on which the circus is to be conducted. 
The fee for a circus license is $37.50 for each day the circus is set up and open to the public, and the license fee for each sideshow and concession operated in connection with a circus is $4.50 per day. 
(C)  Inspection: It shall be the duty of the Police Chief and the Chief of the Fire Department to make inspections of all circus performances and of the premises used by the circus. 
(D)  Cheating: It shall be unlawful for any person to cheat, shortchange or otherwise defraud any person attending, or about to attend, a circus performance within the Village. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 4.13; Ord. 2290, 12-12-1977, eff. 7-1-1978) 
3-2-14. - Amusement devices. 
(A)  Definition of terms: As used in this section, unless the context otherwise indicates, "mechanical amusement device" or "electronic amusement device" shall mean any machine which may be operated by the public as a game, entertainment or amusement whether or not registering a score, and shall include such devices as marble, pinball, skillball and mechanical grab machines, electronic video games, movie viewers, and all other games, operations or amusements similar thereto under whatever name they may be indicated. 
(B)  Regulation of mechanical amusement devices or electronic amusement devices: 
1.  No mechanical amusement or electronic amusement devices shall be operated in any place of business open to the public, except on certain premises possessing a class A or B liquor license, and specifically approved by Village Board ordinance. 
2.  Mechanical amusement devices, electronic amusement devices, coin operated billiard and pool tables and similar games may be licensed for use in supervised student recreation centers located on the campuses of institutions of higher learning pursuant to application by any such institution and in compliance with specified hours of operation, location and number of devices and games, and other conditions as provided by ordinance. 
3.  Coin operated billiard, pool, bagatelle or pigeonhole tables may be operated in a billiard or pool hall licensed pursuant to the provisions of section 3-2-10 of this chapter. 
(C)  License required: Any person displaying for public patronage any mechanical amusement device or electronic amusement device shall be required to obtain a license therefor upon payment of a license fee. 
(D)  License fee and term: Every applicant, before being granted a license, shall pay an annual license fee of $50.00 for each mechanical or electronic amusement device. A license shall be effective for one year commencing on July 1 and ending on June 30 annually. 
(E)  Gambling devices not permitted: Nothing herein shall be construed to authorize, license or permit any gambling device whatsoever or any mechanism which has been judicially determined to be a gambling device or is in any way contrary to law or which may be contrary to any laws of the state. 
(Ord. 4166, 8-8-1994) 
3-2-15. - Jukeboxes. 
(A)  Definition: "Jukeboxes" shall mean any music vending machine, contrivance or device which, upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token or key or upon payment of any price, emits songs, music, or similar amusement. 
(B)  License required: Any person displaying for public patronage any jukebox shall be required to obtain a license therefor upon payment of a license fee. 
(C)  Application: The application for such license shall contain the following information: 1) name, address and date and place of birth of applicant; 2) prior criminal conviction of the applicant, if any; 3) place where the machine is to be displayed or operated, and the type of business conducted at that place; and 4) description of machine licensed, name of manufacturer, and serial number. No license shall be issued to an applicant unless he is over 21 years of age and a citizen of the United States of America. 
(D)  Inspection: The application for a license shall be executed in duplicate; one copy shall be referred to the Police Chief and the other copy to the Building and Zoning Official. 
1.  The Police Chief shall investigate the location where it is proposed to operate such machine, ascertain if the applicant is a person of good moral character, and either approve or disapprove the application. 
2.  The Building and Zoning Official shall inspect all wiring and connections to the machine to determine if the same complies with the electrical code, and shall either approve or disapprove the application. 
No license shall be issued to any applicant unless approved by the Police Chief and the Building and Zoning Official. 
(E)  License fee: Every applicant, before being granted a license, shall pay an annual license fee of $22.50 for the privilege of operating or maintaining for operation each jukebox. Each license shall expire one year from the date of its issue. Not more than one machine shall be operated under one license, and the applicant shall be required to secure a license for each and every machine displayed by him. 
(F)  Display of license: 
1.  The license provided for herein shall be prominently affixed to the licensed machine. 
2.  A license may be transferred from one machine to another similar machine upon a showing to the Cashier's Office that the use of the original machine has been discontinued, giving the description and serial number of the new machine, and the payment of a $1.00 transfer fee. 
3.  A license shall not be transferable from person to person or place to place, and shall be usable only at the place and by the person to whom a license is issued. 
(G)  Restrictions: 
1.  No person holding a license under this section shall permit the playing of a jukebox between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
2.  No person shall permit the playing of a jukebox within 600 feet of any church, public or parochial school, or playground. 
(H)  Revocation of license: Every license issued hereunder is subject to revocation should the licensee, directly or indirectly, permit the operation of a jukebox contrary to the provisions hereof. A license may be revoked by the Board of Trustees after written notice to the licensee, specifying the violations with which the licensee is charged, and fixing a date for a hearing before the Board of Trustees not less than ten days after the date of such notice. Licensee and his attorney may be present and submit evidence in his defense at such hearing. 
(Ord. 1780, 12-11-1972; Ord. 2290, 12-12-1977, eff. 7-1-1978; amd. Ord. 4166, 8-8-1994; Ord. 4458, 1-13-1997) 
3-2-16. - Motion pictures. 
(A)  License required: No person shall construct, operate or maintain a motion picture theater within the Village without first obtaining a license therefor as hereinafter provided. 
(B)  Applications: Application for license shall state: 
1.  The name, home address and business address of the applicant. 
2.  The hours of operation. 
3.  The number of employees and attendants. 
4.  The seating capacity of the theater. 
(C)  Fee: The annual license fee shall be $75.00. Any person securing an annual license for a motion picture theater may present therein any number of performances, including theatricals, during the year for which the license is issued without having to pay an additional fee. 
(D)  Single performance; daily fee: For motion pictures which are to be presented in premises not designed as motion picture theaters and to which admissions are charged, the fee shall be $15.00 per day. 
No fee shall be required from a charitable or religious organization, but a permit must be obtained from the Police Chief. 
(E)  Prohibited advertising: The licensee shall not exhibit any indecent, obscene, immoral or suggestive advertising on the premises; and no picture or other form of advertising shall be permitted which is not true to the theatrical performance or motion picture so advertised, or which misleads or misinforms the public as to the nature of the picture or entertainment to be exhibited. 
(F)  Seating required: No licensee shall permit any person except ushers to remain standing in a motion picture theater during a performance, and it shall be unlawful to admit to any one performance more persons than can be accommodated by seating capacity of the theater. 
(G)  Scenery: All scenery at any theater shall be nonflammable or rendered nonflammable by application of fire preventive coatings. 
(H)  Exits; wiring; ventilation: Every building in which motion pictures are exhibited shall contain the number of exits required by the Building Code of the Village, and all electrical wiring therein must comply with the Electrical Code. 
All places used for the exhibition of motion pictures must be adequately ventilated during the performance and so long as an audience remains therein. 
(I)  Obstructing aisles: No aisle, corridor or exit leading from any room or enclosure in which a motion picture performance is being given shall be obstructed. 
(1965 Code § 4.15; Ord. 2290, 12-12-1977, eff. 7-1-1978; amd. Ord. 4166, 8-8-1994) 
3-2-17. - Off track betting parlors. 
The establishment of an intertrack wagering location is prohibited within that area over which the corporate authorities of the Village possess zoning authority. Pursuant to state law, no state license may, therefore, be issued to conduct intertrack wagering within the zoning jurisdiction of the Village. 
(Ord. 3805, 12-17-1990; amd. Ord. 4166, 8-8-1994) 
3-2-18. - Video gaming. 
(A)  Definition: 
VIDEO GAMING: The ownership, placement, maintenance, operation, or use of a video gaming terminal in a public place or in a fraternal or veterans' establishment. 
(B)  Prohibition: In accordance with section 27 of the Illinois video gaming act, video gaming is prohibited within the corporate limits of the Village of Glen Ellyn. 
(C)  Enforcement: Any such video gaming terminal as defined herein is prohibited and shall be removed by the owner or operator from the public place or fraternal or veterans' establishment in which it is located. 
(Ord. 5813, 11-9-2009) 
State Law reference- 230 ILCS 40/1 et seq. 
Chapter 3 - AUCTIONS AND AUCTIONEERS 

3-3-1. - License required. 
No person shall conduct an auction, or do business as an auctioneer, in the Village without having first obtained a license. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 7.01) 
3-3-2. - Application. 
Application for an auctioneer's license, or for a single auction, shall state thereon the place of business intended to be occupied, if any, or the place of such auction, and the names of the auctioneer and not more than two employees who are to be authorized to conduct an auction under the authority of the license. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 7.01) 
3-3-3. - Character of applicant. 
A license shall be issued only to a person of good character, and the Police Chief shall investigate the character of each applicant before the license shall issue. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 7.01) 
3-3-4. - Employees. 
Every person licensed as an auctioneer may designate not more than two employees who may be authorized by him to conduct auctions. The employer shall be liable for violations of this Code committed by such employees in conducting an auction. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 7.01) 
3-3-5. - Exemptions. 
This chapter does not apply to any public auction or sale made or conducted by a public officer by virtue of any judicial order or process or by virtue of any power or authority contained in any mortgage or trust deed. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 7.01) 
3-3-6. - License fee. 
The fee for an auctioneer's license is $15.00 for one auction or $15.00 per day for each day in excess of three. 
(Ord. 2290, 12-12-1977, eff. 7-1-1978) 
Chapter 4 - BARBERSHOPS 
(Repealed by Ordinance 2289, December 12, 1977) 
Chapter 5 - CARTERS 

3-5-1. - Definition. 
Every wagon, cart, truck, dray, automobile, autocar, autotruck, or other vehicle of any kind, either drawn by animals, motor vehicles, or self-propelled, which shall be operated for the purpose of transporting or conveying bundles, parcels, furniture, trunks, baggage, goods, wares, merchandise, produce or any other articles for hire, shall be deemed a cart within the meaning of this chapter, whether such vehicle is employed or hired from any public stand, barn, garage, office or other place in the Village by the day, week, month or year. Any person engaged in the business of operating or leasing a cart shall be deemed a "carter". 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 7.03) 
3-5-2. - License required. 
No person shall engage in the business of a carter without first obtaining a license therefor. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 7.03) 
3-5-3. - Application. 
The application shall state the name and residence address of the carter, and the address of his place of business. It shall include the number of vehicles owned or leased by him, with a description of each. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 7.03) 
3-5-4. - Display of license. 
The Cashier's Office shall deliver to each carter, upon payment of the license fee, an emblem which shall bear the word "Carter" and numerals designating the year for which the license fee has been paid. 
It shall be the duty of the carter to affix the license emblem in a conspicuous place on each licensed vehicle. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 7.03; amd. Ord. 4458, 1-13-1997) 
3-5-5. - License fee. 
The annual license fee shall be according to the following schedule: 
For each self-propelled vehicle up to three ..... $30.00 
For each additional self-propelled vehicle ..... 15.00 
For each trailer up to five ..... 20.00 
For each additional trailer ..... 10.00 
(Ord. 2435, 2-26-1979) 
Chapter 6 - COMPREHENSIVE REGULATION OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS 

3-6-1. - Legislative finding and declaration. 
The President and Board of Trustees expressly find and declare that: 
(A)  Cigarette smoking is dangerous to human health. 
1.  There exists substantial scientific evidence that the use of tobacco products causes cancer, heart disease and various other medical disorders. 
2.  The surgeon general of the United States has declared that nicotine addiction from tobacco is similar to addiction to cocaine and is the most widespread example of drug dependence in this country. 
3.  The Director of the National Institute on Drug Abuse concluded that the majority of the 320,000 Americans who die each year from cigarette smoking became addicted to nicotine as adolescents before the age of legal consent. 
4.  The National Institute on Drug Abuse found that cigarette smoking precedes and may be predictive of adolescent illicit drug use. 
(B)  The present legislative scheme of prohibiting sales of tobacco products to persons under the age of 21 has proven ineffective in preventing such persons from using tobacco products. 
(C)  The enactment of this chapter directly pertains to and is in furtherance of the health, welfare and safety of the residents of the Village, particularly those residents under 21 years of age. 
(Ord. 4019, 6-14-1993; Ord. 6591, 4-23-2018, eff. 7-1-2018) 
3-6-2. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
TOBACCO PRODUCTS: Any substance containing tobacco leaf, including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco or dipping tobacco. This shall also include e-cigarettes, vaping devices and any substance, with or without nicotine, intended to be aerosolized or vaporized during the use of the device. This excludes any product approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration as a non-tobacco product for sale as a tobacco cessation product, as a tobacco dependence product, or for other medical purposes, and is being marketed and sold solely for that approved purpose. 
VENDING MACHINE: Any mechanical, electric or electronic, self-service device which, upon insertion of money, tokens or any other form of payment, dispenses tobacco products. 
(Ord. 4019, 6-14-1993; Ord. 6591, 4-23-2018, eff. 7-1-2018) 
3-6-3. - License required. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail, whether in person or by vending machine, to give away, deliver or to keep with the intention of selling at retail, whether in person or by vending machine, giving away or delivering tobacco products within the Village without having first obtained a tobacco products dealer's license therefor pursuant to this chapter. 
Such license shall be in addition to any other license required by this Code. 
(B)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of installing, keeping or maintaining a tobacco vending machine without having first complied with section 3-6-12 of this chapter regarding vending machine locking devices and without having first obtained a tobacco vending machine license to do so. 
No person shall install, keep, maintain or use or permit the installation, keeping, maintenance or use upon his premises of any tobacco vending machine owned and operated by another who has not first complied with section 3-6-12 of this chapter regarding vending machine locking devices and who has not obtained a tobacco vending machine license. 
Such license shall be in addition to any other license required by this Code. 
(Ord. 4381, 5-28-1996) 
3-6-4. - License application. 
Application for a license hereunder shall be made to the Village annually in conjunction with the annual business registration. 
(Ord. 4019, 6-14-1993; amd. Ord. 4458, 1-13-1997; Ord. 6591, 4-23-2018, eff. 7-1-2018) 
3-6-5. - License fee and term. 
A license shall be effective for one year, commencing on July 1 and ending on June 30 annually. The license fee shall be according to the following schedule: 
Each tobacco products dealer ..... $100.00 
Each tobacco vending machine ..... 85.00 
(Ord. 4381, 5-28-1996) 
3-6-6. - Prohibited sales; delivery; signs. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any person, including any licensee, to sell, offer for sale, give away or deliver tobacco products to any person under the age of 21 years. 
(B)  Signs informing the public of the age restrictions provided for herein shall be posted by every licensee on every display of tobacco products and on every vending machine which offers tobacco products for sale. Each such sign shall be plainly visible and shall state: 
GLEN ELLYN VILLAGE ORDINANCE PROHIBITS THE PURCHASE OR POSSESSION OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS BY PERSONS UNDER 21 YEARS OF AGE. 
The text of such signs shall be in red letters on a white background; said letters to be at least one inch high. 
(Ord. 4019, 6-14-1993; Ord. 6591, 4-23-2018, eff. 7-1-2018) 
3-6-7. - Minimum age to sell tobacco products. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee and/or any officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee, to engage, employ or permit any person under 18 years of age to sell tobacco products in any licensed premises. 
(B)  An agent or employee of a licensee younger than 18 years of age but at least 16 years of age may sell tobacco products in any licensed premises, if an officer, agent or employee of the licensee who is at least 21 years of age shall also be on the licensed premises at the time of such sale. 
(C)  It shall always be unlawful for any person under the age of 16 years to sell tobacco products. 
(Ord. 4019, 6-14-1993) 
3-6-8. - Purchase by minors prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to purchase tobacco products, or to misrepresent their identity or age, or to use any false or altered identification for the purpose of purchasing tobacco products. 
(Ord. 4019, 6-14-1993) 
3-6-9. - Possession by minors prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to possess any tobacco products; provided that the possession by a person under the age of 18 years under direct supervision of the parent or guardian of such person in the privacy of the parent's or guardian's home shall not be prohibited. 
(Ord. 4019, 6-14-1993) 
3-6-10. - Gift of tobacco products. 
No person, after purchasing or otherwise obtaining tobacco products, shall sell, give or deliver such tobacco products to another person under the age of 18 years; provided that the gift of a tobacco product to a person under the age of 18 years made under direct supervision of the parent or guardian of such person in the privacy of the parent's or guardian's home shall not be prohibited. 
(Ord. 4019, 6-14-1993) 
3-6-11. - Certain free distributions prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any licensee or any person in the business of selling or otherwise distributing, promoting or advertising tobacco products, or any employee or agent of any such licensee or person, in the course of such licensee's or person's business, to distribute, give away or deliver tobacco products free of charge to any person on any right of way, park, playground or other property owned by the Village, any school district, any park district or any public library. 
(Ord. 4019, 6-14-1993) 
3-6-12. - Vending machines; locking devices. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee to sell or offer for sale, give away, deliver or to keep with the intention of selling, giving away or delivering tobacco products by use of a vending machine, unless such vending machine is equipped with a manual, electric or electronic locking device controlled by the licensee so as to prevent its operation by persons under the age of 21 years. 
(B)  Any premises where access by persons under the age of 21 years is prohibited by law, or premises where the public is generally not permitted and where vending machines are strictly for the use of employees of businesses located at such premises, shall be exempt from the requirements of subsection 3-6-12(A) of this section. 
(Ord. 4019, 6-14-1993; Ord. 6591, 4-23-2018, eff. 7-1-2018) 
3-6-13. - Responsibility for agents and employees. 
Every act or omission of whatsoever nature constituting a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter by any officer, Director, Manager or other agent or employee of any licensee shall be deemed and held to be the act of such licensee; and such licensee shall be punishable in the same manner as if such act or omission has been done or omitted by the licensee personally. 
(Ord. 4019, 6-14-1993) 
3-6-14. - Suspension, revocation of license; fines; costs. 
(A)  The Village President shall be charged with the administration of this chapter. The Village President may suspend or revoke any license issued under the provisions of this chapter if he determines that the licensee has violated any of the provisions of this chapter. In lieu of suspension or revocation of a license, the Village President may instead levy a fine on the licensee. The fine imposed shall not exceed $500.00 for each violation. Each day on which a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. 
(B)  However, no such license shall be suspended or revoked and no licensee shall be fined except after a public hearing by the Village President with a seven day written notice to the licensee affording the licensee an opportunity to appear and defend against the charges contained in such notice. The seven day notice provisions shall begin the day following delivery by certified mail or by personal service. 
(C)  The Village President shall within seven days after such hearing, if he determines after such hearing that the license should be revoked or suspended or that the licensee should be fined, state the reason for such determination in a written order and state either the amount of the fine, the period of suspension or that the license has been revoked and serve a copy of such order upon the licensee within the seven days. 
(D)  Any licensee determined by the Village President to have violated any of the provisions of this chapter shall pay to the Village the costs of the hearing before the Village President on such violation. The Village President shall determine the costs incurred by the Village for said hearing, including, but not limited to: court reporter fees, the costs of transcripts or records, attorney fees, the cost of preparing and mailing notices and orders and all other miscellaneous expenses incurred by the Village or such lesser sum as the Village President may allow. 
(E)  The licensee shall pay said costs to the Village within 30 days of notification of the costs by the Village President. Failure to pay said costs within 30 days of notification is a violation of this chapter and may be cause for license suspension or revocation or the levy of a fine. 
(Ord. 4019, 6-14-1993) 
3-6-15. - Use of premises after revocation. 
When any license shall have been revoked for any cause, no license shall be granted to said licensee for the period of six months thereafter for the conduct of the business of selling tobacco products as defined in section 3-6-3 of this chapter on the premises described in such revoked license. 
(Ord. 4019, 6-14-1993) 
3-6-16. - Penalty. 
(A)  Persons charged with violating: Section 3-6-8, "purchase by minors prohibited", section 3-6-9, "possession by minors prohibited", section 3-6-10, "gift of tobacco products", of this chapter, may discharge their liability by paying an administrative fee of $5.00 within ten days after the first violation occurs; $20.00 within ten days after the second violation occurs; and $50.00 within ten days after their third and subsequent offense. 
(B)  Any person violating any section or provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than $5.00 nor more than $500.00 for each offense. 
(Ord. 4019, 6-14-1993) 
Chapter 7 - COAL DEALERS 
(Repealed by Ordinance 2289, December 12, 1977) 
Chapter 8 - DRY CLEANERS 

3-8-1. - License required. 
No person shall conduct or operate a dry cleaning establishment, other than one containing coin operated machines, without first obtaining a license therefor. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 7.06) 
3-8-2. - Application. 
An application for a license shall contain the name and address of the applicant and the address of the business location. 
Each application shall be referred to the Chief of the Fire Department for investigation and recommendation before the license is issued. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 7.06) 
3-8-3. - License fee. 
The annual fee for a license shall be $30.00. 
(Ord. 2290, 12-12-1977, eff. 7-1-1978) 
3-8-4. - Buildings. 
All buildings in which dry cleaning establishments are operated shall comply with the provisions of the Building Code and fire prevention code. 
It shall be unlawful for anyone to smoke on the premises or to maintain a stove or open flame of any kind thereon. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 7.06) 
3-8-5. - Location. 
No dry cleaning establishment shall be operated in any place where a majority of the buildings within a radius of 400 feet are used exclusively for residence purposes. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 7.06) 
3-8-6. - Inspection. 
It shall be the duty of the Chief of the Fire Department to make such inspections as may be necessary to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 7.06) 
Chapter 9 - FILLING STATIONS 

3-9-1. - Definition. 
A filling station means any building, structure or premises where a container or tank, either portable or stationary, containing ether, carbon, bisulfite, gasoline, naphtha, benzene, hydrocarbon, liquefied petroleum gas, acetone, kerosene, turpentine or other flammable liquids having a flashpoint below 165 degrees Fahrenheit are kept for the purpose of sale or distribution. 
This chapter, however, shall not apply to any place where such flammable liquids are kept for medicinal purposes only. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 7.07) 
3-9-2. - License required. 
No person shall operate a filling station without first having obtained a license therefor. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 7.07) 
3-9-3. - Application. 
The application for a filling station license shall specify the location of the filling station, the capacity, in gallons, of the tanks, and the liquids to be contained therein. 
Each application shall be referred to the Chief of the Fire Department, and approved by him, before the license is issued. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 7.07) 
3-9-4. - Regulations and inspections. 
Each filling station shall be erected and maintained in accordance with the state statutes and the rules of the State Fire Marshal. 
The Chief of the Fire Department, or some person authorized by him, shall inspect each filling station at least twice every year. It shall be the duty of the person making such inspections to see that the premises are maintained in compliance with the provisions of this Code and the rules of the State Fire Marshal, and to determine that there is no dangerous accumulation of waste or other combustible material on the premises. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 7.07) 
3-9-5. - License fee. 
The annual fee for such license shall be $30.00. 
(Ord. 2290, 12-12-1977, eff. 7-1-1978) 
Chapter 10 - FLORISTS 

3-10-1. - Definition. 
The term "florist" means any person regularly engaged in an established business selling, at retail, cut flowers, bridal bouquets, funeral designs, or growing plants from a fixed and permanent business location. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 7.08) 
3-10-2. - License required. 
No person shall engage in business as a florist without first obtaining a license therefor. 
A separate license shall be required for each location from which a person is operating as a florist. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 7.08) 
3-10-3. - Application. 
Each application shall give the name and residence address of the owner or operator of the business, and the address of each location from which he intends to conduct his business. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 7.08) 
3-10-4. - Regulations. 
Each location from which the business of a florist is conducted shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, free from rodents and vermin. No decayed, decaying, unwholesome, contaminated or diseased flowers or plants shall be allowed to remain in or about the establishment. 
Adequate and convenient washing and toilet facilities shall be provided. 
No licensee shall offer for sale any flowers or plants, the sale of which is restricted by any federal or state law. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 7.08) 
3-10-5. - Inspection. 
The Building and Zoning Official or his designee shall, at least twice each year, inspect all florist establishments to determine whether the requirements of this Code are being complied with. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 7.08; amd. Ord. 4458, 1-13-1997) 
3-10-6. - License fee. 
The annual fee for a florist license shall be $30.00. 
(Ord. 2290, 12-12-1977, eff. 7-1-1978) 
Chapter 11 - FUNERAL DIRECTORS 
(Repealed by Ordinance 2289, December 12, 1977) 
Chapter 12 - HOUSEHOLD PET DEALERS 

3-12-1. - License required. 
No person shall engage as a dealer in birds, cats, dogs or other household pets within the Village without first obtaining a license therefor. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 7.10) 
3-12-2. - Sanitary regulations. 
Premises used for such purposes shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, and shall be thoroughly cleaned at least once each day. No refuse shall be allowed to accumulate thereon for a period longer than 24 hours, and the premises shall be well ventilated. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 7.10) 
3-12-3. - Diseased animals. 
Any diseased animal on such premises shall be kept in separate quarters so that there shall be no danger of disease spreading from one animal to another. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 7.10) 
3-12-4. - Inspections. 
The Building and Zoning Official or his designee shall make, or cause to be made, such inspections as may be necessary to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 7.10; amd. Ord. 4458, 1-13-1997) 
3-12-5. - License fee. 
The annual fee for a household pet dealer shall be $30.00. 
(Ord. 2290, 12-12-1977, eff. 7-1-1978) 
Chapter 13 - HOUSE MOVERS, WRECKERS 
(Repealed by Ordinance 2289, December 12, 1977) 
Chapter 14 - ICE DEALERS 

3-14-1. - License. 
It shall be unlawful to engage in the business of the retail sale of ice in the Village without obtaining a license therefor. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 7.12) 
3-14-2. - Application. 
The application for such license shall state the number of vehicles to be used for the delivery of ice in the Village, and the number of coin operated machines dispensing ice or ice cubes. 
Whenever the number of vehicles or machines so used shall increase, notice of this fact shall be given to the Village collector, and the fee provided herein paid. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 7.12) 
3-14-3. - Standards. 
All ice sold, or offered for sale, for domestic use in the Village shall be free from harmful materials. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 7.12) 
3-14-4. - License fee. 
The annual fee for each vehicle delivering, or each machine dispensing ice or ice cubes at retail shall be $7.50. 
(Ord. 2290, 12-12-1977, eff. 7-1-1978) 
Chapter 15 - INSURANCE BROKERS 
(Repealed by Ordinance 2289, December 12, 1977) 
Chapter 16 - ITINERANT MERCHANTS 

3-16-1. - License required. 
No person shall do business in the Village as an itinerant merchant without having first secured a license. 
Any merchant engaging, or intending to engage, in business for a period of time not exceeding 100 days shall be considered an itinerant merchant. 
Peddlers who are licensed by this Code and charitable organizations selling merchandise shall not be considered itinerant merchants. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 7.14) 
3-16-2. - Application. 
An application for a license as an itinerant merchant must be filed with the Cashier's Office. The application shall set forth the name and address of the applicant, the commodities to be sold or offered for sale, the location of the place intended to be occupied or used for business, and the length of time to be so used. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 7.14; amd. Ord. 4458, 1-13-1997) 
3-16-3. - License fee. 
The license fee shall be $30.00 for each period of 30 consecutive days or $1.50 per day. 
(Ord. 2290, 12-12-1977, eff. 7-1-1978) 
Chapter 17 - JUNK DEALERS 

3-17-1. - License required. 
No person shall engage in business as a junk dealer or operate a junk shop, store or place for the purchase or sale of old iron, chain, brass, copper, tin, lead or other base metals, old rope, old bags, rags, wastepaper, bagging, rubber, glass, and all articles and things discarded or no longer used as a manufactured article composed of, or consisting of, any one or more of the materials or articles herein mentioned, without first obtaining a license. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 7.15) 
3-17-2. - Junkyards. 
No person shall keep or store any junk or establish or maintain any junkyard in the Village. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 7.15) 
3-17-3. - Stolen goods. 
Every keeper of a junk shop or junk dealer who receives or is in possession of any article or thing of value which may have been lost or stolen shall produce such article or thing of value to any member of the Police Department asking to examine the same. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 7.15) 
3-17-4. - Vehicles. 
Each vehicle used by a junk dealer in the conduct of his business shall bear thereon, in legible characters, the name and address of the owner and proprietor thereof. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 7.15) 
3-17-5. - License fee. 
The annual fee to be paid for a license as a junk dealer shall be $30.00. 
(Ord. 2290, 12-12-1977, eff. 7-1-1978) 
Chapter 18 - LAUNDRIES 

3-18-1. - Definition. 
The word "laundry" is hereby defined as any place, building, structure, room, establishment or portion thereof, used for the purpose of washing, drying, starching or ironing shirts, dresses, underwear, collars, cuffs or other wearing apparel, table, bed or other household linens, towels, curtains, draperies or other washable fabrics for the general public. 
The word "laundry" shall also include any towel or linen supply laundry maintained or operated for the purpose of washing, drying, starching or ironing towels, aprons, napkins, table linens, washable clothing, or other similar articles, the property of such laundry but rented for a consideration to patrons or customers of said laundry. 
The word "laundry" shall also be held to include any establishment wherein washing machine units are available for use by the general public upon the deposit of a coin or the payment of a fee to the operator of the establishment or his agent. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 7.16) 
3-18-2. - License required. 
No person shall engage in the laundry business without first obtaining a license therefor. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 7.16) 
3-18-3. - Application. 
Application for such license shall state the location intended to be occupied; and such application may be referred to the health officers for investigation and report before such license is issued. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 7.16) 
3-18-4. - Sanitation. 
Premises used for laundries must be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. No refuse of any kind shall be permitted to accumulate on such premises, and the premises must be kept free from rats, mice and vermin. 
It shall be unlawful for a laundry to employ a person afflicted with a venereal or other contagious disease. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 7.16) 
3-18-5. - Inspection. 
It shall be the duty of the health officer, or such other person as may be designated by him, to make, or cause to be made, such inspections as may be necessary to enforce the provisions of this section. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 7.16) 
3-18-6. - License fee. 
The annual fee for a laundry license shall be $30.00. 
For each establishment wherein washing machine units are placed for the use of the general public, the annual fee shall be $30.00 for the first 25 washing machine units installed in the licensed premises, and $1.50 for each such unit over. 
(Ord. 2290, 12-12-1977, eff. 7-1-1978) 
Chapter 19 - LIQUOR CONTROL CODE 

3-19-1. - Purpose. 
It is the policy of the Village to limit the sale of alcoholic liquor at retail primarily to the sale in its original package or by restaurants, hotels or motels. It is not deemed conducive to the promotion of this public policy to allow the sale of alcoholic liquor at retail for consumption on the premises where sold as a sole or primary business to be conducted within the Village. 
Further it is the policy of the Village to limit the purchase, consumption or possession of alcoholic liquor to persons of the age of 21 years or older and to prevent intoxication, disorderly conduct, trespasses, unruly disturbances at public or private assemblies, and similar conduct that often results from the purchase, consumption or possession of alcoholic liquor by persons under the lawful age. 
(Ord. 2767, 5-10-1982) 
3-19-2. - Title. 
The provisions of this chapter may be referred to as the Glen Ellyn Liquor Control Code. 
(Ord. 2767, 5-10-1982) 
3-19-3. - Definitions. 
All words and phrases defined in an act, entitled "an act relating to alcoholic liquors" approved January 31, 1934, as amended from time to time, and as set forth generally in 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2 et seq., are hereby incorporated and made a part of this chapter. Unless the context otherwise requires, the following, as used in this chapter, shall be construed according to the definitions given below: 
HOLDING AREA: A place within a restaurant that is primarily used by patrons of the restaurant for their waiting to be seated at a table for meal service and in which alcoholic beverages are served to such restaurant patrons. 
LIQUOR CONTROL ACT: The provisions of "an act relating to alcoholic liquors", approved January 31, 1934, as amended and as set forth in 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2 et seq. 
MOTEL: Every building or other structure falling within the definition of "hotel". 
RESTAURANT: A premises or place where meals can be bought to be eaten on the premises. 
(Ord. 2767, 5-10-1982; amd. Ord. 3007, 6-11-1984) 
3-19-4. - Local Liquor Control Commissioner defined. 
The Village President is hereby authorized to be the local Liquor Control Commissioner as defined in 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/4-2 of the "Liquor Control Act" and shall be charged with the administration of the Liquor Control Act and of such ordinances and resolutions relating to alcoholic liquor as may be enacted by the President and Board of Trustees of the Village. 
(Ord. 2767, 5-10-1982) 
3-19-5. - Deputy commissioners. 
The President may appoint one or more persons to assist him in the exercise of the powers and the performance of the duties provided for the local Liquor Control Commissioner, and such other persons as may be appointed shall be designated deputy local Liquor Control Commissioners. 
(Ord. 2767, 5-10-1982) 
3-19-6. - Powers and duties. 
The local Liquor Control Commissioner shall have the following powers and duties with respect to local liquor licenses: 
(A)  To grant and/or suspend for not more than 30 days or revoke for cause, all local licenses issued to persons or entities for premises within the Village. 
(B)  To enter or to authorize any law enforcing officer to enter, at any time, upon the premises licensed hereunder to determine whether any of the provisions of the state law, or Village ordinances or any rules or regulations adopted by the Village or by the Illinois Liquor Control Commission have been or are being violated, and at such time to examine the premises of the licensee in connection therewith. Any person or persons appointed by the local Liquor Control Commissioner pursuant to section 3-19-5 of this chapter shall have the powers given to the local Liquor Control Commissioner by this subsection. 
(C)  To receive complaint(s) from any citizen within the Village that any provision of the state law or of this chapter have been or are being violated and to act upon such complaint(s) in the manner provided by law. 
(D)  To receive local license fees and deposit same to the credit of the Village. 
(E)  To examine, or cause to be examined, under oath, any applicant for a local license or for a renewal thereof, or any licensee upon whom notice of revocation or suspension has been served, or any licensee against whom a citation proceeding has been instituted by the State of Illinois Liquor Control Commission; to examine, or cause to be examined, the books and records of any such applicant or licensee; and to hear testimony and take evidence for his information in the performance of his duties, and for such purposes to issue subpoenas which shall be effective in any part of this state. For the purpose of obtaining any of the information desired by the local Liquor Control Commissioner under this section, he may authorize his agent to act on his behalf. 
(F)  To order, by issuance of a written order, any licensed premises closed for not more than seven days giving the licensee an opportunity to be heard during that period, if the local Liquor Control Commissioner has reason to believe that any continued operation of a particular licensed premises will immediately threaten the welfare of the Village, except if such licensee shall also be engaged in the conduct of another business or businesses on the licensed premises, such order shall not be applicable to such other business or businesses. 
(Ord. 2767, 5-10-1982) 
3-19-7. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail, to give away or to keep with intention of selling at retail or giving away or in a business offering goods or services at retail permitting patrons to bring onto the premises, alcoholic liquor within the Village without having a local retail liquor dealer's license. Further, it shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail or to give away, alcoholic liquors within the Village in violation of the terms of a local retail liquor dealer's license issued by the Village; provided, however, nothing herein contained shall prevent the possession and transportation of alcoholic liquor for the lawful, personal use of the possessor, his family and his guests, over the age of 21 years. 
(Ord. 2767, 5-10-1982; amd. Ord. 6069, 9-10-2012) 
3-19-8. - Application for license. 
Applications for a local retail liquor dealer's license shall be made to the local Liquor Control Commissioner, in writing, signed by the applicant, if an individual, signed by each individual partner if a partnership, or signed by a duly authorized agent thereof, if a club or corporation, verified by oath or affidavit, and shall contain the following statements and information: 
(A)  The applicant's name, mailing address and telephone number; 
(B)  The name and address of the applicant's business; 
(C)  If applicable, the date of the filing of the "assumed name" of the business with the County Clerk of DuPage County; 
(D)  In the case applicant is a partnership, the date of the formation of the partnership, the full name, age, address and telephone numbers of all persons with an ownership interest in the partnership, or who have a right to receive a direct or indirect benefit from the profits of the partnership; 
(E)  In the case of a corporation, if an Illinois corporation, the date of its incorporation, or if a foreign corporation, the state where it was incorporated and the date of its becoming qualified under the Illinois Business Corporation Act to transact business in the State, and in either case, a statement of the objects for which the corporation was organized, the full name, age, address and telephone number of all shareholders with an aggregate of more than five percent of the capital stock of the corporation or of any person(s) receiving a direct or indirect benefit from the profits of the sale of alcoholic liquors in Glen Ellyn; 
(F)  The name, age, address and telephone number of the person(s) who will manage the business of the applicant in the Village; 
(G)  The citizenship of all persons required herein to be identified in the application, their date and place of birth, and if a naturalized citizen, the time and place of their naturalization; 
(H)  The character of the business of the applicant; 
(I)  The length of time that applicant has been in business of that character; 
(J)  The amount of goods, wares and merchandise on hand at the time application is made; 
(K)  The location and description of the premises or place of business which is to be operated under such license, and the following information: 
1.  If a leased premises, a copy of the lease shall be provided and the lease shall be for a term of sufficient length to encompass the term of the license sought; and 
2.  The name and address of the owner or owners of the premises and the names and addresses of all the owners of the beneficial interest of any trust if said premises is held in trust; 
(L)  A statement whether applicant has made similar application for a similar other license on premises other than described in this application, and the disposition of such application; 
(M)  A statement signed by or on behalf of the applicant and by all individuals required to be identified therein, that each of them has never been convicted of a felony or a Class A misdemeanor, and is not disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter or thing contained in the laws of the State or the provisions of this chapter; 
(N)  Whether a previous license by any state or subdivision thereof, or by the Federal government has been issued, and if so, where and when, or if any such license has been revoked, state the reasons therefor; 
(O)  A statement that the applicant and all individuals required to be identified in the application have not in the past and will not in the future violate any of the laws of the State or of the United States, or any ordinance of the Village controlling the retail sale of alcoholic liquors in the conduct of his place of business; 
(P)  The applicant's Retailer's Occupational Tax (ROT) registration number and a statement whether the applicant is delinquent in the payment of the retailer's occupational tax (sales tax), and if so, the reasons therefor; 
(Q)  A statement whether applicant is delinquent under the 30 day credit law, and if so, the reasons therefor; 
(R)  Whether the applicant possesses a current Federal wagering and gaming device stamp, and if so, the reasons therefor; 
(S)  Whether the applicant, any individual identified in the application, or any other person, directly or indirectly interested in his place of business is a public official, and if so, the particulars thereof; 
(T)  A statement whether applicant is in violation of 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-6 of the "Liquor Control Act", and if so, the reasons therefor; 
(U)  A statement that applicant and all individuals required to be identified in the application have not sold, delivered or given away alcoholic liquor in violation of any State law, or Village ordinance to a person under the minimum age required to purchase or possess alcoholic liquor; 
(V)  Such additional information or identification as the Local Liquor Commissioner may deem necessary in order to establish the character of the applicant. Such information may include a requirement that the applicant, if an individual, shall submit his fingerprints to the Local Liquor Control Commissioner. In the case of a partnership, the partners, or in the case of a corporation, the officers, Manager, or Directors thereof, or any stockholder(s) owning in the aggregate more than five percent of the capital stock of said corporation may be required to furnish such additional information including fingerprints. An applicant, whether individual, partnership, association or corporation, shall also furnish or cause to be furnished upon request such additional information and fingerprints concerning the manager or agent who is to conduct the business for which the application is sought. Further, such additional information may include proof that the applicant and the premises to be licensed comply with all other laws and ordinances including licensing provisions, which apply to the applicant, to the premises or to applicant's other businesses conducted on the premises. 
(W)  1.  Each applicant for a liquor license shall have each person who will supervise or be in charge of the sale of liquor upon commencement of their license successfully complete a Beverage Alcohol Sellers and Servers Training (BASSET) Program conducted by an agency licensed by the Illinois Liquor Commission, or successfully complete a State of Illinois certified Alcohol Awareness Program, prior to issuance of a liquor license. Proof of successful completion of BASSET training shall be required prior to issuance of the liquor license. 
2.  Each employee whether or not supervisory of a Class A-1, A-2, B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, B-6, B-7, B-8, B-9, C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, C-4A, D-1, D-2, D-3, E, F, G, I, J, K, L, M, N, O or P license, who is engaged in the selling, mixing, preparing, serving or delivering of alcoholic beverages to customers, guests or patrons, for consumption on or off the premises, shall successfully complete a BASSET Program conducted by an agency licensed by the Illinois Liquor Control Commission, or successfully complete a State of Illinois certified Alcohol Awareness Program. Such training shall be completed not more than 90 days after the employee begins employment with the licensee. A copy of the employee's certificate of completion of training shall be filed with the Glen Ellyn Liquor Commission. 
3.  Liquor license applicants applying for a liquor license effective July 1, 2008 through June 30, 2009, shall be granted a one year grace period to have supervisors and employees, as designated by this section, successfully complete a BASSET Program conducted by an agency licensed by the Illinois Liquor Commission, or successfully complete a State of Illinois certified Alcohol Awareness Program. This grace period shall not apply to new liquor license applicants when the application for the liquor license is submitted after June 30, 2008. 
4.  Liquor license holders shall keep a standing record of when the required BASSET training, and/or successfully completed State of Illinois certified Alcohol Awareness Program, was completed. This will include, but is not limited to, a photocopy of a BASSET card and/or a photocopy of a certificate from a State of Illinois certified Alcohol Awareness Program. This standing record shall be kept on the business premises and available to inspection by representative(s) of the Glen Ellyn Liquor Commission or other Village representative. 
(Ord. 2767, 5-10-1982; Ord. 5677, 4-28-2008; amd. Ord. 5686, 6-23-2008; Ord. 5749, 4-27-2009; Ord. 5880, 7-26-2010; Ord. 6029, 5-14-2012; Ord. 6182, 11-12-2013; Ord. 6322, 5-26-2015; Ord. 6342, 8-17-2015; Ord. 6411, 6-20-2016; Ord. 6507, 6-12-2017; Ord. 6511, 6-26-2017) 
3-19-9. - Processing of applications. 
Any application received by the Village Clerk shall be forthwith forwarded to the Local Liquor Control Commissioner, and the Commissioner shall issue a written acceptance or rejection of such application within 60 days of its receipt by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner or by the Village Clerk in his behalf, providing all information requested by this chapter or by the Commissioner has been furnished. 
(Ord. 2767, 5-10-1982) 
3-19-10. - Persons eligible for license. 
No local retail liquor dealer's license shall be issued to: 
(A)  A person who is not a resident of the Village; 
(B)  A person who is not of fit character and reputation in the community in which he resides and in the Village; 
(C)  A person who has not attained the age of 21 years; 
(D)  A person who is not a citizen of the United States; 
(E)  A person who has been convicted of a felony under any Federal or State law, if determined by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner that such person has not been sufficiently rehabilitated to warrant public trust; 
(F)  A person who has been convicted of being the keeper or is keeping a house of ill fame; 
(G)  A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime of misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality; 
(H)  A person whose license issued under this chapter has been revoked for cause; 
(I)  A person who at the time of application for renewal of any license issued hereunder would not be eligible for such license upon a first application; 
(J)  A partnership, unless all of the members of such partnership shall be qualified to obtain a license; 
(K)  A corporation or association, if any officer, Manager or Director thereof, or any stockholder(s) or member(s) owning in the aggregate more than five percent of the stock of such corporation or association, would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason other than a citizenship or residence in the Village; 
(L)  A corporation, unless it is incorporated in Illinois or unless it is a foreign corporation which is qualified under the Illinois Business Corporation Act to transact business in Illinois; 
(M)  A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager unless said manager possesses the same qualifications required of the licensee; 
(N)  A person who has been convicted of a violation of any Federal or State law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor, or who shall have forfeited his bond to appear in court to answer charges for any such violations; 
(O)  A person who does not beneficially own the premises for which a license is sought, or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for which the license is to be issued; 
(P)  Any elected public official, law enforcing officer, the President or member of the Village Board of Trustees, Glen Ellyn officer or employee, or member of any Glen Ellyn Board or Commission; 
(Q)  Any person, firm or corporation not eligible for a State retail liquor dealer's license; 
(R)  Any applicant who fails to obtain a State liquor license; 
(S)  A person who is not a beneficial owner of the business to be operated by the licensee; 
(T)  A person who has been convicted of a gambling offense as prescribed by any of the subsections (a)(3) through (a)(10) of section 28-1, or as prescribed by 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/28-3 of the Criminal Code, as heretofore or hereafter amended, or as prescribed by a statute replacing any of the aforesaid statutory provisions; or any person who has been convicted of a gambling offense as prescribed by an ordinance of the Village; 
(U)  A person to whom a Federal gaming device stamp or a Federal wagering stamp has been issued by the Federal government for the current tax period; 
(V)  A partnership to which a Federal gaming device stamp or a Federal wagering stamp has been issued by the Federal government for the current tax period, or if any other partners have been issued a Federal gaming device stamp or Federal wagering stamp by the Federal government for the current tax period; 
(W)  A corporation or association, if any officer, Manager or Director thereof, or any stockholder or member owning in the aggregate more than five percent of the stock of such corporation has been issued a Federal gaming device stamp or a Federal wagering stamp for the current tax period; 
(X)  Any premises for which a Federal gaming device stamp or a Federal wagering stamp has been issued by the Federal government for the current tax period; 
(Y)  Any person who has sold, given away or delivered alcoholic liquor to any person under the age of 21 years, in violation of the applicable State laws or Village ordinances, or to any intoxicated person, or to any person known to him to be a habitual drunkard, insane, mentally ill, mentally deficient or in need of mental treatment, unless otherwise determined by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner. 
(Ord. 2767, 5-10-1982) 
3-19-11. - Classification of licenses. 
There shall be the following classes of licenses: 
(A)  Class A: 
Class A-1 license shall authorize the retail sale on the specified premises of beer, ale or wine in restaurants at times when food service is available and for consumption only on the premises where sold. 
Class A-2 license shall authorize the retail sale on the specified premises of beer sold in glass bottles; beer sold "on tap" served in glass containers only; and wine sold in glass glasses only in fast-casual restaurants at times when food service is available and for consumption only on the premises where sold. 
Class A-3 license which authorizes the retail sale, on the specific premises, at a publicly owned and operated culinary school and hospitality center where the use and service of alcoholic liquor will be part of the educational curriculum and offered in conjunction with the service of food, a restaurant with casual/fine dining, a large meeting space for receptions and special events and a six room boutique hotel. 
The licensee shall develop and share with the Village, by November 1, 2011, and thereafter when revised for its reasonable approval, rules and procedures to allow the sale of liquor to be utilized in an educational program in full conformance with the State and local regulations regarding alcoholic liquor. The rules shall specifically address a context where individuals under the age of 21 may participate. The licensee may request reasonable variations from rules otherwise applicable, which may be granted by the Chief of Police of the Village. 
Class A-4 license which authorizes a retail facility offering goods or services relating to the viewing or the production of art, on the specified premises, to permit patrons to bring onto the premises and to consume alcoholic liquor but only when offered in conjunction with the goods or services offered for sale and offered in conjunction with the service of food, which can be light snacks. When patrons are permitted to bring onto the premises and consume alcoholic liquor, either the owner or a manager of the premises must be present. All alcoholic liquor brought onto the premises shall either be consumed on the premises or sealed if it is to be carried off the premises. The owner or manager will be required to observe the patrons to use their reasonable best efforts to prevent patrons from leaving the premises who are under the influence of the alcoholic liquor and the owner or manager will, in that case, offer the patron alternate transportation to their home, rather than permitting the patron to drive while under the influence of alcoholic liquor. The alternate transportation will be offered without charge. 
(B)  Class B: 
Class B-1 license shall authorize the retail sale, on the specified premises, of alcoholic liquor in restaurants having the seating capacities stated herein below, only at times when food service is available in the restaurant, and for consumption only on the premises where sold. The restaurant must offer and have available during all times that alcoholic liquor is available a menu which includes food more substantial than bar snacks such as nuts, pretzels, chips or the like. Examples of acceptable food service include but are not limited to hot or cold sandwiches, full salads, hot dogs, hamburgers and pizzas. To qualify for a Class B-1 license, a restaurant must seat not less than 50 nor more than 300 persons at tables at times when food service is available and may not include a holding area accommodating more than one person for every 12 restaurant seats. A Class B-1 license shall not authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor at times when live entertainment is available unless the live entertainment is of a type that is incidental to the restaurant service, as opposed to the sale of alcoholic liquor, and unless the licensee has been issued an entertainment endorsement after furnishing a description of both the type of entertainment to be offered and the location of the entertainment on the licensed premises. 
A Class B-1 license may also be issued to permit the sale of alcoholic liquor on a recreational facility comprising more than 100 acres provided that no sales may take place at a location on the premises which are located within 100 feet of an occupied residence. 
Class B-2 license shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor within the following facilities of a hotel or motel: a barroom when the barroom is in conjunction with a restaurant; restaurants and banquet facilities, which cater to banquets, meetings and private parties, as well as the general public. A B-2 license shall not authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor at times when live entertainment is available. Such license shall authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor on the specified premises and for consumption only on the premises where sold. A B-2 license shall also permit the licensee to deliver alcoholic beverages to guestrooms via room service. The server making that delivery shall ascertain that the occupant of the room or the person receiving the alcoholic beverage is at least 21 years of age. 
Class B-3 license shall authorize holders of Class B-2 licenses to sell alcoholic liquor, on the specified premises, with live professional or amateur entertainment or to sell alcoholic liquor in a room other than a dining room and barroom combined, but without coin operated or free amusement devices, and for consumption only on the premises where sold. To qualify for a B-3 entertainment supplemental license, an applicant must first be issued and hold a B-2 license. The B-3 license is supplemental to and in addition to a B-2 license and does not replace a B-2 license. 
Class B-4 license shall authorize holders of a Class B-1 license to sell alcoholic liquor, on the specified premises, in banquet facilities catering to banquets, meetings and serving private parties, as well as the general public, including the sale in such banquet facilities at times when live professional or amateur entertainment is available, but without coin operated or free amusement devices, and for consumption only on the premises where sold. To qualify for a B-4 banquet facilities license, an applicant must first be issued and hold a B-1 license. The B-4 license is supplemental to and in addition to a B-1 license and does not replace a B-1 license. 
Class B-5 license shall authorize holder of a Class A-1, A-2, B-1 or P license to sell alcoholic liquor on public sidewalks adjacent to the specified premises. A Class B-5 license may only be issued to a holder of a Class A-1, A-2, B-1 or P license, who has entered into a license agreement approved by the Glen Ellyn Village Board for the use of some portion of the public sidewalk adjacent to the specified premises for restaurant use. That license agreement shall contain terms and conditions regarding the sale of alcoholic liquor as shall generally apply under the ordinances of the Village. In addition to such special and specific requirements, which may be attached to licenses because of local conditions all A-1, A-2, B-1 or P license holders shall follow these requirements: 1) all liquor service shall cease no later than 10:00 p.m., and liquor consumption shall cease no later than 10:30 p.m.; 2) patrons shall be seated at the tables on the public sidewalk when consuming alcohol, which shall be served only by a server from the restaurant; 3) there shall be no carryout service, and beer, wine and liquor shall not be served in bottles; 4) service of alcohol shall be incidental to the service of meals and shall only take place for patrons ordering meals or appetizers; and 5) the licensee may be required to construct and maintain such separation of the area by wall, fence, divider, chain or other device as shall be approved in the application. A B-5 license shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquor after receiving Village Board approval of the annual tables and chairs license agreement expiring November 1 of each calendar year. To qualify for a B-5 public sidewalk license, an applicant must first be issued and hold an A-1, A-2, B-1 or P license (the basic license). The B-5 license is supplemental to and in addition to the basic license and does not replace the basic license. 
Class B-6 license shall authorize the serving, on the specified premises, of alcoholic liquor during cooking classes, demonstrations or hands on events at a privately owned retail business that also offers fine cookware, professional kitchen tools, tablewares, specialty foods and one of a kind items. 
1.  The serving is for consumption on the specified premises only. 
2.  For wine the serving shall be limited to three individual glasses of wine limited to three five-ounce pours, for beer the serving shall be limited to three individual glasses of beer limited to three 12-ounce pours and for alcoholic liquor the serving shall be limited to three one-and-one-half-ounce pours per person during the permitted hours during any one calendar day. 
3.  No person holding a Class B-6 license pursuant to this chapter shall sell or permit to be sold, offered for sale, given away, or delivered, any alcoholic liquor except between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday and 12:00 noon and 5:00 p.m. on Sunday. 
Class B-7 license shall authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises of a public golf course. The premises shall include the clubhouse dining areas, restaurant, patios, and any temporary tents erected where food is served. The Class B-7 public golf course liquor license shall also authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor from one or more carts and a "halfway house" all for consumption on the specified premises. No licensee shall permit any patron to possess alcoholic liquor on the specified premises which was not acquired from the licensee. The permitted hours of sale shall be the same hours as the Class B liquor licenses except Sundays, alcoholic liquor may be sold between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 1:00 a.m. 
Class B-8 license shall authorize the retail sale/serving of all types of alcoholic liquor on the specified premises within a building and for consumption only in the building where sold or served and only where food and/or snacks are available. Such license shall be for a specified number of discreet events, not to exceed four hours in length and ending no later than 12:00 midnight, and may be granted only to a local retail business establishment with the primary business purpose of the sale of fine art. The Class B-8 license is restricted as follows: 
Class B-8 (12): Maximum number of events 12. 
Class B-8 (24): Maximum number of events 24. 
Liquor licenses are authorized from July 1 through June 30. 
The Class B-8 license holder shall provide written notice to the Village Liquor Commissioner, Village Manager and Police Chief at least 30 days in advance of each scheduled event. This written notice (form provided by the Village of Glen Ellyn) shall specify, name and nature of the event, the date(s) and time(s) at which alcoholic liquor will be served. Fundraising events would not fall under the Class B-8 liquor license, the Class E liquor license classification would apply. Private events will not be considered as part of the Class B-8 liquor license classification. 
The owner or manager and servers shall be BASSET trained and will be required to observe the patrons to use their reasonable best efforts to prevent patrons from becoming under the influence of alcoholic beverages or allowing patrons to leave the premises who are under the influence of the alcoholic liquor and the owner or manager will, in that case, offer the patron alternate transportation to their home, rather than permitting the patron to drive while under the influence of alcoholic liquor. The alternate transportation will be offered without charge, any fees will be paid by the liquor license holder. 
(C)  Class C: 
Class C-1 license shall authorize the retail sale, on the specified premises, of alcoholic liquor in its original package as a principal business, or as an adjunct to another retail business, where more than 300 square feet of floor area is devoted to the storage, display and sale of alcoholic liquor. A Class C-1 license does not authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises where sold. Retail floor area devoted to the sale of alcoholic liquor includes the gross area devoted to the storage, display, customer access and sales area used for the sale of alcoholic liquor. 
Class C-2 license shall authorize the retail sale, on the specified premises, of alcoholic liquor in its original package as an adjunct to another principal retail business, where no more than 300 square feet of retail floor area is devoted to the sale of alcoholic liquor. A Class C-2 license does not authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises where sold. Retail floor area devoted to the sale of alcoholic liquor includes the gross area devoted to the storage, display, customer access and sales area used for the sale of alcoholic liquor. 
Class C-3 license shall authorize the retail sale, on the specified premises, of alcoholic liquor in its original package, along with the sale of other items associated with the storage, use and consumption of alcoholic liquor, where more than 300 square feet of floor area is devoted to the storage, display and sale of alcoholic liquor and where at least 70 percent of the sales on the premises are derived from the sale of wine. A Class C-3 license does not authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor for the consumption on the premises where sold. Retail floor area devoted to the sale of alcoholic liquor includes the gross area devoted to the storage, display, customer access and sale area used for the sale of alcoholic liquor. 
Class C-4 license shall authorize the retail sale, on the premises, of alcoholic liquor in its original package as a principal business, where more than 300 square feet of floor area is devoted to the storage display and sale of alcoholic liquor and where at least 90 percent of the sales on the premises are derived from the sale of beer. A Class C-4 license does not authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises where sold. Retail floor area devoted to the sale of alcoholic liquor includes the gross area devoted to the storage, display, customer access and sales area used for the sale of alcoholic liquor. 
Class C-5 shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption off site and consumption on-site by persons of at least 21 years of age. Class C-5 licenses shall be subject to the following regulations and conditions: 
1.  The primary business of a craft cocktail lounge must be package craft cocktail sales for off-site consumption. 
2.  Authorized hours of business retail sales shall be 3:00 to 11:00 p.m. Monday through Thursday, 3:00 p.m. to 1:00 a.m. Fridays and 1:00 p.m. to 1:00 a.m. Sundays. Authorized hours of business cocktail sales shall be 5:00 to 11:00 p.m. Monday through Thursday, 5:00 p.m. to 1:00 a.m. Saturdays and 1:00 p.m. to o'clock 1:00 a.m. Sundays. 
3.  All staff who participate in packaged sale or on site serving must be BASSET trained and certified. 
4.  No person under the age of 21 shall be on the premises without supervision of a parent or legal guardian 21 years of age or older. Signage shall be posted at the entrance of the premises to reflect this requirement. 
5.  A licensee must offer and have available at all times that alcoholic liquor is available for consumption a menu which includes food more substantial than bar snacks such as nuts, pretzels, chips or the like. Examples of acceptable food service include but are not limited to hold or cold sandwiches, full salads, hot dogs, hamburgers and pizza. All food items are subject to approval from the DuPage County Health Department. 
6.  All applicable taxes, including sales tax, shall be collected and paid on all revenue realized from the retail sale of alcoholic liquor. 
7.  The holder of a Class C-5 liquor license may offer samples, on site, at no charge, of craft alcoholic liquor to consumers of products manufactured and sold for retail. Samples shall be limited to not more than two ounces per samples. The number of samples shall be limited to not more than an aggregate of eight ounces combined of alcoholic liquor per customer per day. 
8.  No such license shall be granted or retained for a premises not located in the C5A or C5B zoning districts. 
(D)  Class D: 
Class D-1 license shall authorize the retail sale, on the specified premises, of beer, ale or wine in its original package, but not for consumption on the premises where sold, as an adjunct to another principal retail business and where no more than ten square feet is devoted to the display and sale of alcoholic liquor. 
Class D-2 license shall authorize the retail sale, on the specified premises, of beer, ale or wine in its original package, but not for consumption on the premises where sold, as an adjunct to another principal retail business and where more than ten square feet but less than 100 square feet is devoted to the display and sale of alcoholic liquor. 
Class D-3 license shall authorize the retail sale, on the specified premises, of beer, ale or wine in its original package, but not for consumption on the premises where sold, as an adjunct to a gasoline station which also offers a convenience food store facility which itself has an area of not less than 3,000 square feet. Where such a license is issued, no alcoholic liquor shall be placed on display for sale within 15 feet of any exterior door generally used by customers. The area where liquor is displayed shall be principally visible from the station of any cashier, and any such area in a "blind spot" shall be visible through the use of a mirror, which shall be installed permitting cashiers at all times to observe any area where alcoholic liquor is made available for purchase. No exterior sign or window sign shall indicate that alcoholic liquor is available for purchase, and a cashier of at least 21 years of age must be positioned at all times at the station of any cashier where alcoholic liquor is available for sale. 
Class D-4 license shall authorize the retail sale, on the specified premises of beer, ale or wine in its original package, but not for consumption on the premises where sold, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight, Monday through Saturday; and as an adjunct to another principal retail business, where more than 500 square feet, but less than 1,500 square feet, is devoted to the display and sale of alcoholic liquor. 
(E)  Class E: 
Class E license shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor on the specified premises within a building and immediate adjacent open space and for consumption only in the building and immediate adjacent open space where sold. Such license shall be for a period of time not to exceed 24 hours and may be granted only to any local organization or group in connection with a fundraising or fraternal gathering of such organization or group. Such license shall also be limited to a date, time and place certain. The application for such license shall specify, in addition to all other information required of an applicant, the date, time and place certain to which said license shall apply and a description of the nature of the function at which alcoholic liquor will be served. The required fee shall be for each Class E liquor license application, whether for a single event or multiple events. 
(F)  Class F: 
Class F license shall authorize the delivery, without additional charge and on the specified premises, of beer, ale or wine in restaurants together with a full meal, and for consumption only on the premises where delivered. 
(G)  Class G: 
Class G license shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor in the outdoors or a not fully enclosed structure used in conjunction with a premises possessing a Class A, Class B or Class C-4A license. Each Class G license shall be subject to the terms and conditions contained within the license granted by the Liquor Commissioner. In establishing terms and conditions, the Liquor Commissioner shall only grant the license when the location and proposed physical design of the area in question shall: 
1.  Not interfere with the peaceful enjoyment of the occupants of residential structures. 
2.  Provide safe and convenient emergency and nonemergency ingress and egress for patrons. 
3.  Offer open access for law enforcement surveillance. 
4.  Be compatible with the operation of the Class A, B or C-4A liquor license and the purpose of this Code. 
The Liquor Commissioner may impose such terms and conditions on the licensee as shall be necessary to cause the fulfillment of these standards to be met. Because of the potential for the disturbance of the public health and safety when alcoholic liquor is sold outdoors or in a not fully enclosed structure, Class G licenses may be canceled without cause at the end of any annual term provided that if no notice of cancellation without cause is given at least six months in advance of the end of the annual term, the holder of the license shall be issued a temporary license good for an additional period of six months, subject to compliance with all ordinances. The cost of such temporary license shall be one-half the annual license fee. If a licensee should have its Class A, B or C-4A license suspended or revoked, the suspension or revocation shall automatically apply to the Class G license. 
(H)  Class H: 
1.  Class H license shall authorize the operation of amusement devices on a premises possessing a Class A or Class B license. Each Class H license shall be subject to the terms and conditions contained within the license granted by the Liquor Control Commissioner after a hearing. 
2.  "Amusement device" shall mean any machine, game or device which is designed, intended, displayed or kept as an amusement game, test of skill or entertainment, and which may be operated by the public upon the insertion of coin, slug, token, plate, disk, or the use of which is made available for any valuable consideration, and which is operated by the manipulation of buttons, dials, balls, wheels, trigger devices, or electrical impulses, whether or not registering a score or offering free replays. Amusement devices shall include, but not be limited to, devices commonly known as pinball machines, marble machines, video games, electronic games, skillball and all games, operations or transactions similar thereto under whatever name they may be indicated. 
3.  The holder of a Class A or Class B liquor license may apply for a Class H license to place amusement devices at the same location as the one for which a liquor license has been granted and which is under the same management and control as the area where alcoholic liquor is sold. The holder of a Class A or Class B liquor license who desires to receive a license to permit the use of amusement devices shall present an application to the Liquor Control Commissioner seeking such a permit. The application shall specify the number of amusement devices which are desired to be placed upon the premises and the general location at which the devices will be placed. 
4.  A license shall specify the number of amusement devices which may be placed upon the premises and shall specify the general location at which such devices may be placed. Future application may be made for the placement of additional amusement devices, although there cannot be more than ten amusement devices at a specific premises. 
5.  In determining whether a Class H license shall be granted and how many amusement devices shall be permitted to be placed at a specific location, the Liquor Control Commissioner shall consider the ability of the licensee to monitor the location at which the amusement devices will be placed, the compatibility of the amusement devices with other business operations carried on at the location, the physical configuration of the location with regard to safety considerations, and the use of amusement devices as adjunct to the sale of alcoholic liquor rather than as part of a separate business enterprise. If the Local Liquor Control Commissioner finds that the use of amusement devices at the premises is consistent with the principal business carried on at the location, that it will be properly monitored and carried on in a safe manner, a license shall be issued. 
6.  The Liquor Control Commissioner may also attach to the granting of a Class H license such reasonable terms and conditions as shall enhance the public safety and welfare. 
7.  In the event that the Liquor Control Commissioner should determine that the licensee has violated the terms of this subsection (H) or the conditions under which the license has been granted, the license may be suspended or revoked after a public hearing in a similar manner as would be held for the suspension or revocation of other general business licenses. 
8.  No person shall install, keep, maintain or use or permit the installation, keeping, maintenance or use upon his premises of any amusement device for which a license has not been issued. 
(I)  Class I: Class I license shall authorize the sale of beer, ale or wine only for off premises delivery by postal or parcel delivery services. It shall be unlawful for holders of Class I licenses to deliver beer, ale or wine by postal or parcel delivery services without having procured adequate information to determine that the purchaser is qualified to receive the product sent. 
(J)  Class J: Class J license shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor anywhere within the Village, where the licensee is acting as a caterer, in conjunction with parties or events where the licensee is also providing food services. During any quarterly period, the income which the licensee derives from the sale of food must comprise at least 50 percent of the gross revenue of the amount earned from the sale of food and alcoholic liquor at such parties or events. No more than six events per year, where liquor is sold, may take place at the same structure located in a residential zone. 
(K)  Class K: Class K license shall authorize the retail sale of beer and wine on a specific premises owned by a park district within a building and the immediate adjacent open space of a miniature golf course for consumption only in the building and immediate adjacent open space where sold. 
(L)  Class L: Class L license shall authorize a legally operating restaurant to permit an educational, religious, fraternal, veterans', labor or business organization as defined in 230 Illinois Compiled Statutes 15/2 to make available on the premises beer and wine at meetings principally of the members of such organizations at a time when the restaurant is not otherwise open to the general public. The license shall allow the license holder to serve and charge, directly or indirectly, for the beer and wine; or the aforesaid group may do so. 
(M)  Class M: Class M license shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor, for consumption on the specified premises, as an adjunct to a principal beauty shop business. The issuance of a Class M license shall be expressly subject to the following conditions: 
1.  The retail sale of alcoholic liquor shall be limited to one drink per hour per customer or patron of the premises, and no such customer or patron shall be served more than two alcoholic beverages during the permitted hours of retail sale of alcoholic liquor during any one calendar day. 
2.  No live entertainment of any nature shall be permitted on the specified premises. 
3.  No window or any other signage visible from the outside of the business shall be permitted on the specified premises or surrounding property that indicates that alcoholic liquor is available for retail sale at the specified premises, provided, however, that the business identification signage may contain the word "bar", and provided further that the word "bar" is only used as part of the business name. 
4.  No person holding a Class M license issued pursuant to this chapter shall sell or permit to be sold, offered for sale, given away, or delivered any alcoholic liquor except between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. 
(N)  Class N: The Class N license authorizes the retail sale of glasses of wine for consumption on the specified premises, as an adjunct to a principal wine/beer retail business. The issuance of a Class N license shall be expressly subject to the following conditions: 
1.  No such license shall be granted or retained for a premises not located in the C5A or C5B Zoning Districts. 
2.  The retail sale of wine shall be limited to two glasses or one tasting per customer or patron on the premises, and no such customer or patron shall be served more than two glasses or one tasting of wine during the permitted hours of retail sale of alcoholic liquor during any one calendar day. 
3.  Individual glasses shall be limited to two five-ounce pours only. 
4.  One tasting shall be limited to five individual, two ounce pours only. 
5.  Crackers and/or bread shall be offered in conjunction with wine service. 
6.  No person holding a Class N license issued pursuant to this chapter shall sell or permit to be sold, offered for sale, given away, or delivered, any alcoholic liquor except between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. Monday through Sunday. 
(O)  Class O: Such license shall permit the licensee to sell alcoholic liquor at any and all locations on the main campus of a public community college. The retail sale of alcoholic liquor is subject to licensure by the Local Liquor Commission. The Class O license shall permit the license holder to sell and dispense alcohol as part of the educational curriculum and as permitted in Classes B1, B-3, B-8 and G of the Village Code for both established indoor and outdoor locations. The license applicant shall provide the Local Liquor Commission its rules and procedures to allow the sale of liquor to be utilized in an educational program in full conformance with the state and local regulations regarding alcoholic liquor, except during the first year following this provision's adoption when the license applicant shall make such submittal within120 days of issuance of a Class O license. Licensee may only conduct outdoor sales of alcohol at established outdoor venues on the main campus between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. All individuals allowed to sell alcoholic liquor shall be required to successfully complete a state certified beverage alcohol sellers and servers BASSET education and training program. A Class O license shall only be issued to a public community college organized under the Public Community Colleges Act, 110 ILCS 805, et seq. The consumption of alcohol is only permitted at the defined premise and venue where the sale and/or service of alcohol occur. 
(P)  Sampling: It shall be lawful for holders of Class C-1, Class C-2, Class C-3, Class C-4, or Class D-2 licenses to permit the tasting or sampling of alcoholic liquor on the premises, if said tasting or sampling is a part of a promotion or sales device to encourage the sale of packaged liquor and no charge of any kind or character is made for such sampling or tasting. It shall also be lawful for holders of these same licenses to charge either a donation or set price for the tasting or sampling of alcoholic liquor on the premises if such tasting or sampling event is held as a fundraiser for the benefit of a specific, local not for profit organization and all monies collected are forwarded to said organization. 
(Q)  Class (Q): 
Class Q Seasonal Market liquor license shall authorize the retail sale of beer and wine only in its original package and not for consumption on the premises at seasonal markets provided that samples for tasking may be furnished by the holder of a Class C or Class P license. Applicants seeking a Class Q license shall submit a written request for the license to the Village Clerk. The written request shall specify the location of the market, the dates of the market's operation and describe the licensee's sales area in detail. The Village Clerk may request additional information as deemed necessary. The Village Clerk may approve the Class Q license if the Class C or Class P licensee proves all required information and is in good standing. If the Class C or Class P licensee is not in good standing, the Class Q license may only be approved by the local liquor commissioner. 
(R)  Classes B-9, C-4A and P: 
Class B-9 shall authorize the sale of craft beer for consumption off site and consumption on-site by persons of at least 21 years of age. Class B-9 licenses shall be subject to the following regulations and conditions: 
Class B-9, restaurants with a brewery, authorizes the retail sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises only, without restriction as to the manner served; provided, that the sale of alcoholic liquor shall only be made in connection with and in adjunct to a restaurant owned and operated by licensee and located upon the premises. For the purposes of this section, the term "brewery" shall mean a limited production beer brewery within the premises which manufactures not more than 5,000 barrels of beer per license year and which product is sold exclusively for consumption on the premises, for carryout (package goods) sales to restaurant customers, or wholesale distribution. 
Class B-9 licenses authorize a person having a valid State brewpub license or craft brewer license to sell beer that is brewed on the premises or brewed and transferred onto premises as permitted by the State Liquor Code to the public at retail for consumption on the premises or in packages for consumption off premises. Each brewery location in the Village, even if owned by the same person(s), must have a separate Class B-9 brewery license to sell beer at retail on each premises where beer is sold at retail. 
Class C-4A shall authorize the sale of craft beer for consumption off site and consumption on-site by persons of at least 21 years of age. Class C-4A licenses shall be subject to the following regulations and conditions: 
1.  The primary business of a craft brew lounge must be package craft beer sales for off-site consumption. No craft brew shall be brewed or manufactured on site. 
2.  Fifty percent of floor space of the premises shall be dedicated to the sale of packaged craft beer. 
3.  On site consumption allowed in the serving area shall be in containers no larger than 16 ounces. 
4.  Authorized hours of business shall be 12:00 noon to 10:00 p.m. Sunday through Wednesday and 12:00 noon to 11:00 p.m. Thursday through Saturday. 
5.  All staff who participate in packaged sale or on site serving of craft beer must be BASSET trained and certified. 
6.  No person under the age of 21 years shall be on the premises without supervision of a parent or legal guardian 21 years of age or older. Signage shall be posted at the entrance of the premises to reflect this requirement. 
7.  A licensee shall not prohibit serving area patrons who intend to consume craft beer on the premises from providing and consuming their own food. 
8.  A licensee must offer and have available at all times that alcoholic liquor is available for consumption a menu which includes food more substantial than bar snacks such as nuts, pretzels, chips or the like. Examples of acceptable food service include but are not limited to hot or cold sandwiches, full salads, hot dogs, hamburgers and pizzas. All food items are subject to approval from the DuPage County Health Department. 
9.  All applicable taxes, including sales tax, shall be collected and paid on all revenue realized from the retail sale of craft beer. 
10.  A licensee may offer samples at no charge of craft beer from premises to consumers of products manufactured and sold for retail. Samples shall be limited to not more than two ounces per sample. The number of samples shall be limited to not more than an aggregate of eight ounces combined of beer per customer per day. 
11.  No such license shall be granted or retained for a premises not located in the C5A or C5B Zoning Districts. 
Class P license shall authorize the retail sale, on the specified premises, of wine, craft beer and small batch liquor in its original package as an adjunct to a principal retail business involving the sales and consumption of cheese, charcuterie, and other specialty food where no more than 300 square feet of retail floor area is devoted to the sale of alcoholic liquor. A Class P license authorizes the sale of wine and craft beer for consumption on the premises where sold. The issuance of a Class P license shall be expressly subject to the following conditions: 
1.  The retail sale of wine and craft beer for consumption on premises shall be limited to three glasses or one tasting per customer or patron on the premises. 
2.  Individual glasses of wine shall be limited to three six-ounce pours only. 
3.  Individual glasses of craft beer shall be limited to three 12-ounce pours only. 
4.  Wine and craft beer tasting shall be limited to no more than 18 ounces per customer. 
5.  No such license shall be granted or retained for a premises not located in the C5A or C5B Zoning Districts. 
6.  Wine and beer purchased on premises may be consumed on premises. 
7.  No person holding a Class P license issued pursuant to this chapter shall sell or permit to be sold, offered for sale, given away, or delivered, any alcoholic liquor except between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. Sunday through Saturday. 
(Ord. 2767, 5-10-1982; Ord. 3085, 2-25-1985; Ord. 3784, 8-27-1990; Ord. 3933, 7-27-1992; Ord. 3966, 10-26-1992; Ord. 4139, 6-13-1994; amd. Ord. 4541, 11-24-1997; Ord. 4568, 2-23-1998; amd. Ord. 4881, 10-23-2000; Ord. 4938, 4-23-2001; Ord. 5140, 3-10-2003, eff. 4-1-2003; Ord. 5196, 10-27-2003; Ord. 5296, 10-11-2004; Ord. 5303, 11-8-2004; Ord. 5356, 5-9-2005; amd. Ord. 5493, 8-14-2006; Ord. 5506, 9-25-2006; Ord. 5583, 6-25-2007; Ord. 5584, 6-25-2007; Ord. 5590, 7-23-2007; Ord. 5686, 6-23-2008; Ord. 5698, 9-22-2008; Ord. 5749, 4-27-2009; Ord. 5750, 4-27-2009; Ord. 5764, 6-8-2009; Ord. 5773, 6-22-2009; Ord. 5850, 2-22-2010; Ord. 5880, 7-26-2010; Ord. 5944, 8-8-2011; Ord. 5958, 9-12-2011; Ord. 6029, 5-14-2012; Ord. 6069, 9-10-2012; Ord. 6182, 11-12-2013; Ord. 6227, 4-14-2014; Ord. 6316, 5-26-2015; Ord. 6322, 5-26-2015; Ord. 6342, 8-17-2015; Ord. 6397, 4-11-2016; Ord. 6400, 4-25-2016; Ord. 6411, 6-20-2016; Ord. 6506, 6-12-2017; Ord. 6507, 6-12-2017; Ord. 6511, 6-26-2017; Ord. 6534, 9-25-2017; Ord. 6587, 4-9-2018; Ord. 6594, 4-9-2018) 
3-19-12. - Restriction on number of licenses. 
The Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall not issue more than the number of licenses set forth hereinbelow for each class: 
Class A-1 - No more than 6 Class A-2 - No more than 1 Class A-3 - None currently permitted Class A-4 - No more than 1 Class B-1 - No more than 18 Class B-2 - No more than 1 Class B-3 - None permitted Class B-4 - None currently permitted Class B-5 - No more than 5 Class B-6 - No more than 1 Class B-7 - No more than 1 Class B-8(12) - None currently permitted Class B-8(24) - None currently permitted Class B-9 - No more than 1 Class C-1 - No more than 9 Class C-2 - No more than 1 Class C-3 - No more than 1 Class C-4 - None currently permitted Class C-4A - No more than 1 Class C-5 - No more than 1 Class D-1 - No more than 4 Class D-2 - No more than 3 Class D-3 - No more than 4 Class D-4 - None currently permitted Class E - No limit Class F - None currently permitted Class G - No more than 11 Class H - No more than 2 Class I - None currently permitted Class J - No more than 1 Class K - None currently permitted Class L - None currently permitted Class M - No more than 2 Class N - No more than 1 Class O - No more than 1 Class P - No more than 1 Class Q - No more than 2  
  
(Ord. 3898, 3-23-1992; amd. Ord. 3907, 4-13-1992; Ord. 3933, 7-27-1992; Ord. 3966, 10-26-1992; Ord. 3997, 3-8-1993; Ord. 4029, 6-28-1993; Ord. 4043, 8-9-1993; Ord. 4107, 3-28-1994; Ord. 4139, 6-13-1994; Ord. 4187, 9-12-1994; Ord. 4201, 10-24-1994; Ord. 4269, 6-26-1995; Ord. 4298, 9-25-1995; Ord. 4336, 1-8-1996; Ord. 4341, 1-22-1996; Ord. 4382, 5-28-1996; Ord. 4395, 6-24-1996, eff. 7-1-1996; Ord. 4411, 9-9-1996; Ord. 4426, 10-28-1996, eff. 11-15-1996; Ord. 4458, 1-13-1997; Ord. 4476, 3-24-1997; Ord. 4541, 11-24-1997; Ord. 4568, 2-23-1998; Ord. 4582, 4-27-1998; Ord. 4665, 12-14-1998; Ord. 4701, 4-26-1999; Ord. 4713, 5-24-1999; Ord. 4734, 7-26-1999; Ord. 4747, 8-23-1999; Ord. 4787, 12-13-1999; Ord. 4839, 5-22-2000; Ord. 4845, 6-12-2000; Ord. 4853, 6-26-2000; Ord. 4857, 7-24-2000; Ord. 4876, 9-25-2000; Ord. 4906, 1-22-2001; Ord. 4923, 3-26-2001; Ord. 4935, 4-23-2001; Ord. 4938, 4-23-2001; Ord. 4955, 6-25-2001; Ord. 4980, 8-27-2001; Ord. 5009, 11-13-2001; Ord. 5014, 11-26-2001; Ord. 5071, 6-24-2002; Ord. 5096, 9-23-2002; Ord. 5102, 11-12-2002; Ord. 5164, 4-28-2003; Ord. 5175, 6-23-2003; Ord. 5232, 2-23-2004; Ord. 5262, 5-24-2004; Ord. 5273, 6-28-2004, eff. 7-1-2004; Ord. 5277, 7-26-2004; Ord. 5293, 9-27-2004; Ord. 5296, 10-11-2004; Ord. 5303, 11-8-2004; Ord. 5348, 4-11-2005; Ord. 5356, 5-9-2005; Ord. 5360, 5-23-2005; Ord. 5375, 7-25-2005; Ord. 5380, 8-8-2005; Ord. 5388, 8-22-2005; Ord. 5427, 1-23-2006; Ord. 5447, 3-16-2006; Ord. 5484, 6-26-2006; Ord. 5493, 8-14-2006; Ord. 5496, 8-31-2006; Ord. 5506, 9-25-2006; Ord. 5519, 11-13-2006; Ord. 5532, 12-11-2006; Ord. 5559, 3-26-2007; Ord. 5584, 6-25-2007; Ord. 5589, 7-23-2007; Ord. 5590, 7-23-2007; Ord. 5607, 9-19-2007; Ord. 5629, 11-13-2007; Ord. 5640, 12-17-2007; Ord. 5648, 1-28-2008; Ord. 5686, 6-23-2008; Ord. 5698, 9-22-2008; Ord. 5705, 10-13-2008; Ord. 5726, 11-24-2008; Ord. 5749, 4-27-2009; Ord. 5750, 4-27-2009; Ord. 5764, 6-8-2009; Ord. 5773, 6-22-2009; Ord. 5774, 7-13-2009; Ord. 5781, 7-27-2009; Ord. 5806, 10-26-2009; Ord. 5845, 1-25-2010; Ord. 5850, 2-22-2010; Ord. 5861, 5-10-2010; Ord. 5877, 7-12-2010; Ord. 5880, 7-26-2010; Ord. 5920, 2-28-2011; Ord. 5951, 7-25-2011; Ord. 5944, 8-8-2011; Ord. 5955, 9-12-2011; Ord. 5958, 9-12-2011; Ord. 5970, 11-14-2011; Ord. 5993, 1-30-2012; Ord. 6018, 4-9-2012; Ord. 6028, 5-14-2012; Ord. 6029, 5-14-2012; Ord. 6038, 6-11-2012; Ord. 6052, 7-9-2012; Ord. 6069, 9-10-2012; Ord. 6078, 9-24-2012; Ord. 6106, 12-10-2012; Ord. 6112, 2-11-2013; Ord. 6119, 4-8-2013; Ord. 6138, 6-10-2013; Ord. 6139, 6-24-2013; Ord. 6156, 8-12-2013; Ord. 6166, 9-23-2013; Ord. 6182, 11-12-2013; Ord. 6117, 11-25-2013; Ord. 6206, 1-13-2014; Ord. 6227, 4-14-2014; Ord. 6271, 11-10-2014; Ord. 6298, 3-23-2015; Ord. 6317, 5-26-2015; Ord. 6322, 5-26-2015; Ord. 6341, 8-17-2015; Ord. 6342, 8-17-2015; Ord. 6411, 6-20-2016; Ord. 6446, 10-24-2016; Ord. 6501, 5-1-2017; Ord. 6505, 6-12-2017; Ord. 6507, 6-12-2017; Ord. 6511, 6-26-2017; Ord. 6518, 7-24-2017; Ord. 6532, 9-25-2017; Ord. 6534, 9-24-2017; Ord. 6537, 10-23-2017; Ord. 6587, 4-9-2018; Ord. 6594, 4-9-2018; Ord. 6630, 9-24-2018; Ord. 6638, 11-12-2018; Ord. 6651, 12-10-2018; Ord. 6692, 5-13-2019; Ord. 6698, 5-28-2019) 
3-19-13. - License fees. 
(A)  After an initial application fee of $500.00 for all classes, the annual license fee for all classes shall be as follows: 
License Fee Renewal Fee Class A-1 $1,500.00 Class A-2 1,500.00 Class A-3 1,500.00 Class A-4 500.00 Class B-1 2,500.00 Class B-2 4,000.00 Class B-3 2,500.00 Class B-4 2,500.00 Class B-5 100.00 Class B-6 1,500.00 Class B-7 2,500.00 Class B-8(12) 500.00 Class B-8(24) 1,000.00 Class B-9 3,500.00 (initial) $2,500.00 Class C-1 3,000.00 Class C-2 2,000.00 Class C-3 2,000.00 Class C-4 1,500.00 Class C-4A 2,000.00 Class C-5 2,000.00 Class D-1 500.00 Class D-2 2,000.00 Class D-3 2,000.00 Class D-4 2,000.00 Class E 20.00 Class F 200.00 Class G 250.00 Class H $100.00 plus $100.00 per device Class I $1,000.00 Class J 350.00 Class K 200.00 Class L 200.00 Class M 500.00 Class N 500.00 Class O 5,750.00 Class P 1,500.00 Class Q 50.00  
  
(B)  At the time application is made to the Local Liquor Control Commissioner for original issuance of a license of any class, the applicant shall pay to the Village the fee hereinabove provided for the class of license for which the application is filed, in addition to the $500.00 application fee. In the event the license applied for is denied, the application fee shall be retained by the Village; and the license fee shall be returned to the applicant. 
At the time application is made to the Local Liquor Control Commissioner for the annual renewal of a license of any class, the applicant shall pay to the Village the fee hereinabove provided for the class of license for which the application is filed. In the event the license applied for is denied, the license fee, except for a processing charge of $500.00, shall be returned to the applicant. 
In the event a Class E license is denied, the entire fee paid with the application shall be returned to the applicant. 
A licensee who gives up a Class D-2 license and applies for and receives a Class D-4 license shall pay an initial application fee of $500.00, but shall not be required to pay a new annual fee in the first year. 
(C)  In the event the applicant ceases engaging in the business of the retail sale of alcoholic liquors pursuant to a retail liquor dealer's license issued pursuant to this chapter within 30 days of the issuance of such license, then eleven-twelfths of the license fee in excess of a processing charge of $500.00 shall be refunded to the holder of the license upon surrender to the Village of the license. 
(D)  Whenever any license hereunder has been revoked as provided for in this chapter, the licensee shall incur a forfeiture of all monies that have been paid for said license. 
(E)  The Commissioner may waive the fee for Class E and Class F licenses for good cause shown. 
(F)  Whenever an initial license is issued for a portion of the license year less than six months or less than three months, the fee applicable to such license shall be one-half or one-fourth, respectively, of the fee set forth in subsection (A) of this section, in addition to the $500.00 application fee. 
(Ord. 2767, 5-10-1982; Ord. 3205, 5-12-1986; Ord. 5140, 3-10-2003, eff. 4-1-2003; amd. Ord. 5296, 10-11-2004; Ord. 5303, 11-8-2004; Ord. 5356, 5-9-2005; Ord. 5532, 12-11-2006; Ord. 5584, 6-25-2007; Ord. 5590, 7-23-2007; Ord. 5686, 6-23-2008; Ord. 5698, 9-22-2008; Ord. 5749, 4-27-2009; Ord. 5773, 6-22-2009; Ord. 5850, 2-22-2010; Ord. 5880, 7-26-2010; Ord. 5951, 7-25-2011; Ord. 5944, 8-8-2011; Ord. 5958, 9-12-2011; Ord. 6029, 5-14-2012; Ord. 6069, 9-10-2012; Ord. 6182, 11-12-2013; Ord. 6322, 5-26-2015; Ord. 6342, 8-17-2015; Ord. 6411, 6-20-2016; Ord. 6507, 6-12-2017; Ord. 6511, 6-26-2017; Ord. 6587, 4-9-2018; Ord. 6594, 4-9-2018) 
3-19-14. - Duration of license. 
All licenses, except Class E licenses, shall be valid for not to exceed one year after issuance, unless sooner terminated, revoked or suspended as provided in this chapter, and all licenses shall terminate on June 30 next following their issuance. 
(Ord. 2767, 5-10-1982) 
3-19-15. - Record. 
The Village Clerk shall keep a complete record of all local retail liquor dealers' licenses issued and shall immediately give written notice to the Police Chief of the issuance, renewal, revocation or suspension of any such license. 
(Ord. 2767, 5-10-1982) 
3-19-16. - Examination of applicant. 
At any time during the pendency of an application for issuance or renewal, the Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall have the right to compel the applicant to submit to any examination and to produce any books and records which, in the judgment of the Local Liquor Control Commissioner, are material to the determination of whether the applicant is qualified to receive a license under the provisions of this chapter, or whether the premises sought to be licensed are suitable for such purposes. The Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall also have the right to require the applicant to answer any objection to the issuance or renewal of the license or any charges made by any Deputy Commissioner, Trustee of the Village, Police Chief, Attorney for the Village, Prosecuting Attorney for the Village, or by the Sheriff or Prosecuting Attorney of the County of DuPage. The failure of any applicant to appear at the time and place fixed by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner for his examination or to produce books and records requested, unless for good cause shown, shall be deemed to be an admission that the objections or charges are true and that the applicant is not qualified to receive a license. 
(Ord. 2767, 5-10-1982) 
3-19-17. - Renewal. 
Any licensee may apply for renewal of a license at the expiration thereof, provided that he is then qualified to receive a license and the premises for which such renewal license is sought are suitable for such purpose; provided further, that the renewal privilege herein provided for shall not be construed as a vested right which shall in any case prevent the President and Board of Trustees from decreasing the number of licenses to be issued within the Village or to be issued within the Village within any class. 
(Ord. 2767, 5-10-1982) 
3-19-18. - Suspension and revocation. 
The Local Liquor Control Commissioner may, in accordance with the Liquor Control Act, revoke or suspend any license issued under the provisions of this chapter, if he determines that the licensee has violated any of the provisions of the Liquor Control Act, this chapter or any other ordinance or resolution enacted by the Corporate Authorities of the Village or any applicable rules or regulations established by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner or the Illinois Liquor Control Commission, or any State and/or Federal statute which is not inconsistent with the law. However, no such license shall be revoked or suspended except after a public hearing by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner with a three day written notice to the licensee affording the licensee an opportunity to appear and defend the charges contained in such notice. The three days' notice provision shall begin the day following delivery by certified or registered mail or by personal service. 
If the Local Liquor Control Commissioner has reason to believe that any continued operation of a particular licensed premises will immediately threaten the welfare of the community, he may, upon the issuance of a written order stating the reason for such conclusion and without notice or hearing, order the licensed premises closed for not more than seven days giving the licensee an opportunity to be heard during that period except that if the licensee is also engaged in another business on the licensed premises such order shall not be applicable to such other business. 
The Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall within five days after such hearing, if he determines after such hearing that the license should be revoked or suspended, state the reason for such determination in a written order of revocation or suspension and serve a copy of such order within the five days upon the licensee. 
(Ord. 2767, 5-10-1982; Ord. 4108, 3-28-1994) 
State Law reference- 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/7-7, 5/7-9, 5/7-12 and 5/7-13 of the "Liquor Control Act" are incorporated herein by reference and made a part of this chapter. Review of decisions of the Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall be as provided for in 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/7-9 of the "Liquor Control Act". 
3-19-19. - Revocation upon conviction of violation. 
Whenever any licensee shall have been convicted by any court of a violation of any of the provisions of the Liquor Control Act, or of this chapter or any other ordinance of the Village controlling or regulating the sale of alcoholic liquors, the licensee shall, in addition to all other penalties for such offense, incur a forfeiture of any local retail dealer's license issued pursuant to this chapter and all monies that have been paid therefor. 
(Ord. 2767, 5-10-1982) 
3-19-20. - Use of premises after revocation. 
When any license has been revoked for any cause, no license shall be granted to any person for the period of one year thereafter for the conduct of the business of selling alcoholic liquor at retail in the premises described in such revoked license. 
(Ord. 3085, 2-25-1985) 
3-19-21. - Applicability of other provisions. 
Nothing in this chapter shall excuse or relieve the licensee, owner, proprietor, or person in charge of any place in the Village where alcoholic liquor is sold from the restrictions and requirements of any other provision of this Code, other ordinances of the Village or of the statutes of the State. 
(Ord. 2767, 5-10-1982) 
3-19-22. - Insurance. 
(A)  All holders of liquor licenses shall be required to obtain and maintain dramshop insurance as a condition of acquiring such license. 
(B)  Dramshop insurance shall run concurrently with the license year, beginning on July 1 and ending on June 30 of any given year. 
(C)  Certificates of insurance shall be submitted by liquor license holders to the Village. Such certificates shall require that notice be given to the Village ten days prior to expiration, cancellation or nonrenewal of dramshop insurance. 
(D)  In the event the dramshop insurance expires, is canceled or denied renewal, that holder's license shall be immediately suspended by the Village until such time as a new certificate of insurance is provided. 
(Ord. 3205, 5-12-1986) 
3-19-23. - Hours of sale. 
(A)  Any person holding a Class A, Class B, Class E or Class F license pursuant to this chapter shall sell or permit to be sold, offer for sale, give away or deliver any alcoholic beverages between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 1:00 a.m. Monday through Friday; 7:00 a.m. through 2:00 a.m. on Saturdays; and 10:00 a.m. through 1:00 a.m. on Sundays. All patrons and customers shall leave the premises not later than 15 minutes following the closing hours herein established, except that on New Year's Eve in any given year sales provided for this chapter by Class A, Class B, Class E or Class F license holders may be made to 3:00 a.m. 
(B)  No person holding a Class C or Class D license issued pursuant to this chapter shall sell or permit to be sold, offered for sale, given away or delivered any alcoholic liquor, except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight, Monday through Saturday, or except between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on Sunday. All patrons and customers shall leave the premises of the holders of Class C or D license not later than 15 minutes following the hours of sale herein specified. 
(C)  In the case of restaurants, hotels, motels, bowling alleys and licensees selling packaged liquors, where the sale of alcoholic liquors is conducted on premises which are utilized primarily for other retail sales activities, such establishments may be kept open for business after the hours of sale set forth herein, but no alcoholic liquors may be sold, offered for sale, given away, delivered or consumed after said closing hours, and no person shall be permitted to remain in or upon that portion of the premises used during opening hours for the dispensation of alcoholic liquors. 
(D)  Any licensee holding a liquor license may request to extend their liquor license hours earlier in the day for three days per calendar year. A written request shall be submitted to the Local Liquor Commissioner 30 days prior to the dates for which permission is sought. The Local Liquor Commissioner shall place any condition, restriction and limitation on said extension as deemed necessary. 
The Local Liquor Commissioner, in determining whether to grant the extension, may consider difficulties that have occurred with prior requested extensions either at the location of the requested licensee or elsewhere, other events taking place in the community, the availability of public safety officials at that date or time, and other factors which shall impact upon the public health, safety and welfare. Where an extension is granted, the Local Liquor Commissioner may place conditions, restrictions and limitations on such extension which must be complied with by an applicant that wishes to take advantage of the proposed extension being granted. 
(Ord. 2767, 5-10-1982; Ord. 5727, 12-15-2008; Ord. 6081, 10-22-2012; Ord. 6316, 5-26-2015) 
3-19-24. - Transfer of license. 
A license shall be a purely personal privilege, good for not to exceed one year after issuance unless sooner revoked and shall not constitute property, nor shall it be subject to attachment, garnishment or execution, nor shall it be alienable or transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily or subject to being encumbered or hypothecated. Such license shall cease upon the death of the licensee, and shall not descend by the laws of the testate or intestate devolution, provided that executors or administrators of the estate of any deceased licensee, and the Trustee of any insolvent or bankrupt licensee, when such estate consists in part of alcoholic liquor may continue the business of sale of alcoholic liquor under the order of the appropriate court, and may exercise the privileges of the deceased or insolvent or bankrupt licensee after the death of such decedent, or such insolvency or bankruptcy, until the expiration of such license, but no longer than six months after the death, bankruptcy or insolvency of such licensee. 
(Ord. 2767, 5-10-1982) 
3-19-25. - Change in personnel. 
(A)  Any changes in partnership, officers, directors, persons holding directly or indirectly or beneficially more than five percent of the stock or ownership interest, or managers of establishments licensed under this chapter, shall be reported in writing to the Liquor Control Commissioner within ten days of the change. All new personnel shall meet all the standards of this chapter and must otherwise qualify to hold a liquor license. All such changes in personnel shall be subject to review by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner within 30 days of the change. 
(B)  When a license has been issued to a partnership and a change of ownership occurs resulting in a partnership interest by one who is not eligible to hold a liquor license, said license shall terminate. 
(C)  When a license has been issued to a corporation and a change takes place in officers, directors, managers or shareholders of more than five percent of the stock, resulting in the holding of office or such shares of stock by one who is not eligible for a license, said license shall terminate. 
(D)  When a license has been issued to an individual who is no longer eligible for a license, said license shall terminate. 
(Ord. 2767, 5-10-1982) 
3-19-26. - Change of location. 
A license issued hereunder shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquor only on the premises described in the application and license. Such location may be changed only when and upon the written permit to make such change is issued by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner. No change of location shall be permitted unless the proposed new location is in compliance with the provisions and regulations of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2767, 5-10-1982) 
3-19-27. - Sanitary conditions. 
All premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor, or for the storage of such liquor for sale, shall be kept in full compliance with all ordinances of the County of DuPage regulating food service sanitation, as well as with all applicable rules and regulations regulating the condition of premises used for the storage or sale of food for human consumption, as promulgated and enforced by the DuPage County Health Department. 
(Ord. 3416, 12-21-1987) 
3-19-28. - Employees. 
It shall be unlawful to employ in premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor any person who is afflicted with, or who is a carrier of, any contagious, infectious or venereal disease; and it shall be unlawful for any person who is afflicted with or is a carrier of any such disease to work in or about any premises or to engage in any way in the handling, preparation or distribution of such liquor. 
(Ord. 2767, 5-10-1982) 
3-19-29. - Location restrictions. 
No license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor within 100 feet of the exterior of the structure from which alcoholic liquors will be sold by the applicant for a liquor license, to the closest part of the exterior of any church, school, hospital, home for the aged or indigent persons or for veterans, their wives or children, or any military or naval station; provided, that this prohibition shall not apply to hotels offering restaurant service, or to restaurants, where the sale of alcoholic liquor is not the principal business carried on, if such place of business so exempted shall have been established for such purpose prior to the effective date hereof. 
(Ord. 6477, 1-9-2017) 
3-19-30. - Stores selling school supplies. 
No license shall be issued to any person for the sale of any alcoholic liquor at any store or other place of business where the majority of customers are minors of school age or where the principal business transacted consists of schoolbooks, school supplies, food, lunches or drinks for such minors. 
(Ord. 2767, 5-10-1982) 
3-19-31. - Election days. 
Licensees may sell at retail any alcoholic liquor on the day of any National, State, County or Municipal election, including primary election, including hours the polls are open, within the political area in which such election is being held. 
(Ord. 2767, 5-10-1982) 
3-19-32. - Responsibility for agents and employees. 
Every act or omission of whatsoever nature, constituting a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter by an officer, director, manager or other agent or employee of any licensee, if such act is committed or omission is made within the scope of such agency or employment or with the authorization, knowledge, or approval of the licensee, shall be deemed and held to be the act of such employer or licensee and such employer and licensee shall be punishable in the same manner as if such act or omission had been done or omitted by him personally. 
(Ord. 2767, 5-10-1982) 
3-19-33. - Gambling. 
It shall be unlawful to permit any gambling on any premises licensed to sell alcoholic liquor. 
(Ord. 2767, 5-10-1982) 
3-19-34. - Refilling original packages. 
No person licensed under this chapter shall fill or refill, in whole or in part, any original package of alcoholic liquor with the same or any other kind or quality of alcoholic liquor; and it shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession for sale at retail any bottles, casks or other containers of alcoholic liquor, except in original packages. 
(Ord. 2767, 5-10-1982) 
3-19-35. - Solicitation. 
It shall be unlawful for any licensee, his manager or other person in charge of any licensed premises where alcoholic liquor is sold or offered for sale for consumption thereon to engage, employ or permit the engagement or employment of any person nor shall any person be permitted to remain on said premises, who shall solicit any patron or customer thereof to purchase alcoholic or nonalcoholic liquor for said person, or any other person therein; nor shall any female, or any male representing himself to be female or impersonating a female, whether employee, entertainer or otherwise, solicit any patron or customer therein to purchase alcoholic or nonalcoholic liquor for herself or himself or any other person therein; provided however, that nothing herein contained shall prohibit any adult manager, bartender or waitress who shall be regularly employed therein from accepting and serving the order of a patron or customer in the regular course of employment as such manager or waitress. 
(Ord. 2767, 5-10-1982) 
3-19-36. - Displaying license. 
Every licensee shall cause his license or licenses to be framed and hung in plain view in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises. 
(Ord. 2767, 5-10-1982) 
3-19-37. - Violation of Retailer's Occupation Tax Act. 
In addition to other grounds specified in this chapter, the Local Liquor Control Commissioner may refuse the issuance or renewal of a retail license, or suspend or revoke such license, for any of the following violations of the "Retailer's Occupation Tax Act", approved June 28, 1933, as amended: 
(A)  Failure to make a tax return; 
(B)  The filing of a fraudulent return; 
(C)  Failure to pay all or part of any tax or penalty finally determined to be due; 
(D)  Failure to keep books and records; 
(E)  Failure to secure and display a certificate or subcertificates of registration; 
(F)  Wilful violation of any rule or regulation of the department relating to the administration and enforcement of tax liability. 
(Ord. 2767, 5-10-1982) 
3-19-38. - Cessation of business. 
Any licensee who ceased to do business or closes his place of business for a period of more than 30 successive days shall be subject to having his license declared forfeited and lapsed by order of the Local Liquor Control Commissioner. 
(Ord. 2767, 5-10-1982) 
3-19-39. - Multiple locations. 
Where two or more locations, places or premises are under the same roof or at one street address, a separate local retail liquor dealer's license shall be obtained for each such location, place or premises; provided that nothing herein contained shall be so construed as to prevent any hotel or motel operator licensed under the provisions of this chapter from serving alcoholic liquor to his registered guests in any room or part of his hotel or motel, if such liquor so served shall be kept in and served from a licensed location, place or premises in said hotel or motel. 
(Ord. 2767, 5-10-1982) 
3-19-40. - Improper exhibitions. 
No person licensed under this chapter shall permit any employee, entertainer or patron to engage in any live act, demonstration, dance or exhibition on the licensed premises which: 
(A)  Exposes his or her genital, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum, anal region or pubic hair region; or 
(B)  Exposes any device, costume or covering which gives the appearance of or simulates the genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum, anal region or pubic hair region; or 
(C)  Exposes any portion of the female breast at or below areola thereof. 
(Ord. 2767, 5-10-1982) 
3-19-41. - Unlawful possession and consumption by persons under age. 
(A)  No person under the age of 21 years shall consume, purchase or accept delivery of alcoholic liquor or have alcoholic liquor in his or her possession within the Village; provided the possession and dispensing, or consumption by a person under the age of 21 years of alcoholic liquor in the performance of a religious service or ceremony, the consumption by a person under the age of 21 years under the direct supervision and approval of the parent(s) or guardian(s) of such underage person in the privacy of the parent's or guardian's home, or the possession and delivery of alcoholic liquors in pursuant of a person's employment by a licensee under this chapter as allowed in section 3-19-48 of this chapter is not prohibited. 
(B)  No person after purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic liquor shall sell, give or deliver such alcoholic liquor to another person under the age of 21 years, except as allowed under subsection (A) of this section. 
(C)  Presence restriction: It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 19 to be or to remain in any room, apartment, house, place or vehicle which is not licensed for the sale of alcoholic liquor under this chapter, when such person knows alcoholic liquor is being consumed by persons under the age of 19 therein, except as otherwise provided in this chapter; provided however, a person shall not be in violation of this subsection where the room, apartment or house is that person's actual place of domicile, unless that person permits the use of the room, apartment or house when such person knows or in the exercise of ordinary care should know of a substantial probability that such place is or will be used by persons under the age of 19 for the consumption or possession of alcoholic liquor. 
(Ord. 2767, 5-10-1982; Ord. 6413, 6-20-2016) 
3-19-42. - Parental responsibility. 
It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian to knowingly suffer or permit any minor child of which he or she may be the parent or guardian to violate any provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2767, 5-10-1982) 
3-19-43. - Responsibility of the owner or occupant of premises. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of any premises located within the Village to knowingly allow any person under the age of 21 years to remain on such premises while in the possession of alcoholic liquor or while consuming alcoholic liquors in violation of section 3-19-41 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2767, 5-10-1982) 
3-19-44. - Sale by licensee to underaged and certain other persons. 
(A)  No licensee or officer, associated member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee shall sell, give or deliver alcoholic liquor to any person under the age of 21 years, or to any intoxicated person, or to any person known by him to be a habitual drunkard, insane, mentally ill, mentally deficient or in need of mental treatment. 
(B)  It shall be unlawful for any holder of a liquor license, or his or her agent or employee, to suffer or permit any person under the age of 21 years to be or remain in any room or compartment adjoining or adjacent to or situated in the room or place where such licensed premises is located; provided, that this paragraph shall not apply to any person under the age of 21 years who is accompanied by his or her parent or guardian, or to that portion of any licensed premises which derives its principal business from restaurants or the sale of service or commodities other than alcoholic liquor. 
(C)  For the purpose of preventing the violation of this section, any licensee, or his agent or employee, may refuse to sell or serve alcoholic beverages to any person who is unable to produce adequate written evidence of identity and the fact that he or she is over the age of 21 years, as required by this chapter. 
(Ord. 2767, 5-10-1982) 
3-19-45. - Evidence of age of person attempting to purchase or receive alcoholic liquor. 
(A)  If a licensee or his agent or employee believes, has reason to believe or should have reason to believe that a sale or delivery of alcoholic liquor is prohibited because the prospective recipient is underage, then he shall, before making such sale or delivery, demand presentation of at least two separate forms of positive identification each containing proof of age, each issued by a public officer in the performance of his official duties and one of those forms of identification must contain a picture of the holder thereof. A traffic citation shall not be accepted as identification or evidence of age. 
(B)  No person shall transfer, alter or deface an identification card issued by a Federal, State, County or Municipal government or subdivision or agency thereof, use the identification card of another, carry or use a false or forged identification card, or obtain an identification card by means of false identification. 
(C)  No person shall purchase, accept delivery or have possession of alcoholic liquor by the use of an altered, forged or defaced identification card or by the use of an identification card of another person. 
(D)  No person shall misrepresent his or her age for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining alcoholic liquor in any place in the Village where alcoholic liquor is sold at retail. 
(Ord. 2767, 5-10-1982) 
3-19-46. - Required warning signs. 
In every location in the Village holding a Class C-1, C-2, C-4, D-2, D-3 and D-4 liquor license there shall be displayed at all times in a prominent place a printed card which shall be supplied by the Village Clerk and which shall read substantially as follows: 
WARNING: If you are under 21 years of age, you are subject to a fine up to $500.00 under the Glen Ellyn Village Code, if you PURCHASE alcoholic liquor or MISREPRESENT YOUR AGE for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining alcoholic liquor. OFFICIAL PHOTO IDENTIFICATION will be required to prove age before purchase. 
(Ord. 6412, 6-20-2016) 
3-19-47. - Additional penalty for sale to underaged persons. 
(A)  In addition to all other fines and penalties the Local Liquor Control Commissioner may revoke, suspend or refuse to renew any license of a licensee who violates the provisions of section 3-19-44 of this chapter or whose employee or agent violates the provisions of section 3-19-44 of this chapter. 
(B)  Proof that the licensee, or his employee or agent, demanded, was shown and reasonably relied upon written evidence of identification as required by section 3-19-46 of this chapter in any transaction forbidden by section 3-19-44 of this chapter, is competent evidence and may be considered in any ordinance violation prosecution or in any proceedings for the suspension or revocation of any license based on a violation of section 3-19-44 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2767, 5-10-1982) 
3-19-48. - Employment of underaged persons. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee, or any officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee, to engage, employ or permit any person under the age of 21 years to attend bar and/or draw, pour or mix any alcoholic liquor in any licensed premises; provided, that the provisions of this section shall not be construed to prevent the employment of persons who are at least 19 years of age as waiters or waitresses in restaurants, hotels, or motels for the purpose of serving food and alcoholic liquor on the licensed retail premises. 
(B)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee or any officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee, to engage, employ or permit any person under 21 years of age to sell any alcoholic liquor in any licensed premises. 
(Ord. 2767, 5-10-1982) 
3-19-49. - Certain sales prohibited. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful to peddle alcoholic liquor in the Village. 
(B)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee pursuant to this chapter to engage in or allow the following enumerated practices on any licensed premises: 
1.  Deliver more than one drink of alcoholic liquor at one time to one person for consumption by that one person. 
2.  Sell, offer to sell or deliver to any person any unlimited number of alcoholic drinks during any specified time period for a fixed price, other than at private functions not open to the public. 
3.  Sell, offer to sell or deliver alcoholic drinks to any person or group of persons on any one day at prices less than those charged the general public on that entire day, except at private functions not open to the public. 
4.  Increase the volume of alcoholic beverages contained in a drink without proportionately increasing the price charged therefor. 
5.  Permit, allow or encourage any game or contest upon the licensed premises which involves the consumption of alcoholic beverages or the awarding of alcoholic drinks as a prize. 
6.  Advertise or promote, in any manner whatsoever, whether on or off the licensed premises, any of the foregoing enumerated practices. 
7.  Notwithstanding subsections (B)1. through (B)6. of this section, a licensee pursuant to this chapter shall not be prohibited from offering free food or entertainment at any time, including an alcoholic beverage as part of a meal package, from conducting free wine tastings or from offering room services to registered hotel or motel guests where the premises are licensed for such services. 
(Ord. 3416, 12-21-1987; Ord. 5677, 4-28-2008) 
3-19-50. - General penalty; appeals. 
(A)  Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be fined not less than $25.00 nor more than $500.00 for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. In addition to any other penalty, a licensee convicted of violating any provision of this chapter may be subject to having his license revoked, suspended or not renewed by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner. 
(B)  Pursuant to Resolution 94-12 of the Village, the appeal of any decision of the Local Liquor Control Commissioner to the Illinois State Liquor Control Commission shall be limited to a review of the official record of the proceedings of such Local Liquor Control Commissioner as provided in 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/7-9 of the Liquor Control Act. 
(Ord. 4108, 3-28-1994) 
3-19-51. - Severability. 
The repeal of this chapter or part of ordinances effectuated by the enactment of this chapter shall not be construed as abating any actions now pending under or by virtue of such ordinance or as discontinuance, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accruing or to accrue or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation or as waiving any right of the Municipality under any section or provision existing at the time of the passage of this chapter. It is the intention of the Village Board that this chapter, and every provision thereof, shall be considered separable; and that the invalidity of any section, clause, provision or part or portion of any section, clause or provision of this chapter shall not affect the validity of any other portion of this chapter. If any part or provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall be confined by its operation to the controversy in which it was mentioned and shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of this chapter or the application thereof to any other person or circumstance and to this end the provisions of this chapter are declared severable. 
(Ord. 2767, 5-10-1982) 
3-19-52. - Private function/party. 
A private function or party is one for which the host (not the liquor license holder) invites a prearranged list of guests, may or may not require an advance charge for alcohol, and does so in a way which is not advertised to the general public via any form of media, including, but not limited to, print, electronic or social media, and does not allow for admission (free or for charge) to uninvited attendees. 
(Ord. 6316, 5-26-2015) 
Chapter 20 - LUMBER DEALERS 

3-20-1. - License required. 
No person shall engage in business as a lumber dealer maintaining a lumberyard in the Village without first securing a license therefor. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 7.17) 
3-20-2. - Fire limits. 
No license shall be issued for the establishment of a lumberyard within the fire limits. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 7.17) 
3-20-3. - Fire apparatus. 
Every person owning or operating a lumberyard shall have the premises equipped with sufficient firefighting apparatus to prevent the spread and to extinguish any small fires which may start. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 7.17) 
3-20-4. - Piling lumber. 
No lumber shall be piled or stacked in such a way that it overhangs or is in danger of falling onto any adjoining property, street, alley or other public place. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 7.17) 
3-20-5. - Location. 
No lumberyard shall be established where a majority of the buildings within a radius of 400 feet are used exclusively for residence purposes. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 7.17) 
3-20-6. - Inspections. 
It shall be the duty of the Chief of the Fire Department to make, or cause to be made, such inspections as may be necessary to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 7.17) 
Chapter 21 - MOTOR VEHICLE SHOPS, SALESROOMS 

3-21-1. - Vehicle repair shops. 
(A)  Definition: A motor vehicle repair shop is any building, structure, enclosure or other place where the business of doing repair work on motor vehicles, or the component parts thereof, or where the replacing of or the adding of parts thereto, is carried on. 
(B)  License required: No person shall engage in the motor vehicle repair business without first having obtained a license therefor. 
(C)  Application: The application shall give the name and address of the owner or operator of the repair shop, the location of the repair shop, and the number of persons employed therein. 
(D)  Location: No motor vehicle repair shop shall be operated within 200 feet of a hospital, church or public or parochial school, nor in any block in which two-thirds of the buildings on both sides of the street are used exclusively for residence purposes. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 7.18) 
Chapter 22 - NURSING HOMES 
(Repealed by Ordinance 2289, December 12, 1977) 
Chapter 23 - PEDDLERS 

3-23-1. - Definition. 
The word "peddler" as used herein shall include any person, whether a resident of the Village or not, traveling by foot, wagon, automobile, or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, house to house, or street to street, carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise, meats, fish, vegetables, fruits and farm produce or provisions, offering and exposing the same for sale, or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers, or who, without traveling from place to place shall sell or offer the same for sale from a wagon, automobile, or other vehicle or conveyance; and further provided, that one who solicits orders and, as a separate transaction, makes deliveries to purchasers as a part of a scheme or design to evade the provisions of this chapter, shall be deemed a peddler. 
The word "peddler" shall include the words "hawker" and "huckster". 
(Ord. 2198, 5-23-1977) 
3-23-2. - License required. 
No person shall engage in the business of peddler in the Village without having first obtained a license therefor. 
(Ord. 2198, 5-23-1977) 
3-23-3. - License fee. 
The fee for a peddler's license shall be $1.50 per day, and a license up to three weeks (21 days) in advance may be secured. Mobile ice cream vendors may secure a license for up to one month at a cost of $1.50 per day plus associated cost of background checks for the operator and any of his/her employees that are 18 years of age or older. Food truck operators may obtain a license for either a three or six month period at a cost of $150.00 for three months or $270.00 for six months which in either case shall include the cost of one fingerprint background check. 
(Ord. 6303, 3-9-2015; Ord. 6677, 2-25-2019) 
3-23-4. - Exception. 
No license fee shall be required from any ex-soldier, sailor or marine, nor from any farmer peddling or selling the produce of his own farm, nor from any other person from whom the Village is prohibited, by state or federal law, from requiring a license fee. 
However, all persons herein excepted must register with the Police Chief each day they engage in peddling or selling in the Village. 
(Ord. 2198, 5-23-1977) 
3-23-5. - Application for permit. 
Application for a peddler's license shall be made in writing to the Police Chief on forms provided by the Village collector. 
The application shall contain the following information: 
(A)  The name and address and length of time it has been operating, of the business intended to be operated. 
(B)  The kind of article or merchandise offered for sale. 
(C)  The name, current and permanent address of the peddler. 
(D)  The number of vehicles if any, intended to be operated. 
(E)  The method or methods to be used in conducting the peddling. 
(F)  The dates and times when such peddling is to be conducted. 
(G)  The date or approximate date, of the latest previous application for a license under this chapter, if any. 
(H)  A statement as to whether or not a license previously issued to this applicant or organization under this chapter has ever been revoked. 
(I)  A statement as to whether or not the applicant or organization or other of the organization's members has ever been convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter or the ordinance of any other Illinois Municipality regulating peddling. 
(J)  A statement as to whether or not the applicant or organization or the organization's members have ever been convicted of a felony under the laws of the State of Illinois or any other state or federal laws of the United States, and a statement authorizing the Police Chief to conduct a fingerprint background check. 
(K)  A statement that, if a license is granted, it will not be used, or represented in any way as an endorsement by the Village or any department or official thereof. 
(L)  Food trucks and mobile ice cream vendors must submit a copy of their current valid DuPage County mobile vending permit. 
(M)  Such other information as the Police Chief may request. 
(Ord. 2198, 5-23-1977; Ord. 6303, 3-9-2015) 
3-23-6. - Permit issued. 
The Police Chief shall issue the permit requested if he has reason to believe that: 
(A)  The statements in the application are true, 
(B)  The peddling will be conducted as described in the application, 
(C)  Neither the applicant(s) nor organization for which the applicant(s) propose(s) to peddle have engaged in any fraudulent practices, 
(D)  Neither the applicant(s) nor organization for which the applicant(s) propose(s) to peddle have been convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter or the ordinance of any other Illinois Municipality regulating peddling, and 
(E)  Neither the applicant(s) nor organization for which applicant(s) propose(s) to peddle have ever been convicted of a felony under the laws of the State of Illinois or any other state or federal laws of the United States; 
Otherwise the license shall be denied. 
The license shall consist of a copy of the application signed by the Police Chief as approved. Each person peddling under the application shall carry a copy of the approved application. However, a separate application shall be required for each separate period for which the peddling is made. 
(Ord. 2198, 5-23-1977) 
3-23-7. - Unlawful trespass, misrepresentation. 
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the President and Board of Trustees of the Village that the occupant or occupants of the residences in the Village shall make the determination of whether peddlers shall be, or shall not be, invited to their respective residences. 
(A)  Every person desiring to secure the protection intended to be provided by this chapter shall give notice of his determination to refuse to invite peddlers to the residence by exhibiting a weatherproof card, decal or sign, not less than three inches by four inches in size, upon or near the main entrance, point of approach or entry to the residence, containing the words "No Peddlers Or Solicitors Invited", the letters of which shall be at least one-third inch in height, and, for the purpose of uniformity, cards shall be provided by the Police Department to persons requesting them at the cost thereof. Such card, decal or sign so exhibited shall constitute sufficient notice to any peddler that he is prohibited from trespassing upon the premises. 
(B)  It is hereby declared to be unlawful, and shall constitute a trespass, for any person to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell, or create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of such residence, for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant thereof and engage in peddling, in defiance of the notice exhibited at the residence, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(C)  It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in peddling to use sales or other tactics based on force, threat of force, intimidation or psychological pressure; to knowingly misrepresent himself or herself or their product to any Village Officer, or potential or actual customer, or to make or cause to be made any contract, order form or instrument of indebtedness without full knowledge of the customer. 
(Ord. 2198, 5-23-1977; Ord. 3829, 4-22-1991) 
3-23-8. - Revocation, suspension of license. 
Any license issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked by the Police Chief if he has reason to believe that the license holder, the license holder's organization or other members of license holder's organization have violated any provisions of this chapter or any other provisions of any ordinance of the Village, or any section of this Code, or any statute, rule or regulation of any other governmental agency. 
Upon receiving a complaint or other notification alleging that a violation has occurred the Police Chief shall fix a date and time for a hearing and shall notify license holder or license holder's organization either verbally or in writing of the charge. At the hearing the Police Chief shall hear such evidence bearing upon the question as may be presented by the complainant and the license holder. Based upon the evidence taken at such hearing the Police Chief shall make a determination as to whether or not the license shall be suspended or revoked and shall cause his decision to be carried out. 
(Ord. 2198, 5-23-1977) 
3-23-9. - Hours of operation. 
No peddling shall be permitted within the Village before the hour of 9:00 a.m. or after the hour of 8:00 p.m., and no peddling shall be conducted on Sundays except that licensed food truck and mobile ice cream vendors shall be permitted to peddle within the Village on Sundays between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. 
(Ord. 6303, 3-9-2015) 
3-23-10. - Signs at village limits. 
The Public Works Director is hereby directed to post appropriate signs at the limits of the Village with the following language: 
PEDDLERS MUST BE LICENSED AND REGISTERED. APPLY AT THE GLEN ELLYN POLICE DEPARTMENT, 65 S. PARK BOULEVARD. 
(Ord. 2198, 5-23-1977; Ord. 6677, 2-25-2019) 
3-23-11. - Penalty, conflicting ordinances. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined in an amount not exceeding $500.00 for each such offense. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. 2198, 5-23-1977) 
3-23-12. - Validity of chapter. 
If any section, subsection, paragraph or part of this chapter is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid by any final court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2198, 5-23-1977) 
3-23-13. - Unlawful peddling. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to stand on or within any street located within the corporate limits of the Village for the purpose of engaging in the business of peddling with the occupant of any vehicle. 
(Ord. 2442, 3-26-1979) 
3-23-14. - Additional conditions. 
Sales by a peddler within the Village shall be subject to the following additional conditions: 
(A)  Vehicles must be operated in a manner as not to interfere with traffic. 
(B)  The sale of products is to be made from the right curb side of the vehicle and only when legally parked. 
(C)  Sale of products to any person standing on the roadway is prohibited. 
(D)  The use of electronic sound amplification equipment is prohibited. 
(E)  Peddling within 1,000 feet of any grade school, junior high school or high school within the Village is prohibited while the school is in session, 30 minutes before assemblage or within 30 minutes of dismissal with the exception of licensed food trucks, pursuant to section 10-5-20 of this Code. 
(F)  Mobile ice cream peddling is prohibited at all times on the streets listed in section 9-5-17, "Schedule Q; Peddling Prohibited At All Times", of this Code. 
(Ord. 4155, 6-27-1994; Ord. 6303, 3-9-2015) 
Chapter 24 - PUBLIC GARAGES 

3-24-1. - Definition. 
A public garage is any building, structure or enclosure within the Village where two or more motor vehicles are stored, housed or parked for hire in a condition ready for use. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 7.22) 
3-24-2. - License required. 
No person shall operate or maintain a public garage without first obtaining a license therefor. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 7.22) 
3-24-3. - Application. 
The application for such license shall state the name and address of the owner or operator of the garage, the location of the garage, the number of cars that can be accommodated therein, the type of construction of the building, and the number of square feet of floor area in each story of the building. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 7.22) 
3-24-4. - Regulations. 
It shall be unlawful to maintain or operate any public garage in a frame building or within 100 feet of any building or structure used for a church, public or parochial school, or theater. The premises of every garage must be kept clean and free from flammable waste and material. 
Every garage shall have "No Smoking" signs posted in conspicuous places. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 7.22) 
3-24-5. - Changing identification marks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to change the identification marks on the engine of any vehicle in any public garage, or change the license tags on any vehicle, except in accordance with the provisions of the Illinois Compiled Statutes. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 7.22) 
3-24-6. - Inspection. 
It shall be the duty of the Police Chief and the Chief of the Fire Department to make such inspections of public garages as may be necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter. Any Police officer shall be permitted, at any reasonable hour, to view every car stored or kept in any public garage; and it shall be unlawful to hinder any such inspection or to conceal any car or motor vehicle from inspection. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 7.22) 
3-24-7. - License fee. 
The annual fee for a public garage license shall be $30.00. 
(Ord. 2290, 12-12-1977, eff. 7-1-1978) 
Chapter 25 - RADIO AND TELEVISION REPAIRMEN 
(Repealed by Ordinance 2289, December 12, 1977) 
Chapter 26 - REAL ESTATE BROKERS 
(Repealed by Ordinance 2289, December 12, 1977) 
Chapter 27 - REFRIGERATED LOCKER PLANTS 
(Repealed by Ordinance 2289, December 12, 1977) 
Chapter 28 - SCAVENGERS 

3-28-1. - Definition. 
"Scavenger" means any person engaged in the business of collecting, carting, hauling or transporting garbage, ashes, refuse and miscellaneous waste, as defined in section 7-6-2 of this Code. 
(Ord. 2659, 5-11-1981) 
3-28-2. - License required, limitation on number. 
Any person engaged in the scavenger business shall first obtain a license therefor. There shall be the following classes of licenses: 
(A)  Residential. 
(B)  Commercial shall be issued without regard to limit. 
The Village shall issue one residential license and shall issue commercial license without restriction as to number issued. 
(Ord. 2659, 5-11-1981) 
3-28-3. - Application. 
The application shall disclose the name and residence address of the applicant and the address of his place of business and type of license requested. Each application for commercial license shall be accompanied by bond in the sum of $5,000.00 executed by the applicant, as principal, and two sureties upon which service of process may be made in the state. Said bond shall be approved by the Village attorney, conditioned upon the applicant complying with all provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 3829, 4-22-1991) 
3-28-4. - Regulations. 
(A)  All vehicles used in the scavenger business for collecting, hauling or transporting garbage, ashes, refuse or miscellaneous waste shall meet all requirements of title 7, chapter 6 of this Code. 
(B)  All collections shall be made in accordance with the requirements of title 7, chapter 6 of this Code. 
(C)  It shall be the duty of each scavenger providing nonresidential service to a multi-family residential customer to provide a service for the collection and removal of recyclable material, as defined in subsection 7-6-5(A)3. of this Code, from the residents of that multi-family residential property. 
(D)  It shall be the duty of each scavenger providing nonresidential service to a commercial customer to offer that customer the option to recycle, providing the necessary services in collecting and removing recyclable material from that commercial property. 
(Ord. 2659, 5-11-1981; Ord. 4785, 11-22-1999; Ord. 4968, 7-23-2001) 
3-28-5. - License fee. 
The annual fee for a scavenger business license shall be $100.00 for the operation of not to exceed four vehicles plus $20.00 per year for each additional vehicle. 
(Ord. 2659, 5-11-1981) 
Chapter 29 - SECONDHAND GOODS PURCHASED FOR RETAIL SALES 

3-29-1. - Register of license required. 
No person, firm or corporation shall conduct, engage in, maintain, operate or carry on any business within the Village of Glen Ellyn dealing in the listed secondhand goods, wares and merchandise, as defined herein, either by himself or itself, or through an agent, employee or partner without first having obtained a license issued by the Village of Glen Ellyn, as provided herein for each separate place, premises, or location where such business is to be conducted. 
(Ord. 6130, 4-29-2013) 
3-29-2. - Definitions. 
PRECIOUS METALS AND STONES: Any article combining precious metals, including, but not limited to, silver, gold, and platinum, such as, but not limited to, jewelry, or any articles containing any genuine diamond, ruby, emerald, sapphire or pearl of any value and any other genuine stone or gem. 
SECONDHAND GOODS: Including, but not limited to, any described goods, wares and merchandise which were previously owned or used by any person other than the manufacturer, wholesaler, or retailer with a value, such as: 
(A)  Audiovisual equipment, including, but not limited to, any stereo, speaker, radio, video recorder, video camera, television set, tape or disc player; 
(B)  Cameras and other photographic instruments and equipment; 
(C)  Computers, printers, software, and computer supplies; 
(D)  Electronic equipment other than electronic toys and games; 
(E)  Jewelry; 
(F)  "Precious metals and stones", as defined herein; 
(G)  Telephones, including, but not limited to, pager and cellular phones and other satellite signal devices; 
(H)  "Valuable metals", as defined herein. 
SECONDHAND GOODS DEALER: Any individual, corporation, business, partnership or other entity: a) who engages in the business of purchasing, selling, receiving, trading, consignment selling or otherwise transferring for value any "secondhand goods", as defined herein, or b) who purchases any "secondhand goods", as defined herein, for purposes of recycling or salvaging such items. A secondhand goods dealer shall not include: a) sales or exchanges of used articles and materials conducted or controlled by charitable, religious, or community organizations, including, but not limited to, schools, Boy Scouts, Girl Scouts, and youth athletics groups, which accept donated items to resell for fundraising activities, and b) residents of the Village conducting garage sales held not more than two weekends every year provided such residents are not engaged therein as a business. A secondhand goods dealer licensed under this chapter is sometimes referred to as "licensee". 
VALUABLE METALS: Aluminum, copper, lead, titanium, stainless steel, copper alloy or brass, formed as a bar, cable, rod, tubing, wire, wire scrap, clamp, connector, bushing or bearing or other appurtenances utilized or that can be utilized by persons, firms, corporations or Municipal corporations engaged in either the generation, transmission or distribution of electric energy, in telephone, telegraph or other communications, or by railroads; or any copper, copper alloy or brass, or aluminum materials utilized for the purpose of plumbing, storm doors and windows, siding, or gutters of building structures or automotive parts. 
(Ord. 6130, 4-29-2013) 
3-29-3. - Application; investigation of applicant; qualifications. 
(A)  An application for a secondhand goods dealer license shall be made on a form provided by the Village Clerk, who shall provide a copy of the application to the chief of Police, or his designee, to investigate each licensee applicant. The chief of Police shall determine whether or not such applicant has complied with the laws of the State of Illinois and the provisions of this chapter applicable to said business, and whether the applicant is a person of good character and repute. No license shall be issued to any person, partnership, corporation or other entity, if any owner, manager, partner, officer, director, employee, or shareholder owning more than five percent of the shares of stock in the corporation has been convicted of any felony offense or convicted of the offense(s) of possession of stolen goods, burglary, robbery, or who has been convicted of any criminal offense involving dishonesty or moral turpitude. 
(B)  Every applicant for a secondhand goods dealer license, as well as every owner, partner, manager, officer, director, employee, and in the case of a corporate applicant, every shareholder owning more than 25 percent of the shares of stock in the corporation shall undergo a criminal background investigation, which investigation may include fingerprinting, prior to the issuance of a secondhand goods dealer license. 
(C)  Existing businesses located in the Village of Glen Ellyn on the date this chapter becomes effective shall have 30 days to apply for a license required under this chapter. The Village Clerk shall endeavor to send a notice to existing businesses which the Clerk believes may require such a license, but all entities which need a license shall be required to apply, even absent such notice. 
(Ord. 6130, 4-29-2013) 
3-29-4. - Business location; zoning; inspection; code compliance. 
(A)  Every applicant for a secondhand goods dealer license must state in the application the address of the building and premises on which the person or entity is conducting or proposing to conduct a business dealing in secondhand goods. 
(B)  Such building and premises must comply with all Village zoning, building, fire and health codes, ordinances, rules and regulations, as well as all other applicable Village Codes, ordinances, rules and regulations and must be maintained in good repair, free of litter and debris and kept in a safe condition for employees, customers, and other persons present at the business location stated in the application ("licensed premises"). 
(C)  Any business licensed under this chapter must comply with all laws of the State of Illinois and all other applicable governmental rules and regulations, and must not be conducted, operated, maintained or carried on so as to constitute a nuisance. 
(Ord. 6130, 4-29-2013) 
3-29-5. - Issuance of license. 
(A)  Upon compliance with all the requirements of this chapter, a secondhand goods dealer license will be issued to the applicant for the licensed premises. 
(B)  Each license will be valid from the date of issuance until the following April 30 and shall be subject to reissuance for the period from May 1 to April 30 of each year thereafter. 
(Ord. 6130, 4-29-2013) 
3-29-6. - Reserved. 
(Ord. 6130, 4-29-2013) 
3-29-7. - Duty to report stolen or lost articles. 
Each licensee or employee or agent must report to the chief of Police, or his or her designee, any secondhand goods sought to be sold to the licensee or placed on consignment with the licensee, if the licensee or his employee or its agent reasonably believes that the secondhand goods was stolen or that the secondhand goods was lost and found by the person attempting to sell it or place it on consignment. 
(Ord. 6130, 4-29-2013) 
3-29-8. - Record requirements. 
All licensees doing business in the Village of Glen Ellyn shall participate as fully required by reporting the data to an online database: leadsonline.com. This reporting requirement records things including, but not limited to: 
(A)  Accurate account and description of the secondhand goods including the brand name, if any; 
(B)  Amount of money paid for the secondhand goods; 
(C)  Serial number or other identification number of the secondhand goods; 
(D)  Time and date of the transaction; and 
(E)  Name and residence address of the person selling or placing the secondhand goods on consignment. 
Any secondhand goods purchased or received on consignment must be clearly digitally photographed in color so as to be able to clearly identify the secondhand goods, including any serial numbers or other identifying marks. All photographs taken must be maintained and preserved as provided in this section. This requirement does not apply to any secondhand goods purchased from dealers possessing a federal employer identification number who have provided a receipt to the licensee. 
Any failure to follow the reporting requirements of the website shall be considered a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 6130, 4-29-2013) 
3-29-9. - Identification required. 
(A)  It is unlawful for any licensee, agent or employee of a licensee to fail to request and require identification to be shown by each person selling any article to the licensee or placing such article on consignment with the licensee. The licensee, agent, or employee of the licensee must photocopy the identification presented and retain the photocopies as records under section 3-29-8 of this chapter. In addition to a valid driver's license or identification card, other acceptable forms of pictured identification include an employee or student identification card, pictured credit card, or a pictured civic, union or professional association membership card. If the person selling the secondhand goods to the licensee or placing the secondhand goods on consignment with the licensee does not present identification issued by the State of Illinois, the licensee must digitally photograph the person in color print and record such person's name, residence address, date of birth, gender, height and weight on the reverse side of the photograph. 
(B)  The licensee must maintain the records required by this section in electronic form, in a manner approved in writing by the chief of Police. 
(C)  Any secondhand goods deposited, pawned or pledged shall be entered into the leadsonline.com database within 12 hours of receipt of the article. The chief of Police may in writing to the licensee, designate another electronic database which shall satisfy the reporting provision of this chapter. The chief of Police, for good reasons presented, may waive or modify any requirement of this section or section 3-29-8 or 3-29-13 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 6130, 4-29-2013) 
3-29-10. - Inspection of records. 
The record book, electronic records, video surveillance records, digital photographs, as well as every secondhand goods purchased or received on consignment will at all times be open to inspection by the chief of Police, or his or her designee, during the licensee's business hours. The record book, electronic records, and all photographs taken must be maintained for a period of three years after the date on which the record was prepared. 
(Ord. 6130, 4-29-2013) 
3-29-11. - Monthly report. 
Except as may be otherwise provided in this chapter, every licensee must prepare and deliver to the chief of Police, or his designee, a legible exact copy of the record book and computer generated record, including copies of the digital photographs, as required in this chapter, for all transactions made during the preceding calendar month. This record must be delivered no later than 12:00 noon on the third day of each month showing transactions in the prior month. 
(Ord. 6130, 4-29-2013) 
3-29-12. - Transactions with prohibited parties. 
(A)  It is unlawful for any licensee, or his or its agent or employee, to purchase any secondhand goods from a person under the age of 18 years, or when the ownership of the secondhand goods is claimed by a minor, or when the secondhand goods are in the possession or control of a minor without the written consent of the minor's parent or legal guardian. The consent must be signed by the minor's parent or legal guardian in the presence of the licensee or his employee or agent who must include the consent in the report required under section 3-29-8 of this chapter. 
(B)  It is unlawful for any licensee to purchase any secondhand goods from any person appearing to be intoxicated or under the influence of any drug or controlled substance or from any person known to have been convicted of theft, burglary, deceptive practices, robbery or armed robbery. It is the duty of every licensee, or agent or employee of a licensee, to return any secondhand goods purchased or received on consignment to the lawful owner of such article without the payment of the money paid by the licensee, or any other cost or charge of any kind, in cases where the secondhand goods have been stolen from or lost by the lawful owner, and the lawful owner can clearly establish ownership. 
(Ord. 6130, 4-29-2013) 
3-29-13. - Sale of property. 
No article purchased or received on consignment by any licensee shall be sold by the licensee, altered from its original state, or removed from the place of business of such licensee for a period of at least four days after purchase. Removal from place of business shall not apply to items stored at a central corporate location. 
(Ord. 6130, 4-29-2013) 
3-29-14. - Prohibited items. 
No licensee, or agent or employee of a licensee, may purchase or receive on consignment any firearm, stun gun or taser or any article, the possession of which is prohibited pursuant to section 24-1(a)(1) of the Illinois criminal code, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/24-1(a)(1). 
(Ord. 6130, 4-29-2013) 
3-29-15. - Revocation or suspension; hearing. 
(A)  Any license issued under this chapter may be revoked or suspended for not more than 30 days by the Village President by reason of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, following a hearing. 
(B)  When a hearing is set by the Village President in a revocation or suspension proceeding, the licensee will receive not less than 20 days' written notice, which notice will contain the charges made, as well as the time and place when the hearing will be held. 
(C)  At a hearing conducted pursuant to this section, the licensee will have the right to be represented by counsel, to present witnesses, to testify and cross examine any other witnesses. Proceedings will be conducted under oath. 
(D)  The Village President will preside at the hearing and the Village President will make the final determination. 
(E)  If any decision adverse to the licensee is made by the Village President after a hearing, the Village President will provide the licensee with the written reason or reasons for such decision, as well as a notice of the licensee's right to seek administrative review of the decision. 
(F)  The provisions of the administrative review act of Illinois will apply and govern all proceedings for the judicial review of final determinations of the Village President and Board of Trustees under this section. In the event that the administrative review act shall be determined to not apply, the licensee may seek any appropriate judicial review. 
(Ord. 6130, 4-29-2013) 
3-29-16. - Penalty. 
(A)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary, any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be fined an amount not less than $150.00 or more than $750.00 for each offense. Each day on which a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(B)  A violation of the provisions of this chapter by an employee or agent of the licensee will be imputed to the licensee and will be considered the act of the licensee for which the license issued may be suspended or revoked as provided by section 3-29-15 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 6130, 4-29-2013) 
Chapter 30 - SOLICITATIONS 

3-30-1. - Permit required. 
No individual, association, corporation, school, church, religious sect, religious denomination, political organization, social organization, civic organization, or league shall conduct a tag day or sell merchandise or tickets at a fixed price, a portion of which price is received by the selling individual or organization as part of a fundraising effort for charity or a community project, or otherwise solicit monetary contributions or goods for any charitable endeavor or community project from the residents of the Village without having first obtained a permit to solicit. 
However, no permit need be obtained by any school, church, or organization which is conducting a solicitation solely among its members thereof or by any noncommercial, religious, or political organization which does not solicit monetary contributions or goods and is merely interested in distributing materials or conveying a verbal message. 
(Ord. 5081, 8-12-2002) 
3-30-2. - Application for permit. 
An application for a permit to solicit shall be made in writing to the Village Administrator on forms furnished by the Village Administrator's office. The application shall contain the following information, or in lieu thereof, a statement as to why information cannot be furnished: 
(A)  The name and address and length of time it has been operating of the charity or organization applying for the permit. 
(B)  The names and addresses of the people in charge of organizing and supervising the solicitation and length of residence in the Village. 
(C)  The names and addresses of those people who will be soliciting and length of residence. 
(D)  The name and address of any person who is to receive a percentage of the funds collected for organizing or promoting the solicitation. 
(E)  The amount or percentage to be paid to such promoter or organizer. 
(F)  The purpose for which the collected funds are to be used. 
(G)  The name and address of the person or organization to whom the funds are to be remitted when collected. 
(H)  The method or methods to be used in conducting the solicitation. 
(I)  The time when such solicitation is to be made, giving dates requested for beginning and ending of solicitation. 
(J)  The date, or approximate date, of the latest previous application for a permit under this chapter, if any. 
(K)  A statement as to whether or not a permit previously issued to this applicant or organization under this chapter has ever been revoked. 
(L)  A statement as to whether or not the applicant, or organization or other of the organization's members, has ever been convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter or the ordinance of any other Illinois municipality regulating soliciting. 
(M)  A statement as to whether or not the applicant or organization or the organization's members have ever been convicted of a felony under the laws of the State of Illinois or any other state or federal laws of the United States. 
(N)  A statement that, if a permit is granted, it will not be used or represented in any way as an endorsement by the Village or any department or official thereof. 
(O)  A statement that the applicant is a responsible member of the organization and giving the purpose for which he or she and the organization proposes to collect. 
Such other information as the Village Administrator may request. 
(Ord. 2197, 5-23-1977; Ord. 3829, 4-22-1991) 
3-30-3. - Issuance of permit. 
The Village Administrator shall issue the permit requested if he has reason to believe that: 
(A)  The statements in the application are true, 
(B)  The control and supervision of the solicitation will be under responsible and reliable persons, 
(C)  The solicitation is solely for the purpose of financing the charitable cause or community project as described in the application, 
(D)  Neither the applicant(s) nor organization for which the applicant(s) propose(s) to solicit have engaged in any fraudulent practices, 
(E)  Neither the applicant(s) nor organization for which the applicant(s) propose(s) to solicit have been convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter or the ordinance of any other Illinois Municipality regulating soliciting, and 
(F)  Neither the applicant(s) nor organization for which applicant(s) propose(s) to solicit have ever been convicted of a felony under the laws of the State of Illinois or any other state or federal laws of the United States; otherwise the permit shall be denied. 
The permit shall consist of a copy of the application signed by the Village Administrator as approved. Each person soliciting under the application shall carry a copy of the approved application. Such approved copies may be reproduced by the applicant or applicant's organization as necessary. However, a separate application shall be required for each separate period for which the solicitation is made. 
(Ord. 2197, 5-23-1977) 
3-30-4. - Fee. 
Before a permit is issued, a permit fee of $3.00 shall be paid. 
(Ord. 2290, 12-12-1977, eff. 7-1-1978; amd. Ord. 4458, 1-13-1997) 
3-30-5. - Time of permit. 
Permits issued hereunder shall bear the name and address of the organization by and for which the solicitation is to be made, the date issued, and the dates within which the solicitation will be conducted. No permit may grant the right to solicit for a period of longer than 21 days. Following a permit issued for 21 days, an organization wishing to continue to solicit within the Village may reapply for a solicitation permit using the Village of Glen Ellyn application for permit to solicit. The delivery of goods or merchandise or follow up collection of pledges of contributions shall not exceed an additional ten days unless requested by the contributor. No solicitor or organization shall solicit a resident while at his or her residence more than once during the approved period of solicitation or once altogether should a reapplication be submitted and granted, unless the resident being solicited specifically requests the solicitor to return. 
(Ord. 6157, 8-12-2013) 
3-30-6. - Permit nontransferable. 
Any permit issued hereunder shall be nontransferable. 
(Ord. 3829, 4-22-1991) 
3-30-7. - Receipts. 
Any person receiving more than $1.00 as a monetary contribution, or in return for merchandise from any contributor by solicitation made pursuant to a permit granted hereunder, shall, if requested by the contributor, give to the contributor a written receipt signed by the solicitor showing the name of the organization to whom the permit was issued, the name of the solicitor and the amount received; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to contributions collected by means of a closed box or receptacle used in a solicitation. 
(Ord. 2197, 5-23-1977) 
3-30-8. - Unlawful trespass; misrepresentation. 
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the President and Board of Trustees of the Village that the occupant or occupants of the residences in the Village shall make the determination of whether solicitors shall be or shall not be, invited to their respective residences. 
(A)  Every person desiring to secure the protection intended to be provided by this chapter shall give notice of his determination to refuse to invite solicitors to the residence by exhibiting a weatherproof card, decal or sign, not less than three inches by four inches in size, upon or near the main entrance, point of approach or entry to the residence, containing the words "NO PEDDLERS OR SOLICITORS INVITED", the letters of which shall be at least one-third inch in height, and, for the purpose of uniformity, cards shall be provided by the Police Department to persons requesting them at the cost thereof. Such card, decal or sign so exhibited shall constitute sufficient notice to any solicitor that he is prohibited from trespassing upon the premises. 
(B)  It is hereby declared to be unlawful, and shall constitute a trespass, for any person to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell, or create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of such residence, for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant thereof and engage in soliciting, in defiance of the notice exhibited at the residence, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(C)  It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in soliciting to use sales or other tactics based on force, threat of force, intimidation or psychological pressure; to knowingly misrepresent himself or herself or their product to any Village official, or potential or actual contributor, or to make or cause to be made any contract, order form or instrument of indebtedness without full knowledge of the contributor. 
(Ord. 2197, 5-23-1977; Ord. 3829, 4-22-1991) 
3-30-9. - Revocation, suspension of permit. 
Any permit issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked by the Village Administrator if he has reason to believe that the permit holder, the permit holder's organization or other members of permit holder's organization have violated any provisions of this chapter or any other provisions of any ordinance of the Village, or any section of this Code, or any statute, rule or regulation of any other governmental agency. 
Upon receiving a complaint or other notification alleging that a violation has occurred, the Village Administrator shall fix a date and time for a hearing and shall notify the permit holder or permit holder's organization either verbally or in writing of the charge. At the hearing the Village Administrator shall hear such evidence bearing upon the question as may be presented by the complainant and the permit holder. Based upon the evidence taken at such hearing the Village Administrator shall make a determination as to whether or not the permit shall be suspended or revoked and shall cause his decision to be carried out. 
(Ord. 2197, 5-23-1977) 
3-30-10. - Hours of operation. 
No soliciting shall be permitted within the Village before the hour of 9:00 a.m. or after the hour of 9:00 p.m. Monday through Friday and before the hour of 9:00 a.m. or after the hour of 6:00 p.m. on Saturdays and Sundays. 
(Ord. 6157, 8-12-2013) 
3-30-11. - Signs at Village limits. 
The Public Works Director is hereby directed to post appropriate signs at the limits of the Village with the following language: 
SOLICITORS MUST BE LICENSED AND REGISTERED. APPLY AT GLEN ELLYN MUNICIPAL BUILDING, 535 DUANE STREET. 
(Ord. 2197, 5-23-1977) 
3-30-12. - Violation, conflicting ordinances. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined in any amount not exceeding $500.00 for each such offense. 
(Ord. 2197, 5-23-1977) 
3-30-13. - Validity of chapter. 
If any section, subsection, paragraph or part of this chapter is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid by any final court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2197, 5-23-1977) 
3-30-14. - Unlawful solicitation. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to stand on or within any street located within the corporate limits of the Village for the purpose of soliciting employment, business or contributions from the occupant of any vehicle. 
(A)  Any charitable organization registered with the attorney general in the manner provided by law may stand upon the streets or highways within the Municipality at any intersection where all traffic is required to come to a full stop for the purpose of soliciting contributions from the occupants of any vehicle as part of a statewide fundraising activity. The charitable organization shall be liable for any injuries to any person or property during the solicitation which is causally related to an act of ordinary negligence of the soliciting agency. Any person engaged in the act of solicitation shall be at least 16 years of age and shall wear a high visibility vest. Any charitable organization wishing to engage in such solicitation for contributions shall apply to the Village Administrator for a permit. The application shall state the following facts along with such other facts as may be required by the Village Administrator: 
1.  The name, address and telephone number of the organization. 
2.  The name, address and telephone number of a local representative of the organization or that person making the application. 
3.  Proof that the organization is registered with the attorney general. 
4.  A statement of the statewide fundraising activity of which the local solicitation effort is a part. 
5.  A certificate of insurance showing whether the organization is insured against any claims for injuries or damage to property which is causally related to an act of ordinary negligence of the soliciting agent acting on behalf of the organization. 
6.  The location or locations at which approval to solicit is being sought. 
7.  The days and times of days at which such solicitation is proposed to take place. 
8.  The number of persons proposed to solicit at each location. 
(B)  The Village Administrator shall issue a permit for such solicitation if he finds that the applicant has complied with all of the provisions of state law regarding such solicitation and the provisions of this chapter. The Village Administrator must also find that the locations, times and durations of the proposed solicitation and number of proposed solicitors shall not result in an interference with the flow of vehicular traffic. 
(Ord. 2442, 3-26-1979; Ord. 2504, 11-13-1979, eff. 1-1-1980) 
Chapter 31 - TAXICABS 

3-31-1. - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise expressly stated or the context clearly indicates a different intention, the following terms shall, for the purpose of this chapter, have the meanings indicated in this section: 
TAXICAB: All motor propelled vehicles, having a rated seated capacity of not more than seven persons, carrying passengers for hire indiscriminately, accepting and discharging all such persons as may offer themselves for transportation. 
TAXIMETER: Any instrument or fare registering device attached to a taxicab and designed to register mechanically the distance travelled by the vehicle, to record the time the vehicle is in waiting, and to indicate upon the record, by figures, the fare to be charged in dollars and cents. 
(Ord. 2572, 6-23-1980) 
3-31-2. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any taxicab or engage in the business of operating taxicabs in the Village, including the operation of one or more such vehicles, without obtaining a taxicab vehicle license for each such taxicab operated, as provided in this chapter and otherwise conforming to the requirements of this Code and applicable provisions of other ordinances of the Village. 
(Ord. 2572, 6-23-1980) 
3-31-3. - Number of passengers. 
No driver or operator of a taxicab shall carry more than seven persons at any one time, nor shall he carry any other person than the person first employing the taxicab, without the consent of the first passenger. Neither shall any person, other than the driver and the passenger being conveyed, occupy any taxicab while the taxicab is carrying passengers. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the driver to notify the initial passenger of the rate of fare and/or any changes thereof. 
(Ord. 2572, 6-23-1980) 
3-31-4. - Inspection. 
No vehicle shall be licensed as a taxicab under the provisions of this chapter, until it has been inspected by the Illinois department of transportation (safety lane) as designated by the Village Administrator. Said inspections shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions set forth in this chapter and said approval shall be made by the Village Administrator. The cost of said inspection is to be borne by the owners of the respective cab companies. Such inspection shall be made prior to the issuance of a license or renewal of said license, according to the provisions of this chapter. The Village Administrator may cause a subsequent inspection of said vehicle to be made periodically, by any individual the Village Administrator shall designate and such inspection shall include the following: condition of tires, including spare tire, cleanliness, general appearance, facilities for transportation of passengers in rear compartment, and condition and accuracy of taximeter. 
(Ord. 2572, 6-23-1980) 
3-31-5. - Application renewal. 
Each license issued hereunder shall be valid for the calendar year in which it is issued and shall be renewed only upon application by the holder thereof. 
(Ord. 2572, 6-23-1980) 
3-31-6. - Application and fee. 
Application for taxicab licenses shall be made in writing to the Police Chief, signed and sworn to by the applicant or if the applicant is a corporation, by its duly authorized agent upon forms provided by the Police Chief. The application shall contain the full name, business address and residence address of the applicant, the business telephone number of the applicant, the manufacturer's name, model, year of car, horsepower, and seating capacity of the vehicle which applicant seeks to use. A separate application and separate license is required for each vehicle to be operated as a taxicab. A fee of $20.00 for each vehicle shall accompany the application and no license shall be issued without payment of this fee. 
(Ord. 2572, 6-23-1980) 
3-31-7. - Bond and insurance required. 
No such license shall be issued to any person, firm, or corporation unless the applicant has secured the bond provided by statute and unless he has submitted to the Police Chief a copy of his or their insurance policies, or certificate or certificates of insurance, demonstrating public liability insurance coverage payable for personal injuries in an amount not less than $100,000.00 for each person and $300,000.00 for each accident, and payable for property damage in an amount not less than $10,000.00 for each accident. If, at any time in the judgment of the Village Administrator a policy of insurance given pursuant to this section is not sufficient for any good cause, the Village Administrator may require the owner of the taxicab who filed the same, to replace that policy of insurance with another good and sufficient bond or insurance policy which complies with the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. 2572, 6-23-1980) 
3-31-8. - Driver's requirements. 
No license shall be issued to any person, firm or corporation until he or they shall first have met the application requirements herein. Each driver who shall drive any licensed vehicle in the Village shall: 
(A)  Be licensed by the State of Illinois; 
(B)  Be 18 years of age or older; 
(C)  Be first submitted to fingerprinting by the Police Chief of the Village or by a person whom he shall designate; 
(D)  Shall have first submitted to photographing by the Police Chief of the Village or by a person whom he shall designate; 
(E)  Shall have first paid an application fee of $15.00 for the calendar year. 
(F)  Any person desiring to secure a license with the Village shall file an application in writing with the Police Chief, together with the above said license fee. The Police Chief shall supply said applicant with a "license application form" which shall set forth the name of the applicant, his driver's license number, and other pertinent personal information. It shall further require that the applicant attest to whether or not he has been convicted of a felony or driving under the influence of intoxicating beverages. The applicant shall also set forth names of two responsible citizens, who will vouch for his honesty, sobriety, and veracity in the community at large. In addition, the applicant shall attach two recent one inch by one and one-half inch photographs of himself, together with a set of his fingerprints obtained by the Police Chief. 
(G)  No license shall be issued to any applicant if the results of the foregoing examination are unsatisfactory in any respect, nor to an applicant who made false statements on his application. After the foregoing examination has been completed and the inspections required by this chapter have been made, the Police Chief and any person so designated by him, shall endorse on the application his recommendation as to whether the license shall be issued and who shall issue said license when so instructed by the Village Administrator. 
(Ord. 2572, 6-23-1980) 
3-31-9. - Register and license display. 
It shall be the duty of the Police Chief to keep a register of the names of persons to whom such license is granted or transferred, the number of the license and the description of the vehicle or vehicles licensed. 
In addition to the license, the Police Chief shall deliver a license card for each vehicle. Said card shall contain the name of the cabman, the license number of the vehicle, the date of inspection thereof, and photograph of said driver previously supplied to the Police Chief pursuant to ordinance. It shall be signed by the Police Chief and shall contain blank spaces upon which entries of the date of every inspection of the vehicle and such other entries as may be required shall be made. A suitable frame with glass or clear plastic cover shall be provided and affixed on the inside of the vehicle in a conspicuous place and in such manner as may be determined by the Police Chief for the insertion and removal of the license card and for the chauffeur's license. It is unlawful to carry any passenger or his baggage unless the license cards are exposed in the frame as provided by this section. 
(Ord. 2572, 6-23-1980) 
3-31-10. - Revocation of license. 
The Village Administrator is empowered and directed to revoke or suspend the license of any person owning and operating any taxicab found not to be in safe condition, and in good condition with respect to appearance, cleanliness and mechanical operation, or is found not to be in accord with the provisions of this chapter. Licenses when so suspended or revoked shall not be reissued until such vehicle and its appurtenances are put in fit condition for use by the public in a manner that is satisfactory to the Police Chief. 
(Ord. 2572, 6-23-1980) 
3-31-11. - Taximeters required. 
Every taxicab operated in the Village shall be equipped with an accurate and dependable taximeter. 
(Ord. 2572, 6-23-1980) 
3-31-12. - Taximeters to be visible to passengers. 
Taximeters shall be placed in the taxicab so as to be readily visible to passengers and shall be maintained in a good and correct operating condition at all times. 
(Ord. 2572, 6-23-1980) 
3-31-13. - Inspection of taximeters. 
It shall be the duty of the Village Administrator to test or cause to be tested, at such intervals as he deems necessary, all taxicabs licensed hereunder; and it shall be the duty of every owner, operator or person in control of such taxicab to permit such inspection at any reasonable time. Each taximeter shall be tested to determine the accuracy of its recording mechanism with respect to distance traveled either by running the taxicab with its attached meter over a course of a standard mile in length or by a mechanical test of the taximeter. In the event that the taximeter is found defective or inaccurate the same cannot be used until it has been repaired and the accuracy of its recording system restored. 
(Ord. 2572, 6-23-1980) 
3-31-14. - Taximeters to be equipped with flag. 
Taximeters shall be equipped with a flag at least three inches by two inches in size, either painted red or bearing thereon in letters at least one inch in height the word "vacant" or the words "for hire". The flag post of the flag shall be kept up towards a vertical position when the taxicab is for hire, and shall be immediately pulled down and kept in a horizontal position at all times that the taxicab is engaged for the transportation of passengers for hire, except when the taxicab is rented or hired for service at hourly or per diem rates. Any other meter not complying with this section must be so approved and authorized by the Police Chief or his designee before use. 
(Ord. 2572, 6-23-1980) 
3-31-15. - Duty of driver to place meter to nonrecording position upon termination of service; issuance of receipt when requested. 
It is the duty of the driver of every taxicab at the termination of his services, to throw the flag to the nonrecording position on the taximeter and call the passenger's attention to the fare registered. The taximeter shall not be changed until the fare has been paid or a charge ticket thereof made out and delivered to the person hiring the taxicab. Any passenger is entitled to receive upon his request therefor, a receipt, for the fare paid. 
(Ord. 2572, 6-23-1980) 
3-31-16. - Transfer. 
No person controlling or operating any taxicab shall transfer the taximeter to any other taxicab, unless a new inspection and certification of the taximeter is made. 
(Ord. 2572, 6-23-1980) 
3-31-17. - Name of vehicle. 
Every vehicle licensed as aforesaid shall bear on both sides of the vehicle thereof, in a conspicuous place, the name of the owner thereof, in letters not less than two inches high, which letters shall be of a color in contrast to the color of the vehicle, and shall be properly proportioned and legible. 
If any licensee operates more than one taxicab, each vehicle should be numbered with figures not less than two inches high and no two vehicles shall bear the same number. 
(Ord. 2572, 6-23-1980) 
3-31-18. - Condition of vehicles. 
All vehicles licensed under this chapter must be kept in a safe, clean and sanitary condition, and must be equipped with properly working brakes, lights and warning signals, in accordance with the motor vehicle laws of the State of Illinois, this chapter and the ordinances of the Village, and no license shall be issued for the operation of any taxicab under this chapter until it is shown to be in good mechanical condition. 
(Ord. 2572, 6-23-1980) 
3-31-19. - Licensee of taxicab to have regular telephone service and required to be listed in local telephone directory. 
Every licensee who is licensed to operate a taxicab in the Village shall have and keep in service at all times while his license is in effect, regular telephone service within the Village, by means of which a person desiring to rent a taxicab may call the licensee by calling a Village telephone exchange number. Moreover, the licensee shall see that his telephone number is listed in the local telephone directory which is published in and for the Village by the telephone company which furnishes local telephone service in the Village. Every taxicab shall be operated regularly in the Village to meet the public demands for taxicab service. 
(Ord. 2572, 6-23-1980) 
3-31-20. - Taxicab rates of fare. 
The prices or rates of fare to be asked or demanded by the operator or owner of any such vehicle shall not exceed the following schedule: 
For an initial charge regardless of miles or fractions thereof; and ..... $1.20 
For each mile, or fraction thereof measured in increments of 1/10 mile ..... 1.00 
For each additional passenger at point of origin ..... No charge 
Hourly rate for waiting time occasioned by passenger request ..... 12.00 
When toll road is used, passenger shall pay toll. 
Taxicab firms may be required to participate in a senior cab fare program that is mutually agreeable to the Village and the taxicab firm. 
(Ord. 2572, 6-23-1980) 
3-31-21. - Posting of rates; possession of liquor. 
(A)  Rates of fare to be posted: There shall be affixed on the inside of each taxicab, in a conspicuous place and in such manner that it may be conveniently and easily read by any person riding therein, a card upon which shall be printed in plain, legible type, the rates of fare of the taxicab; also a card showing the minimum rate of $1.20 per ride; also, an identification card giving the name of the driver and his photograph taken within the last two years. The taximeter shall show the exact fare to be charged. 
(B)  Possession of alcoholic liquor in taxicabs: It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator or driver of a taxicab to transport, carry, possess or have any alcoholic liquor within any taxicab, except when in the possession of a regular paying passenger. 
(Ord. 2572, 6-23-1980) 
3-31-22. - Taxicab and driver's license nontransferable. 
Neither the taxicab vehicle license nor the driver's license provided in this chapter shall be transferable. 
(Ord. 2572, 6-23-1980) 
3-31-23. - Taxicabs constructed, designed, etc., in imitation of other taxicabs. 
No taxicab or the owner of a taxicab shall be licensed under the provisions of this chapter if the taxicab sought to be licensed as a taxicab is constructed, designed, painted or labeled as to be so similar to the automobiles or similar vehicles of any other person licensed and engaged in the business of operating taxicabs in the Village as to be an imitation thereof and calculated to deceive the patrons of taxicabs into believing that such vehicles are in reality the taxicabs of such other person. 
(Ord. 2572, 6-23-1980) 
3-31-24. - Number of taxicabs operating in the Village. 
The Village shall have the right to limit the number of taxicab companies and licenses operating in the Village. 
(Ord. 2572, 6-23-1980) 
Chapter 32 - OCCUPATION TAXES 

3-32-1. - Municipal use tax. 
A tax is hereby imposed in accordance with provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-6 of the Illinois Municipal Code upon the privilege of using in the Municipality any item of tangible personal property which is purchased outside Illinois at retail from a retailer and which is titled or registered with an agency of Illinois government. The tax shall be at a rate of one percent of the selling price of such tangible property with selling price to have the meaning as defined in the use tax act, approved July 14, 1955. 
Such tax shall be collected by the Illinois Department of Revenue for all Municipalities imposing the tax and shall be paid before the title or certificate of registration for the personal property is issued. 
(Ord. 1918, 1-13-1975) 
3-32-2. - Municipal automobile renting occupation tax. 
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of renting automobiles in this Village as follows: 
(A)  The tax shall be at the rate of one percent of the gross receipts from such rentals made in the course of such business while this section is in effect, in accordance with the provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-7 of the Illinois Municipal Code. 
(B)  Every person engaged in such business in the Village shall file on or before the last day of each calendar month, the report to the state Department of Revenue required by sections 2 and 3 of "an act in relation to a tax upon persons engaged in the business of selling tangible property to purchasers for use or consumption" approved June 29, 1933, as amended. 
(C)  At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the state Department of Revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of the renting of automobiles during the preceding month. 
(Ord. 2720, 1-11-1982) 
3-32-3. - Municipal automobile renting use tax. 
A tax is hereby imposed upon the privilege of using in this Village an automobile which is rented from a renter outside Illinois and which is titled or registered with an agency of this state's government in this Village as follows: 
(A)  The tax shall be at the rate of one percent of the rental price of such automobile while this section is in effect, in accordance with the provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-8 of the Illinois Municipal Code. 
(B)  The tax provided for in this section shall be collected from the persons whose Illinois address for titling or registration purposes is given as being in this Village. 
(C)  The tax imposed by this section shall be paid to the Illinois Department of Revenue. 
(Ord. 2721, 1-11-1982) 
3-32-4. - Municipal utility tax. 
(A)  Tax imposed; rates: A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the following occupations or privileges: the privilege of using or consuming electricity acquired in a purchase at retail and used or consumed within the corporate limits of the Municipality at the following rates, calculated on a monthly basis for each purchaser: 
1.  For the first 2,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month: 0.552 cents per kilowatt hour; 
2.  For the next 48,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month: 0.366 cents per kilowatt hour; 
3.  For the next 50,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month: 0.364 cents per kilowatt hour; 
4.  For the next 400,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month: 0.350 cents per kilowatt hour; 
5.  For the next 500,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month: 0.340 cents per kilowatt hour; 
6.  For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month: 0.329 cents per kilowatt hour; 
7.  For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month: 0.317 cents per kilowatt hour; 
8.  For the next 5,000,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month: 0.240 cents per kilowatt hour; 
9.  For the next 10,000,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month: 0.170 cents per kilowatt hour; 
10.  For all electricity used or consumed in excess of 20,000,000 kilowatt hours in a month: 0.080 cents per kilowatt hour. 
The tax is in addition to all taxes, fees and other revenue measures imposed by the Village in the State of Illinois or any other political subdivision of the state. 
(B)  Tax prohibited: Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the tax shall not be imposed if and to the extent that imposition or collection of the tax would violate the constitution or statutes of the United States or the constitution of the State of Illinois. 
(C)  Effective date: The tax shall be imposed with respect to the use or consumption of electricity by residential customers beginning with the first bill issued on or after August 1, 1998, and with respect to the use or consumption of electricity by nonresidential customers beginning with the first bill issued to such customers for delivery services in accordance with section 16-104 of the Public Utilities Act or the first bill issued to such customers on or after January 1, 2001, whichever issuance occurs sooner. 
(D)  Taxation on interstate commerce prohibited: The tax authorized by this section may not be imposed with respect to any transaction in interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent to which the business or privilege may not, under the constitution and statutes of the United States, be made the subject of taxation by this state or any political subdivision thereof. 
(E)  Tax additional to other taxes: Such tax shall be in addition to other taxes levied upon the taxpayer or its business. 
(F)  Tax collection: The tax authorized by this section shall be collected from the purchaser by the person maintaining a place of business in this state who delivers the electricity to the purchaser. Any tax required to be collected by this section, and any tax in fact collected, shall constitute a debt owed to the Village by the person delivering the electricity, provided that the person delivering electricity shall be allowed credit for such tax related to deliveries of electricity the charges for which are written off as uncollectible and provided further that if such charges are thereafter collected, the delivering supplier shall be obligated to remit such tax. 
Persons delivering electricity shall collect the tax from the purchaser by adding such tax to the gross charge for delivering the electricity. Persons delivering electricity shall also 
be authorized to add to such gross charge an amount equal to three percent of the tax to reimburse the person delivering electricity for the expense incurred in keeping records, billing customers, preparing and filing returns, remitting the tax and supplying data to the Municipality upon request. If the person delivering electricity fails to collect the tax from the purchaser, then the purchaser shall be required to pay the tax directly to the Municipality in the manner prescribed by the Municipality. Persons delivering electricity who file returns pursuant to this paragraph shall, at the time of filing such return, pay the Municipality the amount of the tax collected pursuant to this section. 
(G)  Payment to Village: On or before the last day of each month, each taxpayer shall make a return to the Village for the preceding month stating: 
1.  His name. 
2.  His principal place of business. 
3.  His gross receipts and/or kilowatt hour usage during the month upon the basis of which the tax is imposed. 
4.  Amount of tax. 
5.  Such other reasonable and related information as the corporate authorities may require. 
The taxpayer making the return herein provided for shall, at the time of making such return, pay to the Village the amount of tax herein imposed; provided that in connection with any return, the taxpayer may, if he so elects, report and pay an amount based upon his total billings of business subject to the tax during the period for which the return is made (exclusive of any amounts previously billed) with prompt adjustments of later payments based upon any differences between such billings and the taxable gross receipts. 
(H)  Erroneous payment: If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not due under the provisions of this section, whether as the result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any tax due, or to become due, under this section from the taxpayer who made the erroneous payment; provided that no amounts erroneously paid more than three years prior to the filing of a claim therefor shall be so credited. 
(I)  Recovery of tax due; time limitation: No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this section shall be commenced more than three years after the due date of such amount. 
(J)  Penalty: Any taxpayer who fails to make a return, or who makes a fraudulent return, or who wilfully violates any other provision of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00 and in addition shall be liable in a civil action for the amount of tax due. 
(K)  Definitions: As used in this section, unless the context otherwise requires: 
PERSON: Any natural person, individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company, Municipal corporation, estate or any of its political subdivisions, any state university created by statute, or a receiver, Trustee, conservator or other representative appointed by order of the court. 
PERSON MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE: Any person having or maintaining within this state, directly or by a subsidiary or other affiliate, an office, generation facility, distribution facility, transmission facility, sales office or other place of business, or any employee, agent or other representative operating within the state under the authority of the person or its subsidiary or other affiliate, irrespective of whether such place of business or agent or other representative is located in this state permanently or temporarily, or whether such person, subsidiary or other affiliate is licensed or qualified to do business in the state. 
PURCHASE AT RETAIL: Any acquisition of electricity by a purchaser for purposes of use or consumption, and not for resale, but shall not include the use of electricity by a public utility, as defined in section 8-11-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code, directly in generation, production, transmission, delivery or sale of electricity. 
PURCHASER: Any person who uses or consumes, within the corporate limits of the Village, electricity acquired in purchase at retail. 
VILLAGE: The Village of Glen Ellyn, Illinois. 
(Ord. 5218, 12-15-2003, eff. 2-1-2004) 
3-32-5. - Municipal tax on the renting, leasing or letting of rooms in a hotel or motel. 
(A)  A tax is imposed on all persons engaged within the Village in the business of renting, leasing or letting rooms in a hotel or motel at the rate of five percent of the gross rental receipts from such renting, leasing or letting, excluding, however, from gross rental receipts, the proceeds of such renting, leasing or letting to permanent residents of that hotel. 
(B)  For the purpose of the taxes imposed by this section, the terms "hotel", "motel" and "gross receipts", shall be as defined in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-3-14 of the Illinois Municipal Code. 
(C)  All persons subject to any tax imposed by this section may reimburse themselves for their tax liability for such tax by separately stating such tax as an additional charge, which charge may be stated in combination, in a single amount, with state tax, if any, imposed under "the hotel operators' occupation tax act". 
(D)  No tax imposed by this section shall be construed to be a tax upon the privilege of engaging in any business which under the constitution of the United States may not be made the subject of taxation by the state or a political subdivision thereof. 
(E)  All amounts collected by the Village pursuant to this section imposing a tax on all persons engaged in the business of renting, leasing or letting rooms in a hotel or motel shall be expended by the Village solely to promote tourism, conventions and other special events within the Village or otherwise to attract nonresidents to visit the Village. 
(F)  The taxpayer shall account to the Village and pay the tax as follows: 
1.  On or before October 31, 1983, each taxpayer shall make a return to the Management Services Director for the Village for the month of September 1983, stating his name, his principal place of business, his gross receipts during that month upon the basis of which the tax is imposed, the amount of tax, and such other reasonable and related information as may be required by the Management Services Director. The report or return shall be on a form or in a format as determined by the Management Services Director. 
2.  On or before the last day of every month thereafter, each taxpayer shall make a like return to the Management Services Director for the preceding month. 
3.  The taxpayer making the return herein provided for shall, at the time of making such return, pay to the Village the amount of tax herein imposed; provided, that in connection with any return, the taxpayer may, if he so elects, report and pay an amount based upon his total billings of business subject to the tax during the period for which the return is made, exclusive of any amounts previously billed, with prompt adjustments of later payments based upon any differences between such billings and the taxable gross receipts. 
(G)  If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not due under the provisions of this section as a result of a mistake of fact, then such amount shall be credited against any tax due or to become due, under this section from the taxpayer who made the erroneous payments; provided, that no amount erroneously paid more than three years prior to the filing of a claim therefor shall be so credited. 
(H)  No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this section shall be commenced more than three years after the due date of such amount. 
(I)  Any taxpayer who fails to make a return or who makes a fraudulent return, or who wilfully violates any other provision of this section, is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00 and, in addition, shall be liable in a civil action for the amount of tax due. 
(J)  The provisions of this section shall be in full force and effect with respect to gross receipts billed or collected on or after September 1, 1983. 
(Ord. 2882, 6-13-1983; Ord. 2892, 6-13-1983; amd. Ord. 3988, 1-25-1993) 
3-32-6. - Demolition contractor tax. 
(A)  Tax imposed: In addition to any other payment required for the procurement of a permit to demolish or partially demolish any building or structure in the Village when the building or structure, or part thereof exceeds 1,000 square feet in area, or exceeds 45 feet in height, or more than 50 percent of the exterior wall and roof area is structurally altered, any building demolition contractor shall pay a tax of $550.00, which shall be payable at the time of the issuance of a permit, into the special programs fund. In the absence of the above referenced alteration or demolition standards, this section shall apply to any demolition or partial demolition of a structure containing more than 500 square feet of interior area where more than 50 percent of the exterior walls of a building or structure are demolished. 
(B)  Definitions: A "demolition contractor" is hereby defined as a person, firm, corporation, or other entity which accepts a fee or contract sum, or provides services without charge, resulting in the partial or complete demolition of any building or structure within the Village when the building or structure, or part thereof exceeds 1,000 square feet in area, or exceeds 45 feet in height, or more than 50 percent of the exterior wall and roof area is structurally altered. In the absence of the above referenced alteration or demolition standards, a "demolition contractor" is hereby defined as a person, firm, corporation, or other entity as described above which provides services resulting in the demolition or partial demolition of a structure containing more than 500 square feet of interior area where more than 50 percent of the exterior walls of a building or structure are demolished. 
(C)  Penalty: Any person, firm, corporation, or other entity which undertakes a full or partial demolition of such an aforesaid building or structure in the Village without paying the demolition tax shall be subject to the payment of the tax and, upon conviction of a failure to pay the tax, shall pay a fine of $250.00 for a first offense and $500.00 for each offense thereafter. 
(Ord. 5996, 1-30-2012, eff. 3-1-2012; Ord. 4733, 7-12-1999, eff. 8-1-1999) 
3-32-7. - Municipal gas use tax. 
Except as otherwise provided by this section, a tax is imposed on the privilege of using or consuming in the Village natural gas that is purchased in a sale at retail. The tax shall be at the rate of $0.020 per therm. 
(A)  Liability for payment: The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of the tax is on the retail purchaser; and nothing in this section shall be construed to impose a tax on the occupation of distributing, supplying, furnishing, selling or transporting gas. 
(B)  Payment: The retail purchaser shall pay the tax, measured by therms of gas delivered to the retail purchaser's premises: 
1.  To the public utility designated to collect the tax pursuant to subsection (G) of this section on or before the payment due date of the public utility's bill first reflecting the tax; or 
2.  Directly to the Village on or before the fifteenth day of the second month following the month in which the gas is delivered to the retail purchaser if no public utility has been designated to collect the tax pursuant to subsection (G) of this section or if the gas is delivered by a person other than a public utility so designated. 
(C)  Tax additional to other taxes: The tax imposed by this section is imposed in addition to all other taxes imposed by the Village, the State of Illinois, or any other Municipal corporation or subdivision thereof. 
(D)  Resale: A purchaser who purchases gas for resale and therefore does not pay the tax imposed by this section with respect to the use or consumption of the gas but who later uses or consumes part or all of the gas, shall pay the tax directly to the Village on or before the fifteenth day of the second month following the month in which the gas is used or consumed. 
(E)  Tax prohibited: Nothing in this section shall be construed to impose a tax upon any person, business or activity which, under the constitutions of the United States or the State of Illinois, may not be made the subject of taxation by the Village. 
(F)  Effective date: The tax shall apply to gas for which the delivery to the retail purchaser is billed by a public utility on or after February 1, 2004. 
(G)  Collection of tax: 
1.  The Finance Director is authorized to enter into a contract for collection of the tax imposed by this section with any public utility providing natural gas service in the Village. The contract shall include and subsequently conform with the following provisions: 
(a)  The public utility will collect the tax with respect to gas delivered by it to its customers as an independent contractor; 
(b)  The public utility will remit collected taxes to the Village no more often than once each month; 
(c)  The public utility will be entitled to withhold from tax collections a service fee equal to three percent of the amounts collected and timely remitted to the Village; 
(d)  The public utility shall not be liable to the Village for any tax not actually collected from a retail purchaser; and 
(e)  Such additional terms as the parties may agree upon. 
2.  A public utility designated to collect the tax imposed by this section from its customers shall bill each customer for the tax on all gas delivered to the customer unless: 
(a)  The customer's use or consumption is exempt from the tax pursuant to a duly passed and authorized ordinance of the Village; or 
(b)  The public utility has received written notification from the Village that the customer is exempt from the tax. 
(H)  Books and records: Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records, including original source documents and books of entry, denoting the activities or transactions that gave rise or may have given rise to any tax liability or exemption under this section. All such books and records shall, at all times during business hours, be subject to and available for inspection by the Village. 
(I)  Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
PERSON: Any individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company, municipal corporation or political subdivision of this state, or a receiver, trustee, conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court. 
PUBLIC UTILITIES ACT: The Public Utilities Act, as amended. 
PUBLIC UTILITY: A public utility as defined in section 3-105 of the Public Utilities Act. 
RETAIL PURCHASER: Any person who purchases gas in a sale at retail. 
SALE AT RETAIL: Any sale of gas by a retailer to a person for use or consumption and not for resale. For this purpose, the term "retailer" means any person engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, or furnishing or selling gas. 
(Ord. 5218, 12-15-2003, eff. 2-1-2004) 
3-32-8. - Home rule municipal retailers' occupation tax and service occupation tax. 
(A)  Municipal retailers' occupation tax imposed : A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property, other than an item of tangible personal property titled or registered, with an agency of the State of Illinois, at retail in the Village of Glen Ellyn at the rate of 1.25% on the gross receipts from these sales made in the course of such business. Such "home rule Municipal retailers' occupation tax" shall not be applicable to the sales of food for human consumption that is to be consumed off the premises where it is sold (other than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks and food that has been prepared for immediate consumption) and prescription and nonprescription medicines, drugs, medical appliances and insulin, urine testing materials, syringes and needles used by diabetics, and other items which may be specifically excluded by state law. The imposition of this home rule tax is pursuant to the provisions of section 8-11-1 of the Illinois Municipal Code. 
(B)  Home rule service occupation tax imposed : A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the Village of Glen Ellyn in the business of making sales of service, at the rate of 1.25% of the selling price of all tangible personal property transferred by such serviceman, either in the form of tangible personal property or in the form of real estate, as an incident to a sale of service. Such "home rule Municipal service occupation tax" shall not be applicable to the sales of food for human consumption which is to be consumed off the premises where it is sold (other than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks and food which has been prepared for immediate consumption) and prescription and nonprescription medicines, drugs, medical appliances and insulin, urine testing materials, and syringes and needles used by diabetics, and other items which may be specifically excluded by state law. The imposition of this home rule tax is pursuant to the provisions of section 8-11-5 of the Illinois Municipal Code. 
(C)  Collection by state: The taxes hereby imposed and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an incident thereto shall be collected and enforced by the Department of Revenue of the State of Illinois. 
(D)  Annual Village Board review: The Village Board shall, as part of the annual budget process, review the uses of the home rule Municipal retailers' occupation tax and home rule service occupation tax and determine the future need for and the amount of the tax. Upon such review, the Village Board shall determine whether the imposition of the tax shall continue at its then current level, or shall be amended or eliminated. It is anticipated that the Village will act upon the results of such review, the tax shall, however, remain in effect until repealed or amended. 
(Ord. 5740, 3-30-2009; Ord. 6101, 12-10-2012; Ord. 6585, 3-12-2018) 
Chapter 33 - MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS AND MASSAGE SERVICES 

3-33-1. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them below, unless otherwise indicated by the context: 
EMPLOYEE: Any and all persons other than a massage therapist who render any service for the licensee and who receive compensation directly from the licensee but have no physical contact with customers or clients. 
LICENSEE: The operative of a massage therapy clinic. 
MASSAGE THERAPIST: Any person who, for any consideration whatsoever, engages in the practice of "therapeutic massage" as defined herein. 
MASSAGE THERAPY CLINIC: Any place of business having a source of income or compensation derived partly or solely from massage therapy, where a licensed massage therapist administers therapeutic massage or from where a massage therapist is dispatched to administer "therapeutic massage" as defined in this section. A massage therapy clinic may be located within the home of a licensed massage therapist who has met the requirements of this chapter. A massage therapy clinic also includes schools and institutions for purposes of this chapter. 
OFF PREMISES MASSAGE: The activity of providing massage services by a licensed massage therapist, for a fee, at a location other than at a massage therapy clinic. 
OFFICES WITHIN THE HOME: Offices within the home shall have a room(s) used solely for massage services. This shall mean that the office/treatment room(s) cannot double as a guestroom, child's bedroom, or be used for any other domestic/business purposes. 
PERSONS: Any individual, copartnership, firm, association, joint stock company, corporation, or any combination of individuals of whatever form or character. 
PROFESSIONAL MASSAGE THERAPY ORGANIZATION: An organization that shall require graduation from a "recognized school" as defined in this section or the passing of the National Certification Examination for Therapeutic Massage and Bodywork (NCETMB) for active membership. 
RECOGNIZED SCHOOLS/TRAINING: Any school which meets one or more of the following requirements: 
(A)  A state approved school operating according to state regulations, which has a current license, approval, accreditation and/or certification from the state in which it is located and provides an entry level massage training program consisting of a minimum of 500 hours of in-class work and 100 hours of clinical training, which program shall include anatomy and physiology, kinesiology, ethics, pathology, contraindications, and clinical experience. 
(B)  A massage school program accredited/approved by the Commission on Massage Training/Approval and Accreditation (COMTAA), a current list of which can be obtained through the COMTAA Manager, 820 Davis Street, Suite #100, Evanston, IL 60201-4444. 
(C)  Schools offering correspondence courses and not requiring actual class attendance shall not be deemed recognized schools. All coursework for credit hours shall be completed under the physical supervision of faculty. 
THERAPEUTIC MASSAGE: Therapeutic massage or massage therapy shall be defined to include, but shall not be limited to, joint mobilization techniques, stretches, effleurage (stroking), petrissage (kneading), tapotement (percussion), compression, vibration, friction, nerve strokes, and any reasonable method or pressure on the external soft parts of the body with the hands, elbows, or forearms or with the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliance, with or without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, oils, liniments, hot and cold packs, antiseptics, powders, creams, lotions, salt glows, ointments, or other similar preparations commonly used in the practice. 
(Ord. 4385, 6-10-1996) 
3-33-2. - License required. 
(A)  Massage therapy clinic: It shall be unlawful for any massage therapist, person, association, firm, or corporation to engage in, conduct or carry on, or to permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, upon any premises in the Village, the operation of a "massage therapy clinic" as herein defined without first having obtained a license from the Village Cashier after the recommendation of the Village Administrator that such license be issued and the approval of the issuance thereof by the Village Cashier. 
(B)  Separate license: A separate license shall be required for each massage establishment location regardless of whether multiple massage therapy clinics are operated by the same person, association, firm or corporation. 
(C)  Sanitary provisions: It shall be unlawful for any person, association, firm, or corporation to operate or conduct any massage therapy clinic which does not conform to the sanitary provisions contained in this chapter or to employ any nonlicensed person or persons as massage therapists. 
(D)  Name on license: It shall be unlawful for any person, association, firm, or corporation licensed as provided in this chapter to operate under any name or conduct business under any designation not specified in such license. 
(E)  Employment of massage therapist: It shall be unlawful for any person, association, firm, or corporation to employ as a massage therapist any person who does not hold a current unrevoked and unsuspended Village of Glen Ellyn massage therapist license as outlined in this chapter. 
(F)  Off premises massage: It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to engage in the practice of or attempt to practice off premises massage as a massage therapist for a fee without a license issued pursuant to the provisions in this chapter. 
(G)  Massage therapist advertising: It shall be unlawful for any person to advertise him/herself within the Village as a "massage therapist" without a massage therapist license as defined in this chapter. 
(H)  Massage therapy advertising: It shall be unlawful for any person or establishment located within the Village to advertise "therapeutic massage", "massage therapy clinic", "massage therapy", or "massage" in the Village other than a licensed "massage therapist" and/or a licensed "massage therapy clinic" as defined in this chapter. 
(I)  Massage therapy school: A massage therapy school or institution operated within the Village shall obtain a license and be treated as a massage therapy clinic. 
(J)  Insurance: Any person, association, firm, or corporation shall provide proof of not less than $1,000,000.00 per occurrence professional liability insurance prior to a license being issued. 
(K)  CPR Certification: All massage therapists must provide proof of a current cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) certification for their licenses to be valid and in full effect. 
(L)  Employment by massage therapy clinic: It shall be the responsibility of the license holder for a massage therapy clinic to ensure that each person employed as a massage therapist shall first have obtained a valid massage therapist license as set forth in this chapter. It shall be unlawful for such a clinic to allow a licensed massage therapist to practice other than as defined in this chapter. 
(M)  Penalty for violation: Any person, clinic, or establishment who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not less than $250.00 nor more than $500.00 for each offense. 
(Ord. 4385, 6-10-1996) 
3-33-3. - License for massage therapy clinic or school. 
Any person desiring to obtain a license to operate or conduct a massage therapy clinic or school shall make application to the Village Cashier upon a form provided by the Village Cashier and pay a nonrefundable filing fee of $200.00 with the exception of not for profit organizations, which shall be exempt from such application fee. 
(Ord. 4385, 6-10-1996) 
3-33-4. - Application for license for massage therapy clinic or school. 
Any person desiring to obtain a license to operate a massage therapy clinic or school shall set forth on the application the exact nature of the massage therapy to be administered and the proposed place and facilities thereof. In addition thereto, any applicant for a license and each partner or limited partner of an applicant, if a partnership applicant, and each officer and Director of a corporate applicant and any stockholder of a corporate applicant holding more than ten percent of the stock of the corporate applicant, shall furnish the following information and appropriate documentation: 
(A)  Written proof that each individual is at least 18 years of age. 
(B)  All residential addresses for the past three years. 
(C)  The business, occupation, or employment of each individual for the three years immediately preceding the date of application. 
(D)  The previous experience of the individual in massage therapy or similar business. 
(E)  Whether the individual has had any license denied, revoked, or suspended in the Village or in any other Municipality or any state for a massage therapy clinic, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation of the individual subsequent to such suspension, revocation or denial. 
(F)  Any conviction, forfeiture of bond, or plea of nolo contendere upon any criminal violation or Village ordinance violation (except minor traffic violations) within a five-year period. 
(G)  If the applicant is a corporation or any partner of any partnership is a corporation, then the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in the articles of incorporation, together with the state of incorporation and proof of authority to do business in the State of Illinois. 
(H)  The applicant shall submit his/her fingerprints to be used in completing the investigation. Applicants are required to present themselves for fingerprints to be taken by the Village of Glen Ellyn Police Department. If the applicant is a corporation, fingerprints shall be required of applicant's officers, directors, and any stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than 20 percent of the stock of such corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, fingerprints shall be required of all general partners and any limited partner owning more than ten percent of the aggregate limited partner interest in such partnership. 
Applicant shall pay a fingerprint fee for each person required to submit fingerprints; provided, in the case of a renewal application, fingerprints and the fingerprint fee shall not be required from a renewal applicant, unless the Village Cashier has reason to believe that the renewal applicant may have reported convictions. 
(I)  Two passport size photographs (one inch by one and one-half inches) of the applicant (head and shoulders area, face forward) shall be provided by the applicant to be used in the identification of the applicant. 
(J)  The Village shall have the right to confirm any of the information asked for or provided in the application, including the fact that an applicant has actually matriculated, attended classes, and successfully completed the requirements from a recognized school. 
(Ord. 4385, 6-10-1996; amd. per letter dated 9-10-1997) 
3-33-5. - Processing of application for massage therapy clinic or school. 
(A)  The Village Cashier shall, within 15 days after receipt of an application for a license for a massage therapy clinic or school, refer copies of such application and all additional information to the Village Administrator. The Village Administrator shall cause the various departments of the Village, within 45 days thereafter, to inspect the premises proposed to be operated as a massage therapy clinic or school and make recommendations to the Village Administrator concerning compliance with the ordinances of the Village. 
Upon the receipt of the recommendations of the respective department managers, the Village Administrator shall notify the applicant as to whether his application has been referred to the Village Cashier for approval or disapproval or held for further investigation. The period of such additional investigation shall not exceed an additional 30 days unless otherwise agreed to by the applicant. If the Village Administrator determines that the application shall be forwarded to the Village Cashier, he shall do so with a written statement of his recommendations with respect thereto within 15 days after receipt of all reports of investigations made by the department managers as required hereunder. 
Within 45 days after the receipt from the Village Administrator of his recommendations, the Village Cashier shall act upon the application. Such application shall be deemed to be approved if the Village Cashier has not taken action with respect thereto within such 45-day period. The Village Administrator shall advise the applicant in writing as to whether the application has been granted or denied. If the application is denied, the Village Administrator shall advise the applicant in writing of the reason for such denial. 
The failure or refusal of the applicant to promptly give any information relevant to the investigation of the application or the refusal or failure of the applicant to appear at any reasonable time and place for examination under oath regarding said application or the refusal of the applicant to submit to or cooperate with an inspection required by this chapter shall be grounds for denial of the application. 
(B)  Upon receipt of the recommendations of the respective departments and with the information contained in the application, together with all additional information provided herein, the Village Administrator shall, together with his recommendation with respect thereto, refer the application to the Village Cashier unless the Village Administrator shall find: 
1.  That the operation of the massage therapy clinic or school as proposed by the applicant, if permitted, would not comply with the applicable laws of the state and the ordinances of the Village; 
2.  That the applicant or any other person who shall be directly or indirectly engaged in the management and operation of the massage therapy clinic or school has been convicted of: a) a felony, b) an offense involving sexual misconduct with children, or c) any provision of 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/2-.5 et seq.; or 
3.  That the operation of the massage therapy clinic or school as provided by the applicant, if permitted, would violate the provisions of this chapter. 
(C)  Upon receipt of the recommendation of the Village Administrator, the Village Cashier shall grant such application unless he/she shall find: 
1.  That the operation of the massage therapy clinic or school as proposed by the applicant, if permitted, would not comply with the applicable laws of the state and the ordinances of the Village; 
2.  That the applicant or any other person who shall be directly or indirectly engaged in the management and operation of the massage therapy clinic or school has been convicted of: a) a felony, b) an offense involving sexual misconduct with children, or c) any provisions of 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/2-.5 et seq.; or 
3.  That the operation of the massage therapy clinic or school as provided by the applicant, if permitted, would violate the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 4385, 6-10-1996) 
3-33-6. - Term of license for massage therapy clinic or school. 
Each license for a massage therapy clinic or school, pursuant to this chapter, shall be for an initial term ending June 30 next following the issuance of the license, unless sooner suspended or revoked. Such license must be renewed annually, and any renewal shall be for a term of one year from July 1 through June 30. 
(Ord. 4385, 6-10-1996) 
3-33-7. - Revocation of license for massage therapy clinic or school. 
Any license issued for a massage therapy clinic or school may be revoked or suspended by the Village Clerk upon direction to do so by the Village Manager. 
(A)  Upon having received a complaint from any person that a massage therapy clinic or school or massage therapist employed by such massage therapy clinic or school has violated any provision of this chapter or any other provisions of any ordinance of the Village or any section of this Code or any statute, rule or regulation of the State of Illinois or any other governmental agency, the Village Manager or his/her designee shall cause written notice of such charge to be served upon the licensee, either by personal service or by certified mail. Notice by certified mail shall be deemed to have been served ten days after the mailing thereof to the licensee's address as shown on the license, in the absence of any other evidence that service by certified mail was accomplished earlier than such ten days. Such notice shall fix a date and time for public hearing by the Village Manager or his/her designee on such charges not less than 30 days from the date of such notice. 
At such public hearing, the Village Manager or his/her designee shall hear such evidence bearing upon the question as may be presented by the complainant and the licensee. 
Each party shall have the right to cross examine witnesses produced by the other party, and each party may be represented by counsel. Such hearing may be continued from time to time by the Village Manager or his/her designee. The Village Manager shall have a stenographic record of the proceedings transcribed, at the cost of the Village. In the event that any party other than the Village, or an officer or employee thereof, desires a copy of such transcript, he shall pay the cost to the Village of such transcript, including the cost of the court reporter's attendance charges. 
Based upon the evidence taken at such hearing, the Village Manager or his/her designee shall make findings of fact. If the evidence has been heard by a designee, that designee shall also make a recommendation to the Village Manager as to whether the license should be suspended or revoked. Based on the evidence, the findings of fact, and (in appropriate cases) a recommendation, the Village Manager shall make a determination as to whether the license should be suspended or revoked within 30 days after the conclusion of the hearing and shall inform the licensee of that determination in writing. If the Village Manager determines that the license should be suspended or revoked, he shall immediately direct the Village Clerk to suspend or revoke the license. 
The Village Clerk shall, in such cases, suspend or revoke the license within ten days after receiving the manager's direction to do so. These procedures shall apply in all cases heard after these procedures have been adopted, regardless of when the alleged violations occurred. 
(B)  Cause for revocation or suspension shall include the violation of provisions of this chapter or of any criminal statute of the state by the licensee or by an employee of the licensee or any massage therapist employed by the licensee, provided that the violation of this chapter or any criminal law of the state shall not be a cause for revocation or suspension unless the licensee shall have had actual or constructive knowledge of such violation in the exercise of due diligence. It shall also be cause for revocation or suspension that the licensee has made a false statement on any application for permit under this chapter or in the event that the licensee shall refuse to permit any authorized Police officer, Building Inspector, health inspector, Fire Inspector, or other authorized representatives of the Village to inspect the premises or the operations thereof at reasonable times. 
(C)  When any license shall have been revoked for any cause, no license shall be granted to any person for the period of one year thereafter for the conduct of a massage therapy clinic or school on the premises described in such revoked license. 
(Ord. 4886, 11-13-2000) 
3-33-8. - License for massage therapist. 
Any person who engages in the practices of a "massage therapist" as herein defined shall file an application for a license as a massage therapist, which application shall be filed with the Village Cashier along with a nonrefundable filing fee of $30.00 for the original application and $30.00 for each renewal application. 
(Ord. 4385, 6-10-1996) 
3-33-9. - Qualifications for massage therapist. 
Any person filing an application for a license as a massage therapist shall provide proof of meeting at least one of the following qualifications: 
(A)  Proof of active member status in a "professional massage therapy organization" as defined in this chapter; 
(B)  Successful completion of a professional level entry program which consists of 500 hours or more of in-classroom study in addition to 100 hours or more of clinical experience in a recognized school; or 
(C)  Successful completion of the national certification examination for therapeutic massage and bodywork (NCETMB) administered by the national certification program for therapeutic massage and bodywork, which is approved by the National Commission for Certifying Agencies (NCCA), the accrediting arm of the National Organization for Competency Assurance (NOCA). 
(Ord. 4385, 6-10-1996) 
3-33-10. - Application for license for massage therapist. 
The application for a license for a massage therapist shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable filing fee of $30.00 plus the current fingerprint fee and contain the following information and appropriate documentation with respect to the applicant: (per letter dated 4-28-1998) 
(A)  Name and residence. 
(B)  Social security number. 
(C)  Written evidence that the applicant is at least 18 years of age. 
(D)  Business, occupation, or employment of the applicant for three years immediately preceding the date of application. 
(E)  Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of, pleaded nolo contendere to, or suffered a forfeiture of bond on a charge of committing any violations of the Village ordinances or state statutes (except minor traffic violations). In the event any answer is in the affirmative, then the applicant shall state the place and court in which such conviction, plea or forfeiture was had, the specific charge and the sentence imposed as a result thereof. 
(F)  Transcript and copy of diploma or certificate of graduation from a recognized school or, in the case of an NCETMB certificate, a copy of the current certificate. 
(G)  Fingerprints, to be taken by the Village of Glen Ellyn Police Department. 
(H)  Two passport size photographs (one inch by one and one-half inches) with head, shoulders area and face forward. 
(I)  A signed medical report of a negative TB test by a medical doctor or the Director of the Public Health Department. 
(J)  Proof of current cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) certification. 
(Ord. 4385, 6-10-1996) 
3-33-11. - Processing of application for massage therapist. 
(A)  The Village Cashier shall refer all applications to the Village Administrator within 15 days after receipt thereof. The Village Administrator shall cause the various departments of the Village government to conduct an investigation to determine if the applicant possesses the qualifications required by this chapter. Upon the receipt of the recommendations of the respective department heads, the Village Administrator shall notify the applicant as to whether the application has been referred to the Village Cashier for his/her approval or disapproval or held for further investigation. The period of such additional investigation shall not exceed an additional 30 days unless otherwise agreed to by the applicant. The Village Administrator shall advise the applicant in writing as to whether the application has been denied and if so, shall advise the applicant in writing the reason for such denial. 
(B)  The failure or refusal of the applicant to promptly give any information relevant to the investigation of the application or the refusal or failure of the applicant to appear at any reasonable time and place for examination under oath regarding said application shall be grounds for denial of the application. 
(Ord. 4385, 6-10-1996) 
3-33-12. - Term of license for massage therapist. 
Each license for a massage therapist, pursuant to this chapter, shall terminate on June 30 following its issuance, and any renewal shall be for a one year term commencing July 1 and ending June 30 thereafter and shall be carried by the license holder while engaged in his or her employment. 
(Ord. 4385, 6-10-1996) 
3-33-13. - Revocation of license for massage therapist. 
A license for a massage therapist may be revoked or suspended where it appears that the massage therapist has been convicted of any offense which would be cause for a denial of a license upon an original application, has made a false statement on an application for a license, or has committed an act in violation of this chapter. The Village Administrator or his/her designee shall give the license holder a written notice specifying the grounds of suspension or revocation. The license holder may, within 15 days after the date of such revocation or suspension, file a written request for public hearing, which hearing shall be scheduled within 15 days after receipt of the request from the license holder, who, at said hearing, may present evidence bearing upon the question. The Village Administrator shall then, within five days after the date of hearing, issue a written order as to whether the license shall be revoked or suspended. 
(Ord. 4385, 6-10-1996) 
3-33-14. - Necessary facilities. 
No massage therapy clinic or school shall receive a license or be operated, established, or maintained, unless the establishment shall comply with each of the following minimum regulations: 
(A)  All massage tables, bathtubs, shower stalls, and bath areas shall have surfaces which may be readily disinfected. 
(B)  Suitable bathing, dressing, locker, toilet, and massage room facilities shall be provided for all patrons in the event that both female and male patrons are served simultaneously. 
(C)  All equipment used in contact with patrons must be maintained in a clean and sanitary manner. 
(D)  Toilet facilities shall be provided in convenient locations. When five or more employees or patrons of different sexes are on the premises at the same time, separate toilet facilities shall be provided. Lavatories or washbasins shall be provided with both hot and cold running water and shall be installed in either the toilet room or vestibule. Lavatories or wash basins shall be provided with soap and a dispenser with sanitary towels. 
(E)  Closed cabinets shall be provided for use in the storage of clean linens, towels, and other materials used in administering massages. All soiled linens, towels, and other materials shall be kept in properly covered containers or cabinets which shall be kept separate from the clean storage areas. 
(Ord. 4385, 6-10-1996) 
3-33-15. - Operating requirements. 
(A)  Every portion of the massage therapy clinic or school, including appliances and apparatus, shall be kept clean and operated under sanitary conditions. 
(B)  Price rates for all services shall be prominently posted in the reception area in a location available to all prospective customers. 
(C)  All employees, including massage therapists, shall wear clean, nontransparent outer garments, and such outer garments shall be restricted in use to the massage therapy clinic or school. 
(D)  Doors to the dressing rooms shall open inward and shall be self-closing. 
(E)  All massage therapy clinics and schools shall be provided with clean laundered sheets and towels in sufficient quantity and shall be laundered after each use thereof and stored in a sanitary manner. 
(F)  The sexual or genital areas of patrons must be covered with towels, cloths, or undergarments when in the presence of an employee or massage therapist. 
(G)  It shall be unlawful for any person in a massage therapy clinic or school to place his or her hand upon or to touch with any part of his or her body or to fondle in any manner or to massage a sexual or genital area of any person. 
(H)  No massage therapist or employee or licensee shall perform, offer, or agree to perform any act which shall require touching of a patron's genital area. 
(I)  All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, baths, and steam rooms and any other physical facilities shall be in good repair and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(J)  Oils, creams, lotions, and other preparations used in administering massages shall be kept in clean, closed containers or cabinets when not in use. 
(K)  Each massage therapist shall clean his/her hands in a sanitary manner before administering massage to each patron. 
(Ord. 4385, 6-10-1996) 
3-33-16. - Advertising. 
No massage therapist, clinic, or school holding a license under this chapter shall depict, place, publish, distribute, or cause to be depicted, placed, published or distributed any advertising matter that suggests to prospective patrons that any services are available other than those services permitted by this chapter or which would suggest that employees or massage therapists are dressed in any manner other than that permitted by this chapter; and all advertisements shall contain the number of the Village license held by the massage therapist, clinic, or school. 
(Ord. 4385, 6-10-1996) 
3-33-17. - Outcall registration. 
Any massage therapist who provides any of the services provided in this chapter at any hotel or motel must first register his or her name and license number with the owner, manager, or person in charge of such hotel or motel. No outcall massage service may be operated other than by a licensed clinic, and each outcall massage service must be performed within the manner provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 4385, 6-10-1996) 
3-33-18. - Inspection. 
The Police Department, Fire Inspector, and Building Inspector shall from time to time, and at least twice a year, make inspections of each massage therapy clinic or school granted a license under the provisions of this chapter for the purpose of determining compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Such inspections shall be made at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to fail to allow such inspection officers access to the premises or to hinder such inspection officers in any manner. 
(Ord. 4385, 6-10-1996) 
3-33-19. - Employment. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator, proprietor, manager, or other person in charge of any massage therapy clinic or school to employ any person who is not at least 18 years of age. 
(Ord. 4385, 6-10-1996) 
3-33-20. - Transfer of license. 
No permit for operation of a massage therapy clinic or school shall be transferable. 
(Ord. 4385, 6-10-1996) 
3-33-21. - Display of license. 
Each licensee shall display a valid current license in a conspicuous place within the massage therapy clinic or school so that the same may be readily seen by persons entering the establishment. 
(Ord. 4385, 6-10-1996) 
3-33-22. - Exceptions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to: 
(A)  Massage therapy provided in a state licensed and approved hospital or nursing home or by persons working under the direction of an individual holding an unrevoked certificate to practice the healing arts under the laws of the state in the aforementioned facilities. 
(B)  Any person who shall be registered as a physical therapist by the state under the provisions of 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 90/1. 
(C)  Any state registered athletic trainer who administers athletic related massage in the normal course of training duties. 
(D)  Any barber, cosmetologist, or aesthetician lawfully carrying on his/her respective business to the extent authorized under a valid unrevoked license or certificate of registration issued by the state, provided this exemption is only intended to permit normal and customary barber, cosmetologist, or aesthetician services which involve incidental physical contact, such as scalp rubs and facials, which otherwise qualify as massage activities. This exemption is not intended and does not permit general massage activities as part of any barber, cosmetologist, or aesthetician business beyond that authorized by his/her state license or certification. 
(Ord. 4385, 6-10-1996) 
3-33-23. - Grandfather clause. 
Notwithstanding the requirements of the preceding sections of this chapter, a massage therapist licensed as such by the Village on or before June 10, 1996, who does not meet the qualifications outlined in subsections 3-33-9(A) through (C) of this chapter will be allowed to renew his/her license on an annual basis provided there is full compliance with all other applicable requirements within this chapter and provided said massage therapist's license has been maintained on a continuous basis and has not been allowed to lapse and has not been either canceled, revoked, or suspended. 
(Ord. 4385, 6-10-1996) 
3-33-24. - Violation and penalty. 
Any person who violates any section of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not less than $250.00 nor more than $500.00 for each offense. 
(Ord. 4385, 6-10-1996) 
3-33-25. - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, paragraph, or part of this chapter is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid by any final court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 4385, 6-10-1996) 
Chapter 34 - CABLE COMMUNICATIONS CODE 

3-34-1. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known as and may be cited as the Village of Glen Ellyn Cable Communications Code. 
(Ord. 2734, 2-22-1982) 
3-34-2. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to: 
(A)  Provide for the franchising and regulation of community antenna television systems and other similar cable communication systems within the Village of Glen Ellyn; and 
(B)  Provide for the payment of a fee and other valuable consideration to the Village of Glen Ellyn for the use by a franchisee of Village streets and other public ways in the construction and operation of a community antenna television system or other similar cable communications system, and to compensate the Village of Glen Ellyn for costs associated therewith; and 
(C)  Provide for the regulation by the Village of Glen Ellyn of the rates and fees to be charged by the franchisees granted a franchise pursuant to the terms and the provisions of this chapter; and 
(D)  Provide for the development of a community antenna television system or other cable communications system as a means to improve communication between and among the citizens and public institutions of the Village of Glen Ellyn; and 
(E)  Provide remedies and prescribe penalties for violation of this chapter and the franchises granted hereunder. 
(Ord. 2734, 2-22-1982) 
3-34-3. - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise expressly stated or the context clearly indicates a different sense, the following terms shall, for the purpose of this chapter, have the meanings indicated in this section: 
AGENCY: The person, department or agency designated by the corporate authorities of the Village of Glen Ellyn to act in matters related to cable television or in the absence of such designation, the corporate authorities. 
BOARD: The Village President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Glen Ellyn, which constitutes the corporate authorities of the Village of Glen Ellyn. 
CABLE COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION OR COMMISSION: The Village of Glen Ellyn Cable Communications Commission, as defined and established by section 2-15-1 of this Code. 
CABLE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM OR SYSTEM OR CATV SYSTEM: A system composed of, without limitation, antennas, cables, wires, lines, waveguides, laser beams, satellites, earth stations, microwave links, towers, amplifiers, conductors, converters, equipment or facilities which are designed, constructed or wired for the purpose of producing, receiving, amplifying, storing, processing or distributing by coaxial cable, digital, fiber optics, microwave or other means, audio and/or visual, radio, television, electronic or electrical signals to and from subscribers, exclusive of any facility that is designed and operated to serve only subscribers in one or more multiple-unit dwellings under common ownership, control or management and which does not use Municipal rights of way. 
CHANNEL: A band of frequencies six or less megahertz wide in the electromagnetic spectrum capable of clearly and effectively carrying an audio data signal or an audiovisual television signal, digital signals or other electronic signals or some combination thereof, and as defined by the Federal Communications Commission rules and regulations. 
COMPANY: An individual franchisee to whom a franchise has been granted under the terms and provisions of this chapter, its successors and assigns, its present subsidiaries and affiliates, and its parent companies. 
CONVERTER: An electronic device provided by a franchisee which converts signals to a frequency not susceptible to interference within a television receiver of a subscriber, and by an appropriate channel selector also permits subscriber to receive all signals delivered at the designated dial locations. 
CORPORATE AUTHORITIES: The Village President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Glen Ellyn acting in their capacity of the corporate authority of the Village of Glen Ellyn. 
EDUCATIONAL ACCESS CHANNEL: Any channel designated for use by local educational authorities. 
FM SERVICES: Broadcast of audio signals only on a broadband standard FM frequency. 
FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION OR FCC: The Federal Communications Commission established by the communications act of 1934, as amended from time to time, and shall include any successor agency or other agency with respect to the federal regulation and licensing of cable communications systems. 
FRANCHISE: The nonexclusive rights granted pursuant to the terms and provisions of this chapter, as described and limited in an ordinance granting a franchise to a franchisee, to construct and operate a cable television system along the public ways in the Village of Glen Ellyn, or within specified areas in said Village, and is not intended to include any license or permit required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within said Village, as may be required by other ordinances and laws of the Village of Glen Ellyn. 
FRANCHISEE: The natural person, partnership, domestic or foreign corporation, association, joint venture, or organization of any kind granted a franchise under this chapter, and including its lawful successor, transferee, assignee, any and all subsidiaries and affiliates and its parent companies. 
LEASED ACCESS CHANNEL: Any channel available for lease, at fair and nondiscriminatory rates, on a first come, first serve nondiscriminatory basis. 
LOCAL ORIGINATION CHANNEL: Any channel programmed by the franchisee including automated program services. 
PERSON: Any individual, firm, partnership, limited partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization of any kind. 
PROPERTY OF THE COMPANY OR PROPERTY OF THE FRANCHISEE: All property owned, leased, installed or used by the company or franchisee in the conduct of a cable communications system. 
PUBLIC ACCESS CHANNEL: Any channel available to the general public for programming on a first come, first serve, nondiscriminatory, noncommercial basis. 
REGULAR SUBSCRIBER SERVICE RATES OR FEE: The monthly or other periodic charge for the availability of the system services to a subscriber, and includes any number of channels up to the maximum channels incorporated within the system, but excludes any premiums for FM radio services, pay per view fees, or premium pay television services. 
REVENUE: All revenue derived directly or indirectly by a franchisee from the operation or use of all or part of a community antenna system or cable communications system franchise pursuant to this chapter, whether that revenue is derived by the franchisee, its affiliates, subsidiaries, parents, or any person or firm of which the franchisee has a financial interest including, but not limited to, the following: 
(A)  Revenue from regular subscriber service fees, whether that fee is paid monthly or otherwise; 
(B)  That portion of receipts from programs from which a per channel or per program charge is made; 
(C)  Any and all revenue derived from any service fee charged for use of the system to transmit electronic or microwave impulses; 
(D)  Revenue derived as advertising income; 
(E)  Revenue from the leasing of cable channels; 
(F)  Revenue received for equipment rentals, including the rental of converters, studio equipment, studio facilities, fixed or mobile production equipment; 
(G)  Revenue received for furnishing other communications and nonbroadcast services either directly or as a carrier or another party, provided that revenues derived from the delivery of communication and nonbroadcast services shall be deemed to be equal to the system cost of providing such services. 
(H)  Revenue derived from the sale of personal property, including catalog sales conducted via cable communications system, data transmission, alarm or signal transmission; 
(I)  Receipts derived from installation, reconnection, inspection, repairs or modifications of any cable installation; 
(J)  Personnel fees received for services of personnel hired by others; provided however, that gross revenue shall not include any taxes on services furnished by the franchisee imposed directly on any subscriber or user by the state, or local governmental unit and collected by the franchisee on behalf of such governmental unit or, refer to that portion of advertising or leased access revenue dedicated for support of local programming. 
SCHOOLS: All public, private, elementary and secondary schools, junior colleges, colleges and universities which have been granted a certificate of recognition by the Illinois State Board of Education, pursuant to section 2-3.25 of the Illinois School Code (1979). 
STREET: The surface of and the space above and below any public place, street, right of way, road, highway, freeway, bridge, lane, path, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway, drive, communications or utility easement, or other dedicated public way of any kind whatsoever, now or hereafter existing as such within the franchise area, which shall entitle the Village of Glen Ellyn and the franchisee to the use thereof for the purpose of installing and maintaining a franchisee's cable communications system. Provided, however, that no reference herein, or in any ordinance granting a franchise, to a "street" or "public way" shall be deemed to be a representation or guarantee of the Village that its title in and to any property or easement is sufficient to permit its use for the installation of a cable communications system, and the franchisee shall be deemed to gain only such rights to use property in the Village as said Village may have the undisputed right and power to give. 
SUBSCRIBER: Any person who receives any regular or other service from a franchisee. 
TWO-WAY SERVICE OR INTERACTIVE SERVICE: The subscriber or any other location shall have the capability to choose whether or not to respond immediately or by sequential delay by utilizing any type of terminal equipment whatever, by push button code, dial code, meter, voice, video including, but not limited to, audio and video, electrical or mechanically produced signal, display and/or interrogation. 
USER: A person or organization utilizing a system channel or system equipment and facilities for purposes of production and/or transmission of material, as contrasted with receipt thereof in a subscriber capacity. 
VILLAGE: The Village of Glen Ellyn, and where appropriate, the corporate authorities of the Village of Glen Ellyn. 
(Ord. 2734, 2-22-1982) 
3-34-4. - Principles of construction. 
This chapter shall be construed and applied in accordance with the following principles: 
(A)  All ordinances or parts thereof in conflict with the provisions creating this chapter are to that extent hereby repealed. 
(B)  In connection with all actions and decisions to be taken or made under this chapter by the Village or a company to whom a franchise is granted, due consideration shall be given the respective interests of the Village, the company, subscribers and potential subscribers. Actions and decisions shall include, but not be limited to, increasing rates or otherwise amending this chapter. In the event of conflict of interest between potential subscribers and the interest of the Village, the company and subscribers, the interest of potential subscribers, except for potential subscribers who have not refused system service when available, shall be secondary to the interest of the Village, the company and subscribers. 
(C)  To the extent that any fee or monetary payment by a franchisee or another person under this chapter shall be declared or found to be excessive as it relates to a license or franchise, such fees or monetary payments shall be considered to be taxes. 
(D)  Words in the present tense include the future. 
(E)  Words importing the singular number may extend to and include plural, words importing the plural number may extend to and include the singular, and words in masculine gender shall include female gender. 
(F)  The specifications in this section of principles to apply in the construction of this chapter shall not be a limitation to other accepted principles of statutory construction. 
(G)  The general provisions of this chapter may be specifically waived in whole or in part for a particular franchisee, but only be a specific reference in an ordinance granting a franchise. 
(Ord. 2734, 2-22-1982) 
3-34-5. - Requirement of a franchise. 
A person or entity, including a telecommunications carrier, seeking to provide cable service or video service shall not use the public rights of way for the installation or construction of facilities for the provision of cable service or video service or offer cable service or video service until it has obtained either: a) a state issued authorization to offer or provide cable or video service under section 401 of the cable and video competition law of 20071; or b) a cable franchise from the Village under the provisions of this chapter and section 11-42-11 of the Illinois Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 5622, 10-22-2007) 
3-34-6. - Unauthorized activities. 
The following actions or omissions by any person, corporation or unincorporated association shall be deemed to be unlawful and constitute a nuisance subject to the general penalty provisions contained in title 1, chapter 4 of this Code: 
(A)  The making of an unauthorized connection, whether physically, electronically, acoustically, inductively or otherwise with any part of a cable communication system operated within the Village of Glen Ellyn for the purpose of taking or receiving television or radio signals, pictures, programs or sounds, or for the purpose of enabling others to receive such signals, pictures, programs or sounds. 
(B)  The wilful tampering with, removal of, or injury to any cable, wires or equipment used for distribution of television or radio signals, pictures, programs or sounds without consent of the system owner. 
(C)  The reselling, without the prior written consent of both the franchisee and the board, of any cable service, program or signal transmitted by a cable communications system operated under a franchise granted pursuant to this cable communications ordinance. 
(D)  Any person, corporation or unincorporated association committing any of the unauthorized activities set forth in this chapter shall be deemed to be guilty of a misdemeanor and each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this section is committed, or continued, or permitted shall be deemed a separate offense and upon conviction of any such violation such violator shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00 or by imprisonment not exceeding six months. Any equipment or structure erected or maintained and any work commenced or continued in violation of this chapter shall be and is hereby declared unlawful and a nuisance. 
(Ord. 2734, 2-22-1982) 
3-34-7. - Franchise application procedure. 
Applications for a cable communications franchise within the corporate limits of the Village of Glen Ellyn shall be made in accordance with the following procedures: 
(A)  After the effective date hereof, any person seeking a grant of a nonexclusive franchise to operate a cable communications system within the Village of Glen Ellyn shall submit an application in writing to the Village Clerk, who shall forward that application to the Cable Communications Advisory Commission for consideration. 
(B)  The application shall be in writing and shall contain information meeting the requirements of the procedures established by the Commission. 
(C)  The application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee in an amount determined from time to time by the Commission, which amount shall be reasonably determined to offset direct expenses incurred by the Village in the evaluation procedures, including, but not limited to, staff time and consulting assistance. 
(D)  All applications for a franchise shall be considered by the Commission in accordance with procedures and schedules established by the Commission. Following the consideration by the Commission, a report concerning any application shall be submitted to the corporate authorities. The report may be that no franchises or additional franchises are necessary or desirable to meet the needs of the Village. 
(E)  The corporate authorities shall consider any report and recommendation of the Commission and in addition shall consider the financial, technical, programming and rate proposals, as well as the legal and character qualifications of any applicant, and may or may not enter into negotiations with any applicant towards the end of obtaining a one or more cable communications system best suited to the unique needs and interest of the Village. The corporate authorities may, by ordinance, grant one or more nonexclusive franchises creating a right to construct and operate a community antenna television system or similar cable communications system within the public ways of the Village. One or more franchises may be granted to any applicant(s) which in the board's judgment may best serve the public interest; provided, however, no provision of this chapter shall be deemed or construed as to require the board to grant a franchise to any applicant. 
(F)  Prior to the enactment of the ordinance creating this chapter, the Village of Glen Ellyn requested interested companies to submit proposals for cable television service to the Village, and in response thereto a number of persons submitted applications. Each of those applications that were timely filed are hereby deemed to be in compliance with this section of this chapter and the report and recommendation heretofore made to the corporate authorities shall be deemed to be in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter and to give the corporate authorities the power to negotiate with any applicant who filed a response to the request for proposal. 
(G)  Any applicant to whom the Village of Glen Ellyn grants a nonexclusive franchise shall, in addition to the nonrefundable fee specified hereinabove, pay to the Village, at the time that the franchisee accepts the grant of franchise, an amount to be determined by the board to be a reasonable amount to reimburse the Village for all direct, reasonable expenses actually incurred by the Village in granting a franchise, which are not defrayed by the fees received with the application. Those reasonable expenses may include attorney fees, consulting fees, hired testing services and the reasonable value of staff time. 
(Ord. 2734, 2-22-1982) 
3-34-8. - Franchise term and nonexclusivity. 
The term of an original franchise shall be no more than 15 years from the date the franchise is granted to a successful applicant. The term of a renewed franchise shall be no more than 15 years. No franchise granted pursuant to this chapter should give any exclusive right to a franchisee and every such franchise shall be deemed to reserve the right to grant other franchises to use and occupy the streets and public ways of the Village, for a community antenna television system, other cable communications system or any other purpose on such terms as the corporate authorities may, from time to time, deem appropriate. 
(Ord. 2734, 2-22-1982) 
3-34-9. - Notice to the franchisee. 
Except for mandatory performance evaluation sessions required by this chapter, the Commission or the corporate authorities shall not take any final action involving the evaluation, modification, renewal, revocation or termination of the franchisee or the franchise granted hereunder unless the following conditions are met: 
(A)  A meeting has been called for the purpose of taking such action; 
(B)  The franchisee has been served at its local office with notice in writing at least 30 days prior to the meeting, as to its time, place and purpose; 
(C)  Notice has been published, at least once, no more than 15 nor less than seven days before the meeting in a newspaper of general circulation within the Village with any cost of publication to be paid by the franchisee; and 
(D)  The franchisee and any interested person are given an opportunity to be heard at such meeting. 
(Ord. 2734, 2-22-1982) 
3-34-10. - Franchise review and modification. 
It shall be the policy of the Village to amend a franchise upon application of a franchisee, when necessary to enable a franchisee to take advantage of technological advancements which will afford it an opportunity to more effectively, efficiently, or economically service its subscribers; provided, however, that this section shall not be construed to require the Village to make any amendments in a grant of franchise. Further, within the term of the franchise, the corporate authorities may, after notice and hearing as required in section 3-34-9 of this chapter, adopt an ordinance or resolution providing for reasonable and appropriate modifications in a franchise grant ordinance of a nature that would not result in effectively terminating the grant or franchise. 
(Ord. 2734, 2-22-1982) 
3-34-11. - Performance evaluation sessions. 
Recognizing that the field of cable communications is ever changing, to help achieve a continually advanced and modern cable communication system for the Village, the franchisee shall cooperate with the following review procedure: 
(A)  The Commission and the franchisee shall hold annual franchise performance evaluation sessions within 60 days of the first anniversary date of the effective date of a grant of a franchise, and within 60 days of each subsequent anniversary date of said effective date. All such review sessions shall be open to the public. 
(B)  Franchisee shall be solely responsible for notifying the Commission, in writing, at least 60 days in advance, of each of the annual performance evaluation sessions, and no notice to the franchisee pursuant to section 3-34-9 of this chapter shall be required. 
(C)  Special franchise review sessions may be held at any time during the term of the franchise, at the request of either the Commission or franchisee. All such special franchise review sessions shall be open to the public, and require notice as provided in section 3-34-9 of this chapter. 
(D)  The Commission and the franchisee shall endeavor to announce all review sessions in a newspaper of general circulation in the Village; however, no such newspaper announcement shall be required as to any adjourned meetings. In addition, franchisee shall be obligated to notify all subscribers of any annual or special franchise review session, including adjourned meetings, by an announcement on the highest use origination channel on its system no less than three times between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m. for five consecutive days immediately preceding each meeting, with the date, time, place and purpose of such meeting being included in any announcement. 
(E)  The following topics may be discussed at any annual or special evaluation session, but this listing shall not be construed to limit topics or to require such topics to be discussed at each session: service rate structures; franchise fees; penalties; free or discontinued services; applications of new technologies; system performance; services provided; programming offered; local programming; customer complaints; privacy; amendments to this Code concerning cable communications; modifications to the grant of franchise; judicial and FCC rulings; line extension policies; and franchisee's rules and regulations. 
(F)  Prior to and during any annual or special review or evaluation session, the franchisee shall fully cooperate with the Commission or other village officers or employees and shall provide such information and documents as such Commission, other officers and employees may request to reasonably perform its review functions. 
(G)  If at any time during its review, the Commission determines that reasonable evidence exists of inadequate cable communications system performance, it may require the franchisee to perform tests and analysis directed toward the suspected inadequacies. The franchisee shall fully cooperate with the Commission in performing such testing and shall prepare results and a report if requested within a reasonable time, as established by the Commission. Such report shall include the following information, unless expressly waived by the Commission: 
1.  The nature of the complaint or problem which precipitated the special test; 
2.  A description of the system component which was tested; 
3.  The equipment used and procedures employed in the testing; 
4.  The method, if any, in which such complaint or problem was resolved, or a statement that it was not resolved; 
5.  Any other information pertinent to said test and analysis which may be reasonably required or requested by the Commission. 
(H)  Should the Commission require testing as set forth hereinabove in subsection (G) of this section, the Commission may also require the test to be supervised by a professional engineer or other consultant, as selected by the Commission. Should such professional engineer or consultant not be on the permanent staff of the franchisee or the Village then all reasonable expense of such professional shall be paid by the franchisee. The professional may be required to sign all records of special tests and forward such reports, together with any requested report interpreting the results of the tests and recommending actions to be taken, to the Commission. 
(I)  The Commission's right under this section to require tests shall be limited to requiring tests, analysis and reports covering specific subjects and characteristics based upon actual complaints or other evidence when and under such circumstances as the Commission has reasonable grounds to believe that complaints or other evidence require tests be performed to protect the public against substandard community antenna television service or other cable communications service, provided by the franchisee. 
(Ord. 2734, 2-22-1982) 
3-34-12. - Franchise renewal. 
The term franchise may be renewed in accordance with the following procedures: 
(A)  The franchisee shall be solely responsible for requesting the Commission, in writing, to hold a special meeting for the purpose of reviewing the franchisee's performance during the term of the franchise and to consider renewal of the franchise. Such special renewal review session shall consider the adequacy of the franchise from the standpoint of the Village, the franchisee and the federal communication's rules for cable communications or community antenna television systems and shall determine the advisability of renewing the grant of franchise to a franchisee. Unless the Village Board shall consent to some lesser notice, said request shall be made not less than 30 months prior to the franchise expiration date. Upon receipt of said request, the Commission shall adopt a resolution setting forth the time and place of the special renewal review session. If no request for renewal is made, the franchise shall expire according to its terms, provided, however, that the corporate authorities may extend the term of the franchise in six month increments during the franchise renewal process provided for in this section, but in no event longer than one year after its original term. 
(B)  The Commission shall hear any interested person during said special renewal review sessions and shall make findings of fact as to whether or not the franchisee reasonably complied with the terms and conditions imposed by this chapter, the ordinance granting the franchise, and federal communications commission's rules for community antenna television systems or cable communication systems. 
(C)  Public announcement of such renewal review sessions shall be made in accordance with section 3-34-9 and subsection 3-34-11(D) of this chapter. 
(D)  At least 30 days prior to the scheduled date of any review session, franchisee shall submit a written description of the cable communications system it proposes to furnish to the Village during the renewal term of the franchise. That description shall be the same description required by the Commission for a new applicant for a franchise, and may include information on the following topics: 
1.  System design and technical specifications; 
2.  Channel allocations and programming; 
3.  Fee schedules; 
4.  System construction programs; 
5.  Community communication provisions, including local programming; 
6.  Subscriber service provisions; and 
7.  Any other information the Commission deems necessary or appropriate. 
(E)  After considering the renewal proposal of the franchisee, and after receiving all evidence, the Commission shall submit a report to the board concerning its findings of fact as to reasonable compliance with the terms of this chapter, the ordinance granting the franchise and FCC rules and regulations. Further, the Commission shall report its recommendation as to whether or not renewal of the franchise would provide the best cable communications system for the Village of Glen Ellyn. 
(F)  Following the submission of the Commission's report on renewal, the board may request the franchisee to provide any further evidence, information, tests or proposals it deems necessary or appropriate. 
(G)  Notwithstanding any findings of fact of the Commission or recommendations of the Commission, the board may determine that the franchisee has been in reasonable compliance with the terms and conditions imposed by this chapter, the ordinance granting the franchise, and the FCC rules and regulations. Notwithstanding the fact that the board determines that the franchisee has been in said reasonable compliance, the board shall have the right not to renew the franchise. If the board does not renew the franchise, the board shall, to the extent then permitted by existing law, have the option to: 
1.  Acquire at fair market value all of the assets of the franchisee's operations within the Village; or 
2.  Require the sale at fair market value of all of such assets to a succeeding franchisee; or 
3.  Require the removal of all such assets from the Village; or 
4.  Take such other action as it deems appropriate. 
(H)  The Village shall have the right to recoup from the franchisee all direct expenses, including reasonable legal expenses, professional consulting expenses, publication expenses, or other expenses, incurred pursuant to the renewal process, should the Village offer to renew the franchise. 
(Ord. 2734, 2-22-1982) 
3-34-13. - Franchise revocation procedures. 
In addition to all other rights, powers or remedies pertaining to the Village in connection with this chapter or otherwise, the Village reserves the right to terminate, cancel and revoke any franchise granted hereunder, together with all rights and privileges granted to a franchisee under the provisions of this chapter. The reserved right to terminate, cancel or revoke shall be exercised in accordance with the following procedure: 
(A)  The Village's right to terminate, cancel or revoke any franchise shall not be exercised by the Village, unless, after hearing as established herein before the Commission, it is found that a franchisee has: 
1.  Violated any material provision of this chapter or any rule, order or determination of the Village made pursuant to this chapter, except where such violation, other than violations defined in subsections (A)2. and (A)3. of this section, is without fault of the franchisee or through excusable neglect; or 
2.  Become insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its debts, or is adjudged a bankrupt; or 
3.  Failed for a substantial time to provide effective transmission and receiving services capabilities to subscribers, except where such failure is due to strikes, war, civil commotions, acts of God or other causes beyond the control of the franchisee, or 
4.  Attempted to evade any of the provisions of this chapter or an ordinance granting the franchise or practices any fraud or deceit upon the Village, its subscribers or the Federal Communications Commission; or 
5.  Failed to establish, construct and operate the system substantially in compliance with the schedule set forth in any ordinance granting a franchise, with due consideration being given to the nature and causes of any delays; or 
6.  Failed to comply with the conditions of occupancy of any public way, street or right of way; or 
7.  Failed to pay franchise fees or other fees due to the Village when due; or 
8.  Arbitrarily and capriciously discontinued service to a substantial number of its subscribers. 
(B)  In the event the Village believes there is a reasonable probability that grounds for revocation exist or have existed, the Village shall notify the franchisee in writing, setting forth the nature and ultimate facts of such grounds for revocation. If, within 30 days following such written notice, the franchisee has not furnished reasonably satisfactory evidence that corrective action has been taken or is being actively and expeditiously pursued, or that the alleged violations did not occur, or that the alleged violations were beyond the franchisee's control, then the Commission shall establish a date, time and place for the conduct of a public hearing on the grounds for revocation, with the date of said public hearing being no sooner than 30 or later than 60 days after the notice of revocation was served upon the franchisee. 
(C)  The hearing on revocation shall be conducted as an administrative hearing with the Village having the obligation to prove the grounds of revocation by a preponderance of the evidence. 
(D)  Within 30 days after the conclusion of the hearing, the Commission shall submit its written findings of fact, and conclusions of fact and law to the board, together with its recommendation as to whether or not in its opinion the franchise should or should not be revoked. The Commission's recommendation shall not be binding upon the board, and the board may receive additional evidence. 
(E)  In the event that a franchise is revoked for cause, the Village shall then have the same options as set forth in subsection 3-34-12(G) of this chapter. 
(F)  The termination of a franchisee's rights under a franchise shall in no way affect any other rights the Village may have under the franchise or under any provision of law or ordinance. 
(Ord. 2734, 2-22-1982) 
3-34-14. - Additional conditions and amendments. 
(A)  Throughout the term of any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter, the franchisee shall have an affirmative duty to notify the Village that it has been granted a cable television franchise by another Municipality or franchising authority located within 50 miles of the Village. 
(B)  For the purpose of this section, any affiliated person, subsidiary, partnership or wholly owned corporation related to the franchisee shall qualify as an entity which shall be considered to be equivalent to the franchisee. Further, any transferee or assignee of a franchisee shall be bound for the purposes of this section by any grant of franchise to such transferee or assignee, or to its transferor, or assignor. 
(C)  Subject to the conditions set forth in subsection (E) of this section the Village shall have the right to amend any ordinance granting a franchise to include any of the following terms or conditions which the franchisee has accepted in any franchise area located within 50 miles of the Village: 
1.  Franchisee fees in excess of five percent of gross revenues; 
2.  Franchise term less than 15 years from the grant of the franchise; 
3.  Rates for cable services which are lower than those proposed by franchisee and approved by the Village. 
(D)  Subject to the conditions set forth in subsection (E) of this section, the Village shall have the right to require the franchisee to modify its cable services to include, within a reasonable time, any services which the franchisee offers in any of its cable system located within 50 miles of the Village. 
(E)  The franchisee shall be obligated to accept any modifications in the ordinance granting a franchise or in its service obligations pursuant to this section, unless the franchisee is able to affirmatively demonstrate the following: 
1.  The additional or modified services involve services which are being tested on a trial basis only; or 
2.  The modification is not technically practical or feasible within the Village due to population, density or other relevant factors; or 
3.  The modification would have a substantial adverse impact upon the reasonable rate of return on investment during the remaining term of the franchise based upon the then current standards in the cable communications industry, and with the adverse impact being determined upon the cumulative effect of the proposed modification and all prior modifications required by the Village pursuant to the provisions of this section. 
(F)  In the event the Village determines that there should be a modification in the ordinance granting a franchise or in the franchisee's services pursuant to this section, then the Village shall so notify the franchisee in writing. Within three months of receipt of such notice, the franchisee shall notify the Village whether it will accept the modification or whether the franchisee rejects such modifications. If the franchisee rejects such modifications, then it shall state the reasons therefor and support those reasons with appropriate affidavits. 
(G)  Should the franchisee reject the modifications, the Village and the franchisee shall promptly meet and seek to find a mutually acceptable resolution of the impasse. 
(H)  If after 60 days no resolution has been achieved, either the Village or the franchisee shall be entitled to submit such matter to binding arbitration pursuant to the provisions of the uniform arbitration act, as enacted in the State of Illinois and as amended from time to time. The arbitrator's costs and other usual expenses shall be paid by the franchisee unless the arbitrators find that the Village's request for modification was unreasonable. The Village and the franchisee shall each be respectively responsible for its own attorney fees, costs and other expenses of presenting the matter to arbitration. 
(I)  Any modification in the franchise fee shall be effective as of the date the franchisee accepts any franchise fee in excess of five percent of its gross revenues in any other Municipality. All other amendments or modifications shall become effective within three months of service of notice requesting such modifications. 
(Ord. 2734, 2-22-1982) 
3-34-15. - Liability, insurance and indemnification. 
(A)  The franchisee shall indemnify, defend and save and hold the Village, its corporate authorities, officers, boards, commissions, employees and agents harmless from any injury, claim, demand, suit, judgment, execution liability, debt, damages or penalty (hereinafter referred to as "claims") arising out of, resulting from, or alleged to arise out of or result from, the construction, erection, installation, operation, maintenance of, or other activity connected with, the franchisee's cable communications system, whether such acts or omissions are those of the franchisee, whether or not any act or omission is authorized, allowed or prohibited by this Code or the ordinance granting the franchise. These damages shall include, but not be limited to, penalties arising out of copyright infringements and damages arising out of any failure by franchisee to secure consents from the owners, authorized distributors or licensees of programs to be delivered by the franchisee's cable communications system, liabilities or claims of liability with respect to property damage, personal injury, invasions of the right of privacy, defamation of any person, the violation or infringement of trademark, trade name, service mark or patent, or any other right of any person, and failure of the franchisee to comply with the provisions of any federal, state or local statute applicable to the franchisee in connection with any franchise granted hereunder. The Village reserves the right to retain counsel of its choice, or in the alternative, approve counsel obtained by the franchisee or its insurance carrier, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld or delayed. 
(B)  A franchisee shall pay and by its acceptance of a franchise shall be deemed to have specifically agreed that it will pay all expenses incurred by the Village in defending itself with regard to all claims mentioned in subsection (A) of this section. These expenses shall include all out of pocket expenses, such as attorney fees, and shall also include the reasonable value of any services rendered by any employee of the Village. 
(C)  A franchisee shall maintain at its own expense, and by its acceptance of a franchise shall be deemed to have specifically agreed that it will maintain throughout the term of such franchise, general comprehensive liability insurance insuring the Village, and the franchisee with regards to all claims mentioned in subsection (A) of this section, in the minimum amount of: 
1.  Comprehensive general all risk insurance to the extent of $3,000,000.00 per occurrence and $1,000,000.00 per person against liability for bodily injury, including death and to the extent of $2,000,000.00 per occurrence against liability for damage to property including loss of use, occurring on, arising out of or in any way related to the system operated by a franchisee; 
2.  Workers' compensation insurance including all legal requirements for occupational diseases, sufficient to cover all employees who will be performing work described herein or in operation of the system in accordance with the Illinois state statutes; and employer's liability insurance with the limits of liability not less than $500,000.00; 
3.  Illinois structural work act insurance coverage to the extent of $3,000,000.00 per occurrence and $1,000,000.00 per person; 
4.  Comprehensive automobile liability insurance to the extent of $3,000,000.00 per occurrence and $1,000,000.00 per person against liability for bodily injury including death and to the extent of $2,000,000.00 per occurrence against liability for damage to property including loss of use occurring on, arising out of, or in any way related to the system. 
The limits and types of insurance required herein shall not be construed as a limit on the franchisee's undertaking provided in subsections 3-34-16(A) and (B) of this chapter. 
(D)  All policies of insurance required by this section shall be placed with companies which are qualified to write insurance in the State of Illinois by the Illinois Director of Insurance and which maintain throughout the policy term a general rating of "A" and a financial size category of "XV" as determined by the A.M. Best Company. No insurance policy which provides for a deductible in excess of $250,000.00 shall be accepted to meet the requirements of this section. 
(E)  The franchisee shall cause the Village and all of its officers and employees to be included as coinsureds on all insurance policies required by this section. The franchisee shall file with the Village copies of all such policies. All such policies shall contain a provision requiring at least 30 days' written notice to both the Village and the franchisee of any cancellation, termination or any other expiration and shall provide that no such cancellation, termination or expiration shall be effective until 30 days after delivery of such written notice. Notices of renewal and proof of payment of the premium of any expiring policy shall be filed with the Village Clerk at least 60 days prior to the date of such expiration. 
(Ord. 2734, 2-22-1982) 
3-34-16. - Restraint on assignment or transfer of franchise. 
(A)  A franchise granted under the provisions of this chapter shall be a privilege to be held personally in trust by the franchisee. Except as otherwise provided in an ordinance granting the franchise, the franchise shall not be assigned, transferred, leased or sublet, sold or disposed of, transferred in trust, pledged, in whole or in part, by voluntary sale, merger, sale and leased back, consolidation or otherwise or by force or involuntary sale, without prior consent of the corporate authorities expressed by resolution or ordinance, and then only upon such conditions as may therein be prescribed. Any sale, transfer or assignment not made according to the procedures set forth in this chapter shall render the franchise voidable at the option of the corporate authorities. The sale, transfer or assignment in bulk of the major part of the tangible assets of the franchisee shall be considered an assignment and shall be subject to the provisions of this section. 
(B)  Any sale, transfer or assignment authorized by the corporate authorities shall be made by a bill of sale or similar document, an executed copy of which shall be filed with the Village Clerk within 30 days after any such sale, transfer or assignment. The corporate authorities shall not withhold its consent unreasonably; provided, however, the proposed assignee agrees to comply with all the provisions of this chapter and the ordinance granting the franchise and reasonable amendments thereto, and must at a minimum, satisfy the legal, financial, technical and character qualifications of an original applicant. 
(C)  The consent of the corporate authorities to any sale, transfer, lease, conveyance into trust, mortgage or other method of hypothecation shall not constitute: 
1.  A waiver or release of any of the rights of the Village under this Code or the ordinance granting the franchise; 
2.  A waiver or release of the requirement for prior approval of any subsequent assignment or transfer; or 
3.  A waiver or release of the rights of the Village in and to public rights of way. 
(D)  The prohibition against assignment and transfer of the franchise shall not be construed to prohibit a mortgage or pledge of system facilities or any part thereof or a leasing by the franchisee of system facilities or any part thereof for financing purposes in connection with construction of the system. Any such mortgage, pledge, or lease shall be subject and subordinate to the rights of the Village and subscribers of the franchisee. 
(Ord. 2734, 2-22-1982) 
3-34-17. - Franchise fees. 
(A)  The franchisee, in consideration of the privilege granted unto the franchisee for the operation of a cable communication system, and the expense of regulation pursuant to the franchise incurred by the Village, shall pay to the Village a percent of its annual gross revenues during the period of its operation under the franchise. This percent shall be set forth in the ordinance granting the franchise and shall be no more than the maximum amount as may be set from time to time by controlling federal or state law. Such franchise fee shall be payable at least quarterly, as established in the ordinance granting the franchise. 
(B)  The Village reserves the right at any time to increase or decrease this percentage in compliance with applicable state or federal law. 
(C)  Each payment of a franchise fee shall be accompanied by a statement under oath from an official or representative of the company having the requisite knowledge to make such a statement certifying the gross revenues upon which the payment is based. Further, the franchisee shall also file, within 75 days following the conclusion of the grantee's fiscal year, an annual report prepared and audited, at franchisee's expense, by a certified public accountant, clearly showing the yearly total gross revenues; however, the Village may for good cause require that the report be certified by an independent certified public accountant acceptable to the Village. 
(D)  Upon termination, expiration or revocation of the franchise, the franchisee shall continue to render quarterly statements and certifications and the annual certified audit until such time as all payments due the Village for franchise fees have been paid and accounted for to the reasonable satisfaction of the Village. 
(E)  In the event that any franchise payment or other payments required of a franchisee is not made on or before their due date, interest shall be charged from such due date at an annual rate of two percentage points over the prime rate charged by the Continental Illinois National Bank of Chicago to its most credit worthy borrowers of demand loans. 
(Ord. 2734, 2-22-1982) 
3-34-18. - Subscriber and user fees. 
(A)  By accepting the franchise granted pursuant to the terms and conditions imposed by this chapter, a franchisee agrees that the Village shall have the authority and right to review and approve or disapprove the franchisee's fee schedule for regular subscriber service, which shall include the basic monthly or other periodic service charge for cable communications availability; provided, however, that the Village's authority and right to review a franchisee's fee schedule for regular subscriber service shall be subject to all applicable state and federal laws, including FCC rules and regulations. Unless provided otherwise, review of any changes in the regular subscriber service rates or fees shall be conducted in accordance with the following procedure: 
1.  A franchisee may, from time to time but no more often than quarterly, request approval of a change in its rates so as to enable it a fair and reasonable return on its investment; 
2.  Any proposed change in its rates for regular subscriber service shall be set forth in a written notice served upon the Village at least 60 days prior to a proposed effective date for the revised rates; 
3.  The Commission may hold a public hearing to determine whether any change in the regular subscriber rates are required to enable a fair and reasonable return to the franchisee on its investment and efforts; 
4.  The franchisee shall cooperate with the Commission in such review of proposed changes in the rates, and upon request of the Commission shall supply such data as reasonably may be required by the Commission for determining the reasonableness and fairness of the proposed rate changes; 
5.  The pendency of any proceedings before the Commission to review the proposed changes in the regular subscriber service rates shall not prevent the proposed rate revisions from going into effect as scheduled, but if the corporate authorities ultimately disapprove of the rate revisions, the rates for regular subscriber service shall revert to those in effect prior to the proposed revisions and a new proposal may be submitted by the franchisee; 
6.  Notice of the Commission's hearing on a proposed rate revision shall be given pursuant to section 3-34-9 of this chapter; 
7.  The Commission shall render its recommendations to the corporate authorities within 30 days following the conclusion of the hearing, and the revised rate shall be deemed to be approved unless the corporate authorities pass a resolution or ordinance disapproving the rates within 30 days following submission of the recommendation by the Commission to the corporate authorities; and 
8.  Approval by the corporate authorities of any revision in the regular subscriber service rates or fees shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
(B)  The Village's right to review, approve or disapprove rates and proposed changes in the regular subscriber service fee is permissive and need not be exercised by the Village. Further, the Village may limit the right to certain tier, class or number of channels by specific reference in an ordinance granting a franchise. 
(C)  All charges to subscribers and users shall be consistent with a schedule of fees for all services offered as established by the franchisee. Subject to the review provisions of subsection (A) of this section for regular subscriber rates or fees, changes in the subscriber fee schedule shall not take effect until 90 days after notification of same is delivered to the Village and to current subscribers and users. In approving or disapproving requested changes in fees, the Village shall consider what is a fair rate of return to the franchisee for its investment and efforts. 
(D)  A franchisee shall not, with regard to fees, discriminate or grant any preference or advantage to any person, firm or entity; provided, however, that the franchisee may establish different rates for different classes of subscribers or users in recognition of the cost of service differentials, so long as the franchisee does not discriminate between any subscribers or users of the same class or receiving the same class or type of service. 
(E)  The Village shall have the right to require the franchisee to maintain the fee schedule set forth in its application for a period of time up to 36 months from the time service is provided to the first subscriber. 
(F)  Without prior approval of the Village, a franchisee shall have the authority and the right to add to its service or installation fees any federal, state or local taxes or fees directly imposed on subscribers, any increase in franchise fee payable to the Village in excess of the initial fee rate and any additional copyright fees that may be imposed as a result of legislative or judicial action at the federal, state or local level taken after the filing of the franchise application. If during the term of the franchise, the franchisee receives refunds of any copyright payments, it shall without delay notify the Village, suggest a plan for flow through of the refunds to its subscribers, and retain such refunds in an interest bearing escrow account pending order of the Village. After considering the plan submitted by the franchisee, the Village shall order flow through of the refunds with accrued interest to the franchisee's subscribers in a fair and equitable manner. 
(G)  Notwithstanding subsections (A) through (D) of this section, no action shall be taken by the corporate authorities with respect to the franchisee's rates, rules or regulations applicable thereto as set forth in its application, until at least the expiration of 30 months following the date service is provided to the first subscriber under the franchise. At any time thereafter, or with reference to additional services not scheduled in the franchisee's application, upon the Commission's own motion or upon request of a franchisee or of the corporate authorities, and after proper notice as provided in section 3-34-9 of this chapter, the Commission may hold public hearings to review the subscriber and user rates or fees charged by the franchisee. The Commission may, following such hearing, recommend approval or disapproval of or suggest adjustments to such rates as are requested by a franchisee or charged by a franchisee in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; provided, however, the Village shall not have the right to order the franchisee to rebate any fee or portion thereof charged during the initial period when such fees were not subject to the review of the Commission. Any approval or disapproval of subscriber and user fees or rates must be adopted by resolution or ordinance passed and approved by the corporate authorities, after advisory recommendation from the Commission following hearings as set forth herein. 
(H)  A franchisee shall apprise each new subscriber in writing of all applicable fees and charges for providing cable communication services. 
(I)  A franchisee may, at its own discretion, in a nondiscriminatory manner, waive, reduce or suspend connection fees or monthly service fees for promotional purposes. 
(J)  Except as may be otherwise provided in an ordinance granting a franchise, a subscriber shall have the right to have its service disconnected without charge, which shall include the removal of any equipment owned by the franchisee from the subscriber's residence. Such disconnection shall be made as soon as practicable and in no case later than 30 days following written notice to a franchisee of a subscriber's request for disconnection. No franchisee shall enter into any agreement with a subscriber which imposes any charge following disconnection of service, except for uniform connection charges, subsequent monthly or periodic charges, and a contractual damage amount for failure to return a convertor or similar equipment, and each of those charges and contractual damage amounts shall be no greater than charges for new customers. This section shall not prevent a franchisee from refusing service to any person because the franchisee's prior accounts with that person remain due and owing. 
(K)  Except as may be otherwise provided in an ordinance granting the franchise, a franchisee may offer service which requires advance payment of periodic service charges for no more than one year in advance subject to the conditions contained in this section. A subscriber shall have the right, at any time, to have its service disconnected without charge and with a refund of unused service charges paid to the customer within 30 days from the date of service disconnection. Rate increases shall not be effective with respect to any subscriber until after the expiration of any period for which advanced payment has been accepted by a franchisee. 
(L)  Franchisee shall refund fees pro rata to a subscriber in the event that service to that subscriber is interrupted for more than 24 hours for any reason whatsoever, except interruptions caused by acts or omissions of the subscriber. 
(Ord. 2734, 2-22-1982; Ord. 3829, 4-22-1991) 
3-34-19. - Required books and records. 
(A)  Unless excused by written resolution of the Commission, a franchisee shall maintain books and records of its operation in connection with activities within the boundaries of the Village with such books and records showing the following, in sufficient detail, consistent with generally accepted accounting principles: 
1.  Subscriber accounts receivable; 
2.  Subscriber transactions; 
3.  Cash receipts journal; 
4.  Cash disbursement journal; 
5.  General ledgers; 
6.  General journals or other journals permanently retained in the ordinary course of business; 
7.  Capital expenditures, to include capitalized interest and overhead, if any; and 
8.  Depreciation expense, by category. 
(B)  All financial records of the company in connection with its activities within the boundaries of the Village shall be maintained in a manner which permits distinguishing revenues earned within the Village from revenues earned by the franchisee in other villages. Any expenses or expenditures which apply to both the system within the Village and any other operations shall be reasonably allocated between all such operations, consistent with generally accepted accounting principles. 
(C)  A franchisee shall simultaneously file with the Village a copy of all petitions and applications, filed or submitted by the franchisee with any governmental entity or agency having jurisdiction with respect to any matter affecting the system, system facilities, or a franchisee's undertakings with respect to a franchise granted in the Village. 
(D)  At least ten days prior to construction of any part of the system or system facilities in public rights of way, a franchisee shall file with the Village copies of maps, plats or other drawings which accurately show the nature of the proposed construction or improvements. Such copies shall show all existing public or private improvements. Upon completion of such construction, the franchisee shall submit "as built" plans which also show existing public or private improvements. 
(E)  A franchisee shall, within 30 days following a request by the corporate authorities, or by the Commission, furnish the Village Clerk a list, showing the names and addresses of persons owning five percent or more of any class or a series of the outstanding voting stock or equivalent ownership interest of a franchisee, together with a roster of the franchisee's officers and directors (or equivalent managerial personnel) and their addresses. 
(F)  Copies of a franchisee's schedule of charges, contractor application forms for subscriber and user services, rules, regulations and policy statements regarding the processing of subscriber complaints, delinquent subscriber disconnect and reconnect procedures and any other terms and conditions adopted as the franchisee's policy in connection with its subscribers or users shall be filed with the Village Clerk. 
(G)  A copy of any books and records required to be maintained or filed with the Village pursuant to the provisions of this section of this Code, shall be furnished to the Village at the franchisee's expense within 11 business days of a request by the Village for such copy. The Village shall have the right, upon reasonable notice to a franchisee and during normal business hours to inspect all or any part of the franchisee's records and documents, planning records and documents, and engineering records and documents of every kind in connection with the grant of a franchise, the system, the system facilities, and a franchisee's undertakings with respect to the grant of a franchise for cable communications. 
(H)  All books and records required to be maintained by a franchisee shall be retained, in any reasonable, retrievable form, for a period of not less than 15 years. 
(Ord. 2734, 2-22-1982) 
3-34-20. - Franchise areas. 
(A)  Unless a smaller area is specified in the application for a franchise, the grant of a franchise shall apply within the corporate limits of the Village, including all territory hereafter annexed to the Village. 
(B)  In the event and to the extent that the County of DuPage, Illinois, authorizes and in a manner not inconsistent with the grant of a franchise, or to the extent that an intergovernmental agreement or contract is made by and between the Village and the County in connection with the extension of the service and the offer of the services of the system to potential subscribers in areas outside of the Village's corporate limits, the grant of a franchise within the Village limits may be extended beyond the corporate limits by authorization of the corporate authorities so that the franchisee may so extend the system and offer services to potential subscribers within such extended areas. 
(Ord. 2734, 2-22-1982) 
3-34-21. - Minimum extension of service. 
(A)  Every franchisee shall be required to extend the system to and to offer the services of the system to potential subscribers within all parts of the franchise area where there are at least a total of 40 residential dwelling units and/or occupied commercial or industrial structures per line mile. Every franchisee shall extend its system by cable to subscribers at no cost to the subscriber for the system extension other than the usual installation fee applicable to all subscribers. 
(B)  Where the density of residential dwelling and occupied commercial or industrial structures, adverse terrain, or other factors render extension of the system and offer of services impracticable or technically unfeasible or creates an undue economic hardship, the franchisee may petition the Commission for relief from the provisions requiring the minimum extension of service. Such application for relief must state as a minimum the part or parts of the franchise area into which extension would create a hardship, the reasons for that hardship, the normal cost of extending such service per subscriber and the additional or inordinate costs presented by the part or parts in which relief is requested. Notice of the hearing for such relief shall be in accordance with sections 3-34-9 and 3-34-11 of this chapter, and following the presentation of evidence, the Commission shall make written findings of fact and recommendations to the corporate authorities as to either waive extension of the service into such part or parts of the franchise area or allow the extension and offer of services on such special terms, conditions and provisions as appear to the Commission to be reasonable and fair, considering the rights and interests of the Village, the franchisee and potential subscribers in such areas. Following such findings of fact and recommendation, the board may either deny the request, waive extension or allow such extension and offer of services on any special terms, conditions and provisions as are deemed reasonable and fair. 
(C)  Every franchisee shall be required to extend service to any area subdivided or constructed after the effective date of the grant of a franchise, in accordance with the criteria set forth in subsections (A) and (B) of this section. 
(Ord. 2734, 2-22-1982) 
3-34-22. - Individual service drops. 
(A)  Standard installation: Every franchisee shall extend and make cable television service available to any isolated subscriber within the franchise area requesting connection at the standard connection charge, if the connection to such subscriber would require no more than 150 feet of standard aerial or buried lead-in cable to connect the subscriber terminal to the nearest distribution system tap-off, trunk or feeder cable required to be installed pursuant to section 3-34-21 of this chapter, with the point of connection to the subscriber terminal being measured to where entry is made into the building through an outside wall adjacent to the location of the subscriber's television; where any internal wiring can be affixed to the surface of the wall or baseboard or placed in a readily accessible raceway; and where the method of installation, either aerial or underground, is the same as is employed in the distribution system serving that subscriber. 
(B)  Custom installation: A custom installation shall include every installation which employs outside construction methods, either aerial or underground, different from those employed in the distribution system serving that subscriber, where inside wiring involves installation of cable or wire in any attic, crawl space, or within the dead space area of any wall or other area not readily accessible or involving excessive time, care or expertise, or which requires the use of more than 150 feet of standard aerial or buried lead-in cable or of additional amplification equipment on the subscriber's property in order to provide proper service. Every franchisee shall extend and make available cable television service to subscribers requiring custom installation at a connection charge in excess of the standard installation charge, but not to exceed the actual installation costs incurred by the franchisee for the custom installation over and above the usual costs for a standard installation. 
(Ord. 2734, 2-22-1982) 
3-34-23. - General system description and system. 
(A)  The cable communication system to be installed by franchisee shall comply in all respects with the requirements set forth in the FCC's rules for cable television including applicable amendments thereto, provided, however, that nothing contained herein shall be construed to prohibit a franchisee from proposing to comply with more rigid technical performance requirements, in which case the more rigid standards proposed in a franchisee's application shall be considered to be incorporated by reference in the ordinance granting the franchise and will be binding on the franchisee. If the FCC should delete said requirements, the Village hereby reserves the right to amend this Code to incorporate similar standards and every franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to such reserved power whether or not expressly so conditioned. 
(B)  Applications for franchise may include proposals for the provision of public, educational, local governmental, and leased access channels, and any other similar system components. Such proposals by a franchisee, if accepted by the Village, shall be incorporated into the ordinance granting the franchise. The Commission may propose minimum requirements for cable communications system. 
(C)  Every franchisee shall provide, without charge within the franchise area, one service outlet activated for regular subscriber service to each fire station, school, police station, public library and such other buildings used for governmental purposes as may be designated by the Commission. Applications for franchise may include more liberal proposals for the extension of services to public buildings. Such proposals by a franchisee, if accepted by the Village shall be considered to be incorporated into the ordinance granting the franchise. 
(D)  Every franchisee shall establish and construct its system in accordance with the highest standards of the art of cable communications and in accordance with the highest standards of conduct with respect to businesses of the size and type similar to that of the franchisee. 
(Ord. 2734, 2-22-1982) 
3-34-24. - Lockout device requirement. 
(Repealed by Ordinance 5623, October 22, 2007) 
3-34-25. - Operational requirements. 
(A)  Every franchisee shall construct, operate and maintain the cable communication system in full compliance with the rules and regulations including applicable amendments, of the federal communications Commission and all other applicable federal, state or local laws and regulations, including the provisions of the Electrical Code of the Village of Glen Ellyn and all the amendments thereto. The cable communication system and all its parts shall be subject to inspection by the building Commissioner, and the Village hereby reserves the right to review each franchisee's construction plans prior to the commencement of construction. The Village shall not, however, be required to make inspections or approve the franchisee's system and plans and specifically disclaims such obligation. Each franchisee shall be solely responsible for taking all steps necessary to assure compliance with such laws and regulations and the safety of its system as installed. 
(B)  Unless otherwise specified in an ordinance granting the franchise, each franchisee shall provide a system designed, established, constructed, operated and maintained as follows: 
1.  To provide 24-hour a day continuous operation; 
2.  To produce for receipt on subscriber's receivers, which are in good working order, either monochrome or color pictures, providing the receiver is color capable, that are free from any significant interference, distortion, or ghosting which would cause any material degradation of video or audio quality, within the limits imposed by the technical state of the art; 
3.  To provide uninterrupted service to all areas of the franchise to which extension of the service is required, unless absolute need or emergency circumstances require interruption; 
4.  To provide the level of service represented to the Village in the application for a franchise; 
5.  Each franchise shall construct, equip and operate its system to provide emergency override alerts whereby the Village or other governmental units or agencies designated by the Village may issue a bulletin on all channels simultaneously. 
(C)  In the case of any major emergency or disaster, each franchisee shall, upon request of the Village, make available its facilities to the Village, or other governmental units or agencies designated by the Village, without cost, for emergency use during such major emergency or disaster. 
(Ord. 2734, 2-22-1982) 
3-34-26. - Tests and performance monitoring. 
(A)  No later than 90 days after any new or substantially rebuilt portion of the system is made available for service to subscribers, technical performance tests shall be conducted by the franchisee to demonstrate full compliance with the technical standards applicable pursuant to subsections 3-34-23(A) and 3-34-25(A) of this chapter. Such tests shall be performed by, or under the supervision of a qualified independent registered professional engineer or an engineer with proper training and experience. A copy of the report shall be submitted to the Village, describing test results, instrumentation, calibration, and text procedures, and the qualifications of the engineer responsible for the test. 
(B)  System monitor test points shall be established at or near the output of the last amplifier in the longest feeder line, at or near trunk line extremities, or at the locations to be specified by the Commission. Such periodic tests shall be made at the test points as shall be required in the exercise of the reasonable discretion of the Commission. 
(C)  At any time after commencement of service to subscribers, the Commission may require additional reasonable tests, including full or partial repeat tests, different test procedures, or tests involving a specific subscriber's terminal at the franchisee's expense to the extent such tests may be performed by the franchisee's employees using its existing facilities and equipment; provided, however, that the Village reserves the right to conduct its own tests upon reasonable notice to the franchisee and if noncompliance is found, the expense thereof shall be borne by the franchisee. The Commission will endeavor to arrange its request for such special tests so as to minimize hardship or inconvenience to grantee or the subscriber. 
(D)  A copy of the annual performance tests report required by the federal communications Commission shall be submitted to the Village within ten days of its completion and may be considered at any annual or special evaluation session. 
(E)  The Village shall have the right to employ qualified consultants if necessary or desirable to assist in the administration of this, or any other section of this Code. 
(Ord. 2734, 2-22-1982) 
3-34-27. - Local office requirement. 
(A)  Unless expressly stated otherwise in an ordinance granting a franchise, each franchisee shall establish, operate and maintain within the corporate limits of the Village a business office and agent for the purpose of receiving inquiries, requests and complaints concerning all aspects of the establishment, construction, maintenance, and operation of the system and the payment of subscribers' service charges. The office shall have a listed telephone and shall be open during reasonable business hours. Further, each franchisee shall employ an operator or maintain a telephone answering service 24 hours per day, each day of the year, to receive subscriber complaints and to dispatch assistance in the case of an emergency or major system malfunction affecting a number of subscribers. 
(Ord. 2734, 2-22-1982) 
3-34-28. - Service, adjustment and complaint procedure. 
(Repealed by Ordinance 5623, October 22, 2007) 
3-34-29. - Street, right-of-way and other easement occupancy. 
(A)  All system facilities erected, constructed or placed by a franchisee within the Village shall be located so as not to interfere with the proper use of streets, alleys, rights of way and other public ways and places, to cause minimal interference with the rights or reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any of said streets, alleys, rights of way or other public ways and places, and to not interfere with existing public utility installations. 
(B)  All service lines shall be underground in those areas of the Village where both public utilities providing telephone or electric service are underground at the time of installation. In areas where telephone or electric utility facilities are aboveground at the time of installation, a franchisee may install its service aboveground. If, subsequently the telephone or electric utility facilities go underground, the affected facilities of the franchisee shall be installed underground simultaneously, at the sole cost of the franchisee. 
(C)  The franchisee shall use existing poles, conduits and other facilities whenever possible, and shall not construct or install any new, different or additional poles, conduits, or other facilities whether on the public way or on privately owned property within the Village, unless prior written approval of the Village, and, if necessary, of the property owner is obtained. Such approval shall not be unreasonably withheld by the Village. No location of any pole, wire holding structure or other facility of the franchisee shall be a vested interest and such poles, structures and facilities shall be removed, relocated or modified by the franchisee at its own expense whenever the Village or other governmental authority determines that the public convenience would be enhanced thereby. Nothing herein or in any ordinance granting a franchise shall be construed to entitle a franchisee to the use of any property other than the public way. 
(D)  The Village may use, for any public or Municipal purpose, any poles or conduits maintained exclusively by or for a franchisee in any street, provided such use by the Village does not interfere with the use by the franchisee. 
(E)  The franchisee shall protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate in the same street or other public place, or remove from the street or other public place, all such activity of the franchisee being herein referred to as "relocation", property of the franchisee when reasonably required by the Village by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street construction, change or establishment of street grade, installation of sewers, drains, water pipes, power lines, tracks, structures or other improvements by public agencies. Such relocation shall be solely at the expense of the franchisee. 
(F)  The franchisee shall not place the cable communication system above or below ground where the same will interfere with any gas, electric, telephone fixtures, water hydrants or other utility, and all such poles, conduits or other fixtures placed in any street shall be so placed as to comply with all ordinances of the Village, or other applicable laws. 
(G)  The franchisee may be required by the Village to permit joint use of its cable communications system located in the street, alleys or other public right of way of the Village of utilities insofar as such joint use may be reasonably practicable and upon payment of reasonable rental therefor; provided that in the absence of agreement regarding such joint use, the Commission shall arbitrate the terms and conditions of such joint use and the compensation to be paid therefor, which arbitration shall be final. 
(H)  The franchisee shall, at the request of any person holding a valid building moving permit issued by the Village, temporarily raise, lower or cut its cables as may be necessary to facilitate the moving of buildings. The direct expense of such temporary raising, lowering or cutting of the cables, including standby time, shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and the company may require payment in advance. Furthermore, the company may require no less than 72 hours' advanced notice to arrange for such temporary changes. 
(I)  The franchisee shall have the authority, except when in conflict with existing village ordinances, to trim any trees upon and overhanging public right of way so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the property of the franchisee, except that at the option of the Village, such trimming may be done by it, or under its supervision and direction at the expense of the franchisee. The franchisee shall notify the Village department of forestry in writing of its general schedule of tree trimming work sufficiently in advance of the franchisee beginning such work to enable the department of forestry to supervise or oversee such activity. 
(J)  The Village shall have the right to install and maintain free of charge upon the property of any franchisee its own equipment, including, but not limited to, a police and fire alarm system and emergency services disaster agency, on the condition that such equipment does not interfere with the franchisee's establishment, construction, operation and maintenance of the system. 
(K)  If a franchisee seeks to construct and maintain its cables and other system facilities on or above public or private property, and an easement for such use has already been granted to telephone company, electric or other public utility, said easement shall, if at all possible, be interpreted or construed so as to grant the franchisee the same rights and privileges as have been granted to the telephone and electric companies and other public utilities. In such easements, the words "telephone" or "telephone company", "electric company" and the like shall be interpreted to include a franchisee granted a cable communications franchise under this chapter. 
(L)  A franchisee shall not be required to extend the cable communications service to areas where the required easements are not reasonably available or obtainable. 
(M)  Whenever, in the case of emergency, it shall become necessary in the judgment of the Village to remove or damage any of the franchisee's facilities, no charge shall be made by the franchisee against the Village for restoration and repair. 
(Ord. 2734, 2-22-1982) 
3-34-30. - Repair and restoration of private and public property. 
(A)  In the event of any disturbance of pavement, sidewalk, driveway, or other surfacing, the franchisee shall, at its own expense, and in the manner required by the Village ordinances or policies, replace and restore all such paving, sidewalk, driveway or other surface of any street, alley, public way or right of way so disturbed. The repair and restoration shall be subject to approval by the Director of Public Works or other designated Village official. 
(B)  In the event of disturbance, on either private or public property, of the land surface, including lawn, plantings and trees, by the franchisee, it shall be restored by the franchisee, at the franchisee's own expense, to substantially its previous condition. 
(C)  In the event of disturbance of any utility service, including telephone, electric, gas, water, storm or sanitary sewer, during the course of construction by the franchisee, the franchisee shall immediately notify the affected utility or the Village for Village operated utilities of such disturbance. Such disturbed utility shall be immediately repaired or restored by the appropriate authority at the expense of the franchisee. With reference to Village utilities, the reasonable value of the time of Village employees and the use of Village equipment shall be included within the cost of repair or restoration. 
(D)  In order to secure any franchisee's faithful performance of its duty to repair and restore disturbed surfaces, landscaping or utilities, as a condition of acceptance of the grant of a franchise hereunder, each franchisee shall deposit with the Management Services Director either a cash deposit or an irrevocable letter of credit in a form approved by the attorney for the Village, in the amount of $20,000.00, to be held by the Village until such time as the franchisee has completed the installation of the extension of its service to all parts of the franchise area, or for at least two years, whichever is longer, at which time the deposit or letter of credit may be reduced to $10,000.00. If the franchisee fails to repair or restore a disturbed surfacing or landscaping or fails to pay the cost of repairing or restoring disturbed utilities services within 30 days from the date of notice to cause such repair, restoration or payment, then the Public Works Director shall direct the Management Services Director to forfeit all or so much of said cash deposit or letter of credit as is required to effect such repair, restoration or payment. Failure of the franchisee to restore such cash deposit or letter of credit to its original amount within ten days after receiving written notice to do so, shall give rise to grounds for revocation of the franchise, pursuant to the franchise revocation procedures set forth in section 3-34-13 of this chapter. 
(E)  The security deposit required herein shall be in lieu of any security deposit required by section 8-1-16 of this Code, or any other provision of this Code and ordinances. 
(Ord. 2734, 2-22-1982) 
3-34-31. - Construction schedule and reports. 
(A)  Upon accepting the grant of franchise, the franchisee shall, within 60 days, file all documents necessary to obtain all necessary federal, state and local licenses, permits and authorizations required for the conduct of its business, it shall submit monthly reports to the Village Clerk on progress in this respect until all such documents are in hand. Failure of the franchisee to pursue all necessary steps to secure the aforementioned authorizations with due diligence shall constitute a substantial violation of this chapter and give rise for grounds of revocation pursuant to section 3-34-13 of this chapter. 
(B)  Franchise applications shall include a schedule for construction of the cable communications system, including the timetable commencement of cable television services to subscribers. Said schedule shall be incorporated into the franchise and shall be enforceable as to the franchisee under the provisions of this chapter. 
(C)  Within 120 days after accepting a franchise, a franchisee shall furnish the Village Clerk a copy of the preliminary engineering drawings and an operating construction schedule setting forth target dates by area for construction activity. The drawings and schedules shall be updated whenever substantial changes become necessary. 
(D)  Every three months after the start of construction, a franchisee shall furnish the Village Clerk a report on progress of construction until complete. The report shall include a map that clearly defines the areas wherein regular subscriber service is available. 
(Ord. 2734, 2-22-1982) 
3-34-32. - Safety requirements. 
(A)  Each franchisee shall at all times employ ordinary care and shall use commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries or nuisances to the public. 
(B)  Each franchisee shall maintain all structures, lines and equipment in, over, under and upon the streets and rights of way wherever located, in a safe condition and in good order and repair, consistent with the Village's Electrical Code now or hereafter in effect. 
(Ord. 2734, 2-22-1982) 
3-34-33. - Protection of privacy. 
(Repealed by Ordinance 5623, October 22, 2007) 
3-34-34. - Restriction of other business activities. 
(A)  The franchisee or any of its employees shall not engage in the sale, leasing or rental of television or radio receivers or in the repair of the same. This provision shall not prohibit the sale, lease or repair of converters, parental discretion locks, if a charge is permitted, or equipment utilized in the operation of the cable communications systems by a franchisee. 
(B)  The franchisee shall not allow its cable or other operations to interfere with television reception of persons not served by the franchisee, nor shall the system interfere with, obstruct or hinder in any manner, the operation of the various utilities serving the residences of the Village. 
(C)  The franchisee is expressly prohibited from requiring the removal or from offering to remove or to provide any inducements for removal of any potential or existing subscriber antennas as a condition for provision of service to the subscriber. 
(Ord. 2734, 2-22-1982) 
3-34-35. - Security for performance. 
(A)  Each franchisee shall furnish with and at the time of its acceptance of the right, privilege and franchise granted to it, a performance bond or letter of credit, in a form approved by the attorney of the Village, in an amount equal to 100 percent of the proposed estimated construction cost of the cable communications system, or in the amount established in the ordinance granting the franchise. When regular subscriber service is available to more than 90 percent of the occupied dwelling units of the parts of the franchise area to which the extension of service is mandatory, as defined in section 3-34-21 of this chapter, then the amount of the performance bond or letter of credit shall be reduced to the amount specified in the ordinance granting the franchise, or if no amount is specified therein, then to the sum of $100,000.00. Said bonds or letters of credit shall be conditioned upon the franchisee faithfully fulfilling and performing in connection with each provision, term and condition of this chapter and of any ordinance granting the franchise, and that in case of any breach, the Village shall be entitled to recover on said performance bond or letter of credit in the amount of any damages, lost benefits to the Village or other public bodies, unfulfilled commitments contained in an ordinance granting a franchise, costs and attorney fees incurred by the Village, both as a body politic and as a representative of the subscribers, proximately resulting from the failure of the franchisee to well and faithfully observe and perform under any and all of the provisions, terms and conditions of this chapter or of any ordinance granting the franchise to the franchisee. Said damages, lost benefits and unfulfilled commitments shall be deemed to include, as a minimum and without limitation, any and all unfulfilled promises or commitments made to the Village as an inducement to the issuance of a franchise, any expenses as may be incurred by the Village as a result of the franchisee's failure to comply with the obligations imposed by this chapter and any ordinance granting the franchise, the present value of all future franchise fees payable to the Village, based upon the most current available data, the cost of refranchising, including any inducements to future franchisees required for their committing to provide comparable service, the cost of removal or abandonment of any property, or other costs and fees which may be in default or which may be incurred by the Village. The Village shall have no obligation to devote the proceeds of such performance bond or letter of credit to the completion, connection, operation or removal of franchisee's cable communications system, all of which shall remain the obligation of the franchisee. The Village's right to recover under the performance bond or letter of credit shall be in addition to any other rights retained by the Village under this chapter or other applicable law, except that any sum recovered by the Village by reason of such bond or letter of credit shall be deducted from any recovery which the Village might have against the franchisee. 
(B)  In addition to the requirements of a performance bond or letter of credit, the franchisee shall maintain at its own expense, and by its acceptance of a franchise be deemed to have agreed that it will maintain on deposit with the Village throughout the term of such franchise a cash deposit or a letter of credit from an Illinois financial institution in an amount of $10,000.00 or such greater or lesser sum as may be specified in the ordinance granting the franchise. The form and content of such cash escrow or letter of credit shall be subject to the approval of the attorney for the Village. The escrow or letter of credit shall at least be conditioned in the same manner as the bond required by subsection (A) of this section and may be drawn on by the Village to compensate itself for any delinquent costs or fees. In particular, but without limitation, such escrow or letter of credit shall be drawn on in the case of any default or failure of the franchisee to pay any fees, penalties, liens or taxes due to the Village, or to compensate the Village for direct costs which are the obligation of the franchisee or to pay any liquidated claims which are the obligation of the franchisee under section 3-34-15 of this chapter. Upon drawing on such escrow or letter of credit for any reason, the Village shall notify the franchisee. The franchisee, shall within 30 days of the receipt of such notification, take all action required to restore the escrow or letter of credit to its original full amount. The rights reserved to the Village with respect to the escrow or letter of credit are in addition to all other rights of the Village, whether reserved by this chapter or the ordinance granting the franchise or authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to such escrow or letter of credit shall affect any other right the Village may have. Resort to the deposit letter of credit shall not be a condition precedent to any cause of action the Village may have against the franchisee, or any cause for revocation of the franchise. 
(Ord. 2734, 2-22-1982) 
3-34-36. - Minimum damages on abandonment or revocation. 
In the event the company fails to perform in accordance with any of the provisions of this chapter by abandoning the franchise or should a revocation for cause of the franchise be declared in accordance with section 3-34-13 of this chapter, then it is understood and agreed that the Village shall be entitled to the sum of $50,000.00 as and for minimum damages, which sum shall be in addition to any sum covered by the security required to be posted by the franchisee in section 3-34-35 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2734, 2-22-1982) 
3-34-37. - Areawide interconnection to other systems. 
(A)  Each franchisee shall seek to enter into interconnection agreements with cable franchisees of adjacent communities for the purpose of sharing locally originated programs enjoying a community of interest with that of the Village. 
(B)  To facilitate interconnection, a franchisee may be required by resolution of the board to provide local origination equipment that is compatible with that used by other cable communications systems servicing adjacent areas. 
(C)  Upon the adoption of a resolution by the board requesting the franchisees to interconnect with adjacent systems, each franchisee shall make a good faith effort to obtain agreements for the sharing of interconnection costs among all interconnecting companies. The Village may extend any time limit to interconnect or may rescind its order to interconnect upon finding that the franchisee has made a good faith effort but has been unable to obtain a reasonable interconnection agreement or that the cost of the interconnection would cause an unreasonable increase in subscriber rates. 
(Ord. 2734, 2-22-1982) 
3-34-38. - Limits on franchisee's recourse. 
(A)  A franchisee shall have no recourse against the Village for any loss, expense or damage resulting from the terms and conditions of this chapter or the franchise or because of the Village's granting or enforcement thereof nor for the Village's failure to have the authority to grant the franchise. The franchisee expressly agrees that upon its acceptance of a grant of franchise it does so relying upon its own investigation and understanding of the power and authority of the Village to grant such franchise. 
(B)  A franchisee, by accepting a grant of franchise, acknowledges that it has not been induced to accept same by any promise, verbal or written, by or on behalf of the Village or by any third person regarding any term or condition of this chapter or the franchise unless that term or condition is expressed herein. The franchisee further pledges that no promise or inducement, oral or written, has been made to any Village employee or official, past or present, regarding receipt of the cable communications franchise other than as contained in the franchise application and ordinance granting the franchise. 
(C)  The decision of the board in their selection of one or more franchisees and their awarding of the franchise(s) shall be final. 
(D)  A franchisee shall not apply for any waivers, exceptions, or declaratory rulings from the Federal Communications Commission or any other federal or state regulatory agency without prior written notice to the Village, and by accepting any grant or franchise agrees to be bound by this provision. 
(Ord. 2734, 2-22-1982) 
3-34-39. - Compliance with local, state and federal jurisdiction. 
(A)  Each franchisee shall establish, construct, operate and maintain its system subject to the reasonable supervision of the Village, and in strict compliance with all applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, or amendments thereto. 
(B)  If at any time the powers of the Village, state or federal government or any agency or official thereof in connection with the system are duly transferred to or later reside in any other board, authority, agency or official, such board, authority, agency or official shall have the power, rights and duties previously vested, in addition to any other which they may acquire by such transfer. 
(C)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, each franchisee shall at all times comply with all state and federal laws, rules and regulations, or any administrative agency thereof; provided, however, if any such ordinance, law, rule or regulation shall require the franchisee to perform any service or do any act in conflict with the provisions and terms of this chapter or of any law, rule or regulation of the Village, then as soon as possible following knowledge thereof the franchisee shall notify the Village of the point of conflict believed to exist. If the Village determines that a material provision of this chapter is affected by such action, the Village shall have the right to modify or amend any of the provisions herein to such reasonable extent that may be necessary to carry out the full intent and purpose of this Code. 
(Ord. 2734, 2-22-1982) 
3-34-40. - Special license. 
Upon such conditions as the board may deem necessary, and notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the board may issue a license, easement or other permit to anyone other than a franchisee to permit that person to traverse any portion of the Village in order to provide service outside the Village. Such license or easement, absent a grant of a franchise in accordance with this chapter, shall not authorize nor permit said person to provide cable communications services of any nature to any home or place of business within the Village, nor to render any service or connect any subscriber within the Village to said person's cable communications system. 
(Ord. 2734, 2-22-1982) 
3-34-41. - Franchise validity. 
(A)  The franchisee agrees, by the acceptance of the franchise, to accept the validity of the terms and conditions of this chapter as they existed on the date of the franchise grant and of the franchise grant ordinance in their entirety and that it will not, at any time, proceed against the Village in any claim or proceeding challenging any term or provision of this chapter or of the franchise as unreasonable, arbitrary, invalid, or void, or that the Village did not have the authority to impose such term or condition. 
(B)  In case of conflict or ambiguity between this chapter, any ordinance granting a franchise, or the franchisee's application, the franchisee agrees that the provisions which provide the greatest benefit to the Village, in the sole discretion of the Village shall prevail. 
(Ord. 2734, 2-22-1982) 
3-34-42. - Failure to enforce franchise. 
The franchisee shall not be excused from compliance with any of the terms and conditions of this chapter or the ordinance granting a franchise by any failure of the Village, upon any one or more occasion, to insist upon the franchisee's performance or to seek franchisee's compliance with any one or more of such terms or conditions. 
(Ord. 2734, 2-22-1982) 
3-34-43. - Rights reserved to the Village. 
The Village hereby expressly reserves the following rights which shall not be deemed to be waived or abrogated by any ordinance granting a franchise pursuant to this chapter: 
(A)  To exercise its governmental powers, now or hereafter, to the full extent that such powers may be vested in or granted to the Village; 
(B)  To exercise the Police powers of the Village by adopting and enforcing general ordinances deemed necessary by the corporate authorities to promote the safety and general welfare of the public, including adopting amendments to this chapter, provided any conflict between the provisions of an ordinance granting a franchise and any other present or future lawful exercise by the Village of its Police powers shall be resolved in favor of the Village's present or future lawful exercise of its Police powers, except that any such exercise that is not of general application within the jurisdiction or which applies exclusively to the franchisee or to cable communications which contains provisions inconsistent with this chapter as it exists on the date of any grant of a franchise or with an ordinance granting a franchise shall prevail only if the Village finds such exercise to be necessary to protect the public health, safety, property or general welfare or such exercise as mandated by subsequent changes in applicable federal or state law, or by court action; and 
(C)  To renegotiate any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter should substantial sections of this chapter or the ordinance granting a franchise be rendered void by the Federal Communications Commission, by subsequent changes in applicable federal or state law, or by court action, so that substantial benefit to the Village is eliminated. In the event that the Village and the franchisee fail to mutually agree on renegotiated terms within six months of any event giving rise to the Village's right to renegotiate, then to the extent permitted by applicable state law either the franchisee or the Village shall be entitled to submit such matter to binding arbitration, pursuant to the uniform arbitration act, as adopted in Illinois and as amended from time to time, provided however that should it be judicially determined that the controversy cannot lawfully be settled by arbitration, then the franchise shall be voidable at the election of the Village. 
(Ord. 2734, 2-22-1982) 
3-34-44. - Nondiscrimination employment requirements. 
The franchisee shall not refuse to hire, nor discharge from employment, nor discriminate against any person regarding compensation, terms, conditions or privileges of employment because of age, sex, race, color, creed or national origin. The franchisee shall take affirmative action to ensure that employees are treated fairly and equally during employment, without regard to their age, sex, race, color, creed or national origin. This condition includes, but is not limited to, the following: recruitment; advertisement; employment interviews; employment; rates of pay; upgrading; transfer; demotion; layoff and/or termination. 
(Ord. 2734, 2-22-1982) 
3-34-45. - Time essence of agreement/force majeure. 
(A)  Whenever any provision of this chapter or an ordinance granting a franchise sets forth any time for any act to be performed by a franchisee, such time shall be deemed of the essence and the franchisee's failure to perform within the time allotted shall, in all cases, be sufficient grounds for the Village to invoke the remedies available under the provisions controlling revocation of the franchise. 
(B)  Whenever a period of time is provided for in this chapter for either the Village or the franchisee to do or perform any act or obligation, neither party shall be liable for any delays due to war, riot, insurrection, rebellion, strike, lockout, unavoidable casualty or damage to personnel, materials or equipment, fire, flood, storm, earthquake, tornado, orders of a court of competent jurisdiction, any act of God, or any cause beyond the control of said party. In such event, said time period shall be extended for the amount of time said party is so delayed. Are act or omission shall not be deemed to be beyond a franchisee's control if committed, omitted or caused by a corporation or other business entity which holds a controlling interest in the franchisee, whether held directly or indirectly. Further, the failure of a franchisee to obtain financing, or to pay any money due from it to any person, including the Village, for whatever reason, shall not be an act or omission which is "beyond the franchisee's control". 
(Ord. 2734, 2-22-1982) 
3-34-46. - Acceptance of franchise grant. 
(A)  The provisions, terms and conditions of this chapter and of any ordinance granting a franchise shall be accepted by a franchisee by written instrument filed with the Village Clerk within 30 days after the passage and approval of the ordinance granting the franchise, unless said time period is extended by the board at its sole discretion. 
(B)  By its acceptance, the franchisee shall be deemed to have declared that it has carefully read the terms and conditions of this chapter and the ordinance granting the franchise, accepts without reservation the obligations imposed by all of those terms and conditions and agrees to abide thereby. 
(C)  The written instrument required by this section shall be in substantially the following form: 
ACCEPTANCE OF GRANT OF FRANCHISE FOR A CABLE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM WITHIN THE VILLAGE OF GLEN ELLYN 
Now, this day of _______, 20___, the franchisee having been advised by the Village of Glen Ellyn, Illinois, that the President and Board of Trustees of said Village have passed and approved an ordinance granting a cable communications franchise to the undersigned on the day of _______, 20___, to enable the undersigned to establish, construct, operate and maintain a cable communications system within the corporate limits of the Village, hereby accepts the grant of said franchise and agrees to comply fully and in all respects with the terms, conditions, provisions and intent of Chapter 34, Title 3 of the Village Code, the ordinance granting said franchise and all other rules, regulations and ordinances of the Village of Glen Ellyn. 
Franchisee 
STATE OF ILLINOIS ) 
)ss: 
COUNTY OF DUPAGE ) 
I, the undersigned, a Notary Public in and for said County and State aforesaid, DO HEREBY CERTIFY THAT _______, and _______, the and _______, of the above identified corporation personally known to me to be the same persons whose names are subscribed to the foregoing instrument, appeared before me this day in person and acknowledged that they signed, sealed and delivered the said instrument as their free and voluntary act and the free and voluntary act of the Franchisee, and that they were fully and duly authorized by the Franchisee to so subscribe, for the uses and purposes therein set forth. 
Given under my hand and notarial seal this day of _______, 20___. 
Notary Public 
My Commission Expires: 
(D)  The acceptance, to be effective, must be accompanied by an initial reimbursement to the Village for costs and expenses incurred in granting the franchise, as set forth herein or in the ordinance granting the franchise, by the security required in sections 3-34-30 and 3-34-35 of this chapter, any certificates of insurance required by section 3-34-15 of this chapter, and any other documents, fees or securities required by the ordinance granting the franchise. 
(Ord. 2734, 2-22-1982) 
3-34-47. - Delegation of powers. 
Any right, power or duty of the Village, the corporate authorities of the Village, the Cable Communications Advisory Commission or any other official of the Village under this chapter may be transferred or delegated by ordinance, resolution, or other appropriate action of the corporate authorities to an appropriate officer, employee, or department of the Village, or any legal authority, including any governmental agency created for the purpose of regulating the operation and development of an intercommunity cable communications system. 
(Ord. 2734, 2-22-1982) 
3-34-48. - Severability. 
If any section, paragraph or provision of this chapter or of any ordinance granting a franchise hereunder, or any portion thereof, is held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction or administrative agency, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof, except as otherwise provided for herein. 
(Ord. 2734, 2-22-1982) 
3-34-49. - Effective date. 
This chapter shall become effective ten days following the passage, approval and publication, as provided by law of the ordinance creating this chapter. 
(Ord. 2734, 2-22-1982) 
Chapter 34A - CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE AND PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE 

3-34A-1. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
CABLE SERVICE: That term as defined in 47 USC section 522(6). 
COMMISSION: The Illinois Commerce Commission. 
GROSS REVENUES: All consideration of any kind or nature, including, without limitation, cash, credits, property, and in-kind contributions received by the holder for the operation of a cable or video system to provide cable service or video service within the holder's cable service or video service area within the Village. 
(A)  Gross revenues shall include the following: 
1.  Recurring charges for cable or video service. 
2.  Event based charges for cable service or video service, including, but not limited to, pay per view and video on demand charges. 
3.  Rental of set top boxes and other cable service or video service equipment. 
4.  Service charges related to the provision of cable service or video service, including, but not limited to, activation, installation, and repair charges. 
5.  Administrative charges related to the provision of cable service or video service, including, but not limited to, service order and service termination charges. 
6.  Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds check charges, and other charges assessed to recover the costs of collecting delinquent payments. 
7.  A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the holder or its affiliates pursuant to compensation arrangements for advertising or for promotion or exhibition of any products or services derived from the operation of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service within the Village. The allocation shall be based on the number of subscribers in the Village divided by the total number of subscribers in relation to the relevant regional or national compensation arrangement. 
8.  Compensation received by the holder that is derived from the operation of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service with respect to commissions that are received by the holder as compensation for promotion or exhibition of any products or services on the holder's network, such as a "home shopping" or similar channel, subject to subsection (A)9. of this definition. 
9.  In the case of a cable service or video service that is bundled or integrated functionally with other services, capabilities, or applications, the portion of the holder's revenue attributable to the other services, capabilities, or applications shall be included in the gross revenue unless the holder can reasonably identify the division or exclusion of the revenue from its books and records that are kept in the regular course of business. 
10.  The service provider fee permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b). 
(B)  Gross revenues do not include any of the following: 
1.  Revenues not actually received, even if billed, such as bad debt, subject to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(c)(1)(vi). 
2.  Refunds, discounts, or other price adjustments that reduce the amount of gross revenues received by the holder of the state issued authorization to the extent the refund, rebate, credit, or discount is attributable to cable service or video service. 
3.  Regardless of whether the services are bundled, packaged, or functionally integrated with cable service or video service, any revenues received from services not classified as cable service or video service, including, without limitation, revenue received from telecommunication services, information services, or the provision of directory or internet advertising, including yellow pages, white pages, banner advertisement, and electronic publishing or any other revenues attributed by the holder to noncable service or nonvideo service in accordance with the holder's books and records and records kept in the regular course of business and any applicable laws, rules, regulations, standards, or orders. 
4.  The sale of cable services or video services for resale in which the purchaser is required to collect the service provider fee from the purchaser's subscribers to the extent the purchaser certifies in writing that it will resell the service within the Village and pay the fee permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b) with respect to the service. 
5.  Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed upon the subscribers or the transaction by a city, state, federal, or any other governmental entity and collected by the holder of the state issued authorization and required to be remitted to the taxing entity, including sales and use taxes. 
6.  Security deposits collected from subscribers. 
7.  Amounts paid by subscribers to "home shopping" or similar vendors for merchandise sold through any home shopping channel offered as part of the cable service or video service. 
(C)  Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be included in the calculation of gross revenues to the extent the treatment of the revenue as revenue of the affiliate rather than the holder has the effect of evading the payment of the fee permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b) which would otherwise be paid by the cable service or video service. 
HOLDER: A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the Commission pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401. 
INCUMBENT CABLE OPERATOR: A person or entity that provided cable services or video services in the Village under a franchise agreement with the Village issued under chapter 34 of this title and pursuant to section 11-42-11 of the Illinois Municipal Code on January 1, 2007. 
PEG: Public, education and governmental. 
PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE: The amount paid under this chapter and 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(d) by the holder to the Village for the service areas within its territorial jurisdiction. 
SERVICE: The provision of "cable service" or "video service" to subscribers and the interaction of subscribers with the person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the Commission pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401. 
SERVICE PROVIDER FEE: The amount paid under this chapter and 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801 by the holder to a village for the service areas within its territorial jurisdiction. 
VIDEO SERVICE: Video programming and subscriber interaction, if any, that is required for the selection or use of such video programming services, and which is provided through wireline facilities located at least in part in the public right of way without regard to delivery technology, including internet protocol technology. This definition does not include any video programming provided by a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47 USC section 332(d) or any video programming provided solely as part of, and via, service that enables users to access content, information, electronic mail, or other services offered over the public internet. 
(Ord. 5622, 10-22-2007) 
3-34A-2. - Cable/video service provider fee imposed. 
(A)  Fee imposed: A service provider fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable service or video service in the Village. 
(B)  Amount of fee: The amount of the service provider fee imposed hereby shall be five percent of the holder's gross revenues. 
(C)  Notice to the Village: Unless the holder has earlier sent notice to the Village pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(a), the holder shall notify the Village at least ten days prior to the date on which the holder begins to offer cable service or video service in the Village. 
(D)  Holder's liability: The holder shall be liable for and pay the service provider fee to the Village. The holder's liability for the fee shall commence on the first day of the calendar month following 30 days after receipt of the ordinance adopting this chapter by the holder. The ordinance adopting this chapter shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the address listed on the holder's application notice sent pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401(b)(6) to the Village. Together with the ordinance adopting this chapter the Village shall send the holder instructions for remitting the payment and statement required hereby. 
(E)  Payment date: The payment of the service provider fee shall be due on a quarterly basis, 45 days after the close of the calendar quarter. If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the fee. 
(F)  Exemption: The fee hereby imposed does not apply to cable service or video service providers that have an existing franchise agreement with the Village issued under chapter 34 of this title in which a fee is paid. 
(G)  Credit for other payments: An incumbent cable operator that elects to terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-301(c) with credit for prepaid franchise fees under that agreement may deduct the amount of such credit from the fees that operator owes under subsection (B) of this section. 
(Ord. 5622, 10-22-2007) 
3-34A-3. - PEG access carriage requirements; PEG access support fee imposed. 
(A)  PEG channels; number; carriage: On the date set forth in subsection 3-34A-2(D) of this chapter, but not earlier than 90 days after the holder sends notice to the Village under 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(a), the holder shall: 1) designate the same amount of capacity on its network to provide for public, education, and government access use, as the incumbent cable operator is required to designate under its franchise terms in effect on January 1, 2007; and 2) retransmit to its subscribers the same number of public, education, and government access channels as the incumbent cable operator was retransmitting to subscribers on January 1, 2007. 
(B)  PEG fee imposed: A PEG access support fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable service or video service in the Village in addition to the fee imposed pursuant to section 3-34A-2 of this chapter. 
(C)  Amount of fee: The amount of the PEG access support fee imposed hereby shall be one percent of the holder's gross revenues or, if greater, the percentage of gross revenues that incumbent cable operators pay to the Village or its designee for PEG access support in the Village. 
(D)  Payment: The holder shall pay the PEG access support fee to the Village or to the entity designated by the Village to manage PEG access. The holder's liability for the PEG access support fee shall commence on the date set forth in subsection 3-34A-2(D) of this chapter. 
(E)  Payment due: The payment of the PEG access support fee shall be due on a quarterly basis, 45 days after the close of the calendar quarter. If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the fee. 
(F)  Credit for other payments: An incumbent cable operator that elects to terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-301(c) shall pay, at the time they would have been due, all monetary payments for PEG access that would have been due during the remaining term of the agreement had it not been terminated pursuant to that section. All payments made by an incumbent cable operator pursuant to the previous sentence may be credited against the fees that that operator owes under subsection (C) of this section. 
(Ord. 5622, 10-22-2007) 
3-34A-4. - Applicable principles. 
All determinations and calculations under this chapter shall be made pursuant to generally accepted accounting principles. 
(Ord. 5622, 10-22-2007) 
3-34A-5. - No impact on other taxes due from holder. 
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to exempt a holder from any tax that is or may later be imposed by the Village, including any tax that is or may later be required to be paid by or through the holder with respect to cable service or video service. A state issued authorization shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the Village's simplified Municipal telecommunications tax or any other tax as it applies to any telephone service provided by the holder. A state issued authorization shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the Village's 911 or E911 fees, taxes or charges. 
(Ord. 5622, 10-22-2007) 
3-34A-6. - Audits of cable/video service provider. 
(A)  Audit requirement: The requirements provided in subsection 3-34-17(C) of this title to submit an annual audited financial statement of that part of its books and records necessary to show how it calculated the fees herein imposed shall apply to the holder's books and records. In addition, the audit requirements shall be those described by the local government taxpayers' bill of rights act, 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 45/1 et seq. No acceptance of amounts remitted should be construed as an accord that the amounts are correct. 
(B)  Additional payments: Any additional amount due after an audit shall be paid within 30 days after the Village's submission of an invoice for the sum. 
(Ord. 5622, 10-22-2007) 
3-34A-7. - Late fees/payments. 
All fees and payments which are past due shall be subject to a five percent late payment penalty. All statements required to be filed under this chapter which are filed late shall be subject to a late filing penalty equal to five percent of the fee remitted as described in such statement. If no statement is filed before the issuance of a notice of fee deficiency or of fee liability to the holder, a failure to file penalty against the holder shall be due in an amount equal to 25 percent of the fee remitted as described in such statement. A late filing and late filing penalty may not apply if a failure to file penalty is imposed by the unit of local government. 
(Ord. 5622, 10-22-2007) 
Chapter 35 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE 

3-35-1. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
GROSS CHARGES: The amount paid to a telecommunications retailer for the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications within the Village and for all services rendered in connection therewith valued in money whether paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services, and property of every kind or nature, and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the cost of such telecommunications, the cost of the materials used, labor or service costs, or any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is extended, the amount thereof shall be included only as and when paid. "Gross charges" for private line service shall include charges imposed at each channel point within the Village, charges for the channel mileage between each channel point within the Village, and charges for that portion of the interstate interoffice channel provided within the Village. However, "gross charges" shall not include: 
(A)  Any amounts added to a purchaser's bill because of a charge made under: 
1.  The fee imposed by this chapter; 
2.  Additional charges added to a purchaser's bill under 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/9-221 or 5/9-222; 
3.  Amounts collected under 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-17; 
4.  The tax imposed by the telecommunications excise tax act; 
5.  911 surcharges; or 
6.  The tax imposed by section 4251 of the internal revenue code. 
(B)  Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside the Village. 
(C)  Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of data or information or subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or information intended to change its form or content. Such equipment includes, but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data processing equipment, tabulating equipment, or accounting equipment and also includes the usage of computers under a time sharing agreement. 
(D)  Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is leased or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such charges are disaggregated and separately identified from other charges. 
(E)  Charges to business enterprises certified under 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/9-222.1 to the extent of such exemption and during the period of time specified by the Village. 
(F)  Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries and only to the extent that the charges between the parent corporation and wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense allocation between the corporations and not the generation of profit other than a regulatory required profit for the corporation rendering such services. 
(G)  Bad debts. (Bad debt means any portion of a debt that is related to a sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as determined under applicable federal income tax standards; if the portion of the debt deemed to be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that portion during the reporting period in which the payment is made.) 
(H)  Charges paid by inserting coins in coin operated telecommunications devices. 
(I)  Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided to the Village. 
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY: Any Municipal street, alley, water, or public right of way dedicated or commonly used for utility purposes, including utility easements wherein the Village has acquired the right and authority to locate or permit the location of utilities consistent with telecommunications facilities. Public right of way shall not include any real or personal village property that is not specifically described in the previous sentence and shall not include village buildings and other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in the public right of way. 
RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE (Or Any Like Term): 
Means and includes any retailer having or maintaining within the State of Illinois, directly or by a subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities, transmission facilities, sales office, warehouse, or other place of business, or any agent or other representative operating within this state under the authority of the retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place of business or agent or other representative is located here permanently or temporarily or whether such retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business in this state. 
SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying, or furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not for sale. 
SERVICE ADDRESS: The location of telecommunications equipment from which telecommunications services are originated or at which telecommunications services are received. If this is not a defined location, as in the case of wireless telecommunications, paging systems, maritime systems, air to ground systems, and the like, service address shall mean the location of the customer's primary use of the telecommunications equipment as defined by the location in Illinois where bills are sent. 
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: Includes, but is not limited to, messages or information transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer exchange services, private line services, specialized mobile radio services, or any other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or similar facilities. Unless the context clearly requires otherwise, telecommunications shall also include "wireless telecommunications" as hereinafter defined. Telecommunications shall not include value added services in which computer processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code, and protocol of the information for purposes other than transmission. Telecommunications shall not include purchase of telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a component part of the service provided by him or her to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the end to end communications. Retailer access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of intercompany facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent provision and used as a component of, or integrated into, end to end telecommunications service shall not be included in gross charges as sales for resale. 
Telecommunications shall not include the provision of cable services through a cable system as defined in the cable communications act of 1984 (47 USC section 521 and following) as now or hereafter amended or cable or other programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to the Village through an open video system as defined in the rules of the federal communications commission (47 CDF 76.1550 and following) as now or hereafter amended. 
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER: 
(A)  Any telecommunications retailer; or 
(B)  Any person that is not a telecommunications retailer that installs, owns, operates, or controls equipment in the public right of way that is used or designed to be used to transmit telecommunications in any form. 
TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER OR RETAILER OR CARRIER: Means and includes every person engaged in the business of making sales of "telecommunications" at retail as defined in this chapter. The Village may, in its discretion, upon application, authorize the collection of the fee hereby imposed by any retailer not maintaining a place of business within this state, who, to the satisfaction of the Village, furnishes adequate security to ensure collection and payment of the fee. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such retailer to pay the fee upon all of the gross charges for telecommunications in the same manner and subject to the same requirements as a retailer maintaining a place of business within the Village. 
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS: Includes cellular mobile telephone services, personal wireless services as defined in chapter 704(C) of the telecommunications act of 1996 (public law 104-104), 42 USC section 332(c)(7), as now or hereafter amended, including all commercial mobile radio services and paging services. 
(Ord. 4526, 9-22-1997) 
3-35-2. - Registration of telecommunications providers. 
(A)  Every "telecommunications provider" as defined by this chapter shall register with the Village within 30 days after the effective date hereof or becoming a telecommunications provider, whichever is later, on a form to be provided by the Village; provided, however, that any telecommunications retailer that has filed a return pursuant to subsection 3-35-4(C) of this chapter shall be deemed to have registered in accordance with this chapter. 
(B)  Every telecommunications provider who has registered with the Village pursuant to subsection (A) of this section has an affirmative duty to submit an amended registration form or current return as required by subsection 3-35-4(C) of this chapter, as the case may be, to the Village within 30 days from the date of the occurrence of any changes in the information provided by the telecommunications provider in the registration form or most recent return on file with the Village. 
(Ord. 4526, 9-22-1997) 
3-35-3. - Municipal telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee. 
(A)  A Village telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee is hereby imposed upon all telecommunications retailers in the amount of one percent of all gross charges charged by the telecommunications retailer to service addresses within the Village for telecommunications originating or received in the Village. 
(B)  Upon the effective date of the infrastructure maintenance fee authorized in this chapter, the Village infrastructure maintenance fee authorized hereunder shall be the only fee or compensation for the use of all public rights of way within the Village by telecommunications retailers. Imposition of the infrastructure maintenance fee provided under this chapter does not, however, serve as a limitation on the levying of any taxes or imposition of any fees otherwise authorized by law. 
(C)  The Village telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee authorized by this chapter shall be collected, enforced, and administered as set forth in section 3-35-4 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 4526, 9-22-1997) 
3-35-4. - Collection, enforcement, and administration of telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fees. 
(A)  A telecommunications retailer shall charge to and collect from each customer an additional charge in an amount equal to the Village infrastructure maintenance fee attributable to that customer's service address. 
(B)  The infrastructure maintenance fee shall be remitted by the telecommunications retailer to the Village not later than the last day of the month subsequent to the month in which a bill is issued to the customer; provided, however, that the telecommunications retailer may retain an amount not to exceed two percent of the Village infrastructure maintenance fee collected by it to reimburse itself for expenses incurred in accounting for and remitting the fee. 
(C)  Remittance of the infrastructure maintenance fee to the Village shall be accompanied by a return, in a form to be prescribed by the Management Services Director, which shall contain such information as the Management Services Director may reasonably require. 
(D)  Any infrastructure maintenance fee required to be collected pursuant to this chapter and any such infrastructure maintenance fee collected by such telecommunications retailer shall constitute a debt owed by the telecommunications retailer to the Village. The charge imposed under subsection (A) of this section by the telecommunications retailer pursuant to this chapter shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the telecommunications retailer who provides such services until paid and, if unpaid, is recoverable at law in the same manner as the original charge for such services. 
(E)  If it shall appear that an amount of infrastructure maintenance fee has been paid that was not due under the provisions of this chapter, whether as a result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any infrastructure maintenance fee due, or to become due, under this chapter, from the telecommunications retailer who made the erroneous payment; provided, however, the Management Services Director may request, and telecommunications retailer shall provide, written substantiation for such credit. However, no claim for such credit may be made more than three years after the date of the erroneous payment unless: 
1.  The credit is used only to offset a claim of underpayment made by the Village within the applicable statutory period of limitations; and 
2.  The credit derives from an overpayment made by the same telecommunications retailer during the applicable statutory period of limitations. 
(F)  Amounts paid under this chapter by telecommunications retailers shall not be included in the tax base under any of the following acts as described immediately below: 
1.  Gross charges for purposes of the telecommunications excise tax act; 
2.  Gross receipts for purposes of the Municipal utility tax as prescribed in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-2; 
3.  Gross charges for purposes of the Municipal telecommunications tax as prescribed in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-17; and 
4.  Gross revenue for purposes of the tax on annual gross revenue of public utilities prescribed in 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/2-202. 
(G)  The Village shall have the right, in its discretion, to audit the books and records of all telecommunications retailers subject to this chapter to determine whether the telecommunications retailer has properly accounted to the Village for the Village infrastructure maintenance fee. Any underpayment of the amount of the Village infrastructure maintenance fee due to the Village by the telecommunications retailer shall be paid to the Village plus five percent of the total amount of the underpayment determined in an audit, plus any costs incurred by the Village in conducting the audit, in an amount not to exceed five percent of the total amount of the underpayment determined in an audit. Said sum shall be paid to the Village within 21 days after the date of issuance of an invoice for same. 
(H)  The Management Services Director may promulgate such further or additional regulations concerning the administration and enforcement of this chapter, consistent with its provisions, as may be required from time to time and shall notify all telecommunications retailers that are registered pursuant to section 3-35-2 of this chapter of such regulations. 
(Ord. 4526, 9-22-1997) 
3-35-5. - Compliance with other laws. 
Nothing in this chapter shall excuse any person or entity from obligations imposed under any law, including, but not limited to: 
(A)  Generally applicable taxes; 
(B)  Standards for construction on, over, under, or within, use of or repair of the public rights of way, including standards relating to freestanding towers and other structures upon the public rights of way, as provided; 
(C)  Any liability imposed for the failure to comply with such generally applicable taxes or standards governing construction on, over, under, or within, use of or repair of the public rights of way; and 
(D)  Compliance with any ordinance or provision of this Code concerning uses or structures not located on, over, or within the right of way. 
(Ord. 4526, 9-22-1997) 
3-35-6. - Existing franchises and licenses. 
Any franchise, license, or similar agreements between telecommunications retailers and the Village entered into before the effective date hereof regarding the use of public rights of way shall remain valid according to and for their stated terms except for any fees, charges or other compensation to the extent waived. 
(Ord. 4526, 9-22-1997) 
3-35-7. - Penalties. 
Any telecommunications provider who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to fine in accordance with the general penalty provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. 4526, 9-22-1997) 
3-35-8. - Enforcement. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional or further remedies that the Village may have for enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. 4526, 9-22-1997) 
3-35-9. - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof. 
(Ord. 4526, 9-22-1997) 
3-35-10. - Conflict. 
This chapter supersedes all chapters or parts of chapters adopted prior hereto which are in conflict herewith, to the extent of such conflict. 
(Ord. 4526, 9-22-1997) 
Chapter 36 - RAFFLES 

3-36-1. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning: 
APPLICANT: Any organization which applies for a license to conduct a raffle under this chapter. 
BUSINESS: A voluntary organization composed of individuals and businesses who have joined together to advance the commercial, financial, industrial, and civic interests of a community. 
CHARITABLE: An organization or institution organized and operated to benefit an indefinite number of the public. The service rendered to those eligible for benefits must also confer some benefit on the public in general. 
EDUCATIONAL: An organization or institution organized and operated to provide systematic instruction in useful branches of learning by methods common to schools and institutions of learning which compare favorably in their scope and intensity with course of study presented in tax supported schools. 
FRATERNAL: An organization of persons having a common interest, the primary interest of which is to both promote the welfare of its members and to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to lessen the burdens of government of caring for those who otherwise would be cared for by the government. 
LABOR: An organization composed of workers organized with the objective of betterment of the conditions of those engaged in such pursuit and the development of a higher degree of efficiency in their respective occupations. 
NET PROCEEDS: The gross receipts from the conduct of raffles, less reasonable sums expended for prizes, local license fees, and other reasonable operating expenses incurred as a result of operating a raffle. 
NONPROFIT: An organization or institution organized and conducted on a not for profit basis with no personal profit inuring to anyone as a result of the operation. 
RAFFLE: A form of lottery, as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/28-2, conducted by an organization licensed under this chapter in which: 
(A)  The player pays or agrees to pay something of value for a chance, represented and differentiated by a number or by a combination of numbers or by some other medium, one or more of which chances are to be designated the winning chance; 
(B)  A winning chance is to be determined through a drawing or by some other method based on an element of chance by an act or set of acts on the part of persons conducting or connected with the lottery, except that the winning chance shall not be determined by the outcome of a publicly exhibited sporting contest. 
RELIGIOUS: Any church, congregation, society, or organization founded for the purpose of religious worship. 
VETERANS: An organization or association comprised of members of which substantially all are individuals who are veterans or spouses, widows, or widowers of veterans, the primary purpose of which is to promote the welfare of its members and to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to confer a public benefit. 
(Ord. 5217, 12-15-2003) 
3-36-2. - License. 
(A)  Raffles conducted in Village: Raffles conducted within the Village are restricted as follows: 
1.  No person or entity shall conduct a raffle without having first obtained a license therefor pursuant to this chapter. 
2.  The application for a license must specify and the applicant shall state: the area or areas within the licensing authority in which raffle chances will be sold or issued, the time period during which raffle chances will be sold or issued, and the time of determination of winning chances and the location or locations at which winning chances will be determined. 
3.  The license application shall contain a sworn statement attesting to the not for profit character of the applicant, signed by an authorized officer. 
4.  The application for license shall be prepared in accordance with the form provided by the Village Manager. 
5.  The issuance of a license authorizes the applicant to conduct a raffle as specified in the license and to be conducted in accordance with this chapter. 
(B)  Qualification of licensee: 
1.  Eligible organizations: Licenses shall be issued only to bona fide religious, charitable, labor, business, fraternal, education, or veterans' organizations that operate without profit to their members. All applicants must have been in existence continuously for a period of five years immediately before making the application and during the entire five-year period had a bona fide membership engaged in carrying out its objectives. In the case of a nonprofit fundraising organization, the licensing authority determines it is organized for the sole purpose of providing financial assistance to an identified individual or group of individuals suffering extreme financial hardship as the result of an illness, disability, occurrence, or disaster. 
2.  Ineligibility: Any organization is ineligible for a license under this chapter if the organization has an officer, administrator, or person designated as responsible for conducting the raffle who: 
(a)  Has been convicted of a felony; 
(b)  Is or has been a professional gambler or gambling promoter; 
(c)  Is a person not of good moral character; or 
(d)  Is a person who has a proprietary, equitable, financial, or credit interest in the organization or the operation of the raffle. 
(C)  Classification of raffles and fees: 
1.  No license shall be granted to an applicant unless the designated fees are paid at the time the license application is submitted to the Village. License fees once paid are not refundable. 
2.  Raffle licenses shall be designated as class A and class B. 
(a)  A class A raffle is conducted on a single identifiable date. If the aggregate retail value of all prizes to be awarded in the raffle is less than $50,000.00, the fee shall be $50.00. If the aggregate retail value of all prizes awarded in conjunction with the raffle is $50,000.00 or above, the fee shall be $100.00. 
(b)  A class B raffle grants to the licensee the right to conduct a series of solicitations and drawings over a stated period of time in which chances are sold and prizes awarded at each drawing. The fee for a class B license shall be $100.00. 
(D)  Prohibitions: A licensee shall not be permitted to conduct a raffle, and no license shall be awarded in the following circumstances: 
1.  In which the aggregate retail value of all prizes to be awarded, whether cash or merchandise, is anticipated to exceed $100,000.00; 
2.  In which the maximum retail value of any prize to be awarded to a single winner exceeds $100,000.00; 
3.  In which the maximum price charged for a raffle ticket or chance exceeds $1,000.00; or 
4.  In which the number of days during which raffle chances or tickets are solicited for sale and/or sold is greater than 180 days. 
(Ord. 5217, 12-15-2003) 
3-36-3. - Conduct and administration. 
(A)  Operation restrictions: 
1.  The conducting of raffles is subject to the following restrictions: 
(a)  The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be exclusively devoted to the lawful purpose of the organization permitted to conduct that game. 
(b)  No person except a bona fide member of the sponsoring organization may participate in the management or operation of the raffle. 
(c)  No person may receive any remuneration or profit for participating in the management or operation of the raffle. 
(d)  A licensee may rent premises on which to determine the winning chance or chances in a raffle only from an organization that is also licensed under this chapter. 
(e)  Raffle chances may be sold or issued only within the area specified on the license, and winning chances may be determined only at the locations specified on the license. 
(f)  No person under the age of 18 years may participate in the conducting of raffles or chances. A person under the age of 18 years may be within the area where winning chances are being determined only when accompanied by his parent or guardian. 
2.  If a lessor rents premises where a winning chance or chances on a raffle are determined, the lessor shall not be criminally liable if the person who uses the premises for the determining of winning chances does not hold a license issued by the governing body of any County or Municipality under the provisions of this chapter. 
(B)  Raffle manager, bond: All operation and conduct of raffles shall be under the supervision of a single raffle manager designated by the organization. The raffle manager shall give a fidelity bond in the sum of $5,000.00 in favor of the organization, conditioned upon his honesty in the performance of his duties. Terms of the bond shall provide that notice shall be given in writing to the licensing authority not less than 30 days prior to its cancellation. The Village Manager may waive this bond requirement by including a waiver provision in the license indicating such waiver shall be granted only by unanimous vote of the members of the licensed organization. 
(C)  Records to be kept: 
1.  Each organization licensed to conduct raffles and chances shall keep records of its gross receipts, expenses, and net proceeds for each single gathering or occasion at which winning chances are determined. All deductions from gross receipts for each single gathering or occasion shall be documented with receipts or other records indicating the amount, a description of the purchased item or service, or other reason for the deduction, and the recipient. The distribution of net proceeds shall be itemized as to payee, purpose, amount, and date of payment. 
2.  Gross receipts from the operation of raffle programs shall be segregated from other revenues of the organization, including bingo gross receipts, if bingo games also are conducted by the same nonprofit organization, pursuant to license therefor issued by the state Department of Revenue, and placed in a separate account. Each organization shall have separate records of its raffles. The person who accounts for gross receipts, expenses, and net proceeds from the operation of raffles shall not be the same person who accounts for other revenues of the organization. 
3.  Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall report promptly after the conclusion of each raffle to its membership and to the licensing local unit of government its gross receipts, expenses, and net proceeds from raffles and the distribution of net proceeds itemized as required in this section. 
4.  Records required by this section shall be preserved for three years in the office of the Village Clerk, and organizations shall make available their records relating to operation of raffles for public inspection at reasonable times and places. 
(D)  Gambling prohibited: Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to authorize the conducting or operating of any gambling scheme, enterprise, activity, or device other than raffles as provided for in this chapter. 
(E)  Penalty: 
1.  Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than $250.00 or more than $1,000.00 for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
2.  Violation of any provision of this chapter is a class C misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 5217, 12-15-2003; amd. Ord. 5233, 2-23-2004) 
Chapter 37 - CABLE AND VIDEO CUSTOMER PROTECTION LAW 

3-37-1. - Customer service and privacy protection law. 
(A)  Adoption: The regulations of 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/70-501 are hereby adopted by reference and made applicable to the cable or video providers offering services within the Village's boundaries. 
(B)  Amendments: Any mandatory amendment to the cable and video customer protection law that becomes effective after the effective date of this chapter shall be incorporated into this chapter by reference and shall be applicable to cable or video providers offering services within the Village's boundaries. However, any amendment that makes its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be incorporated into this chapter by reference without formal action by the corporate authorities of the Village. 
(Ord. 5623, 10-22-2007) 
3-37-2. - Enforcement. 
The Village does hereby pursuant to law declare its intent to enforce all of the customer service and privacy protection standards of the cable and video protection law. 
(Ord. 5623, 10-22-2007) 
3-37-3. - Penalties. 
The Village, pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/70-501(r)(1), does hereby declare that for any material breach of the standards and requirements of the cable and video customer protection law, as incorporated by reference in this chapter, a cable or video provider shall be subject to monetary penalties which shall not exceed $750.00 for each day of the material breach, and shall not exceed $25,000.00 for each occurrence of a material breach per customer. Such penalties shall be in addition to the penalties provided in the law and shall not represent the Village's exclusive remedy for any material breach. All monetary penalties shall apply on a competitively neutral basis. 
(A)  "Material breach" means any substantial failure of a cable or video provider to comply with service quality and other standards specified in any provision of the law. 
(B)  The Village shall give the cable or video provider written notice of any alleged material breaches of the law and allow such provider at least 30 days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach. 
(C)  A material breach, for the purposes of assuming penalties, shall be deemed to occur for each day that a material breach has not been remedied by the cable or video service provider after the notice in subsection (B) of this section. 
(D)  The Board of Trustees hereby delegates authority to levy penalties to the same officer or employee to whom powers are delegated under section 3-34-47 of this title; and in the absence of such person to the Village Administrator. 
(E)  Any decision by the person identified in subsection (D) of this section to levy penalties may be appealed to the Board of Trustees, which shall conduct a hearing on the alleged material breach and penalties levied therefor within 21 days following receipt of the cable or video provider's request for an appeal. 
(Ord. 5623, 10-22-2007) 
3-37-4. - Customer credits. 
The Village hereby adopts and incorporates by reference the schedule of customer credits for violations of the law provided for in the provisions of 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/70-501(s). Those credits shall be applied on the statement issued to the customer for the next billing cycle following the violation or following the discovery of the violation. The cable or video provider is responsible for proactively providing the credits and the customer is under no obligation to request the credit. 
(Ord. 5623, 10-22-2007) 
Chapter 38 - ELECTRICITY AGGREGATION PROGRAM 

3-38-1. - Purpose. 
The provisions of this chapter are designed to describe the manner in which the Village shall implement an opt out electricity aggregation program authorized by section 1-92 of the Illinois power agency act. 
(Ord. 6087, 11-13-2012) 
3-38-2. - Findings. 
The President and Board of Trustees hereby make the following findings of fact: 
(A)  Section 1-92 of the Illinois power agency act, 20 Illinois Compiled Statutes 3855/1-1 et seq. (the "act"), authorizes municipalities to aggregate the electric loads of residential and small commercial retail customers and to then solicit bids, select a retail electric supplier, and enter into a supply agreement to facilitate the purchase of electricity and related services and equipment on behalf of its participating residents and small businesses (collectively, an "aggregation program"). 
(B)  At the November 6, 2012 general election, electors of the Village of Glen Ellyn approved a referendum authorizing the Village to adopt an "opt out" aggregation program. 
(C)  The Village held public hearings on the proposed plan of operation and governance (the "plan") for the aggregation program on October 8, 2012, and October 22, 2012, notice of which was given prior to the first hearing once a week for two consecutive weeks in the Glen Ellyn Review, a newspaper of general circulation in the Village. 
(D)  On November 13, 2012, the Village adopted the plan of operation and governance for the electricity aggregation program herein described, a copy of which shall be available for public inspection and copying at the Village hall. 
(Ord. 6087, 11-13-2012) 
3-38-3. - Definitions. 
The following words and terms, wherever they occur in this chapter, shall be defined as follows: 
ACT: The Illinois power agency act, 20 Illinois Compiled Statutes 3855/1-92, as may be amended from time to time. 
ALTERNATIVE RETAIL ELECTRIC SUPPLIER OR ARES: An entity certified by the Illinois Commerce Commission ("ICC") to offer electric power or energy for sale, lease or in exchange for other value received to one or more retail customers, or that engages in the delivery or furnishing of electric power or energy to such retail customers, and shall include, without limitation, resellers, aggregators and power marketers but shall not include the incumbent electric utility. For purposes of this chapter, the definition of alternative retail electric supplier is more completely set forth in 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/16-102. 
CUSTOMER: Recipients of residential and small commercial retail electric loads as provided in the act. 
ELECTRICITY AGGREGATION PROGRAM: A program pursuant to the act for the aggregation of residential and small commercial retail electric loads located within the corporate limits of the Village that provides customers with the opportunity to opt out of participating in that program as provided in the act. 
PLAN OF OPERATION AND GOVERNANCE: The plan of operation and governance adopted by the Village on November 13, 2012, or as thereafter amended, which describes: 
(a)  How the aggregation program will provide for universal access to all applicable residential customers and equitable treatment of applicable residential customers; 
(b)  How demand management and energy efficiency services will be provided to each class of customers; and 
(c)  How the aggregation program will meet any other legal requirements concerning aggregated electric service. 
(Ord. 6087, 11-13-2012) 
3-38-4. - Electricity aggregation program adopted. 
(A)  The Village is authorized and hereby adopts an electricity aggregation program in a manner not inconsistent with the act. 
(B)  The Village is authorized to exercise its power to operate an electricity aggregation program jointly with two or more other municipalities or counties. 
(C)  The electricity aggregation program shall operate in the manner prescribed in the plan of operation and governance, as amended from time to time. 
(D)  Except for those customers who opt out of the electricity aggregation program pursuant to the plan of operation and governance and the act, the electricity aggregation program shall automatically apply to each person owning, occupying, controlling, or using an electrical load center proposed to be aggregated in the corporate limits of the Village. 
(Ord. 6087, 11-13-2012) 
3-38-5. - Severability. 
In the event any provision or application of this chapter is found unenforceable by a court of competent jurisdiction, such finding shall not affect any other application or the remaining provisions of this chapter to the maximum extent permitted by law. 
(Ord. 6087, 11-13-2012) 
Chapter 39 - SPECIAL EVENTS 

3-39-1. - Purpose. 
The provisions of this chapter are designed to describe the manner in which the Village shall implement a special event permit application process for requesting waivers and/or variations to this Code for a special promotional or community event. 
(Ord. 6128, 4-22-2013) 
3-39-2. - Definition. 
The term "special event" as used herein shall include any commercial or nonresidential public event that will take place on public or private property or which will take place in public rights of way (i.e., street, sidewalk, parking lot), or that will be held on public property where liquor is to be served fall under the scope of this policy. Generally, indoor private events (i.e., invitation only) are exempt from the application process, but are required to apply for all applicable liquor licenses. 
(Ord. 6128, 4-22-2013) 
3-39-3. - Special event permit required. 
No special event or open air meeting shall be allowed on any public way, nor shall any open air public meeting be held in or upon any public way, or upon any ground abutting upon any public way, until a permit is obtained from the Village. 
Application to conduct such special event, or open air meeting shall be made in writing to the Village at least 60 days prior to the event by the person or persons in charge or control thereof or responsible therefor; and such permit application shall specify the place at which it is desired to hold such event or meeting, the purpose thereof, the name of the person or society in control thereof, the time at which such event or meeting is to be held, and the probable duration thereof. Upon such application being made, the Village shall investigate, or cause to be investigated, the person or society making such application and the truth of the statements therein. 
(Ord. 6128, 4-22-2013) 
3-39-4. - Fees. 
All fees and charges for licenses or permits shall be paid in accordance with section 4-1-4 of this Code at the time application is made. 
(Ord. 6128, 4-22-2013) 
3-39-5. - Investigations. 
Upon receipt of an application for a permit, where the provisions of this Code necessitate an inspection or investigation before issuance, the same shall be referred to the proper official within ten days to make the investigation. 
The official charged with the duty of making the investigation or inspection shall make a report thereon within ten days after investigation of the application. 
(Ord. 6128, 4-22-2013) 
3-39-6. - Special event permit approval. 
Special event permit approval is subject to the following provisions: 
(A)  If the Village Board has previously granted waivers and/or variations to this Code for a special promotional or community event, the Village Manager or his/her designee, shall have the authority to administratively approve such subsequent events provided that the event is in substantial conformance with the event for which the previous waivers and/or variations were granted, and previous waivers and/or variations were granted within three years of the date of the proposed event. Commercial uses located on property comprised of six and one-half acres or more and on which no other commercial uses are located shall receive no more than four administrative waivers per calendar year for events. All other commercial uses shall be allotted no more than two administrative waivers per calendar year for events. 
(B)  The Village shall take final action upon a completed application for a special event permit as soon as practicable, but no later than 60 days from the item being placed upon the agenda, provided however mutual consent may serve as a ground for continuance. 
(C)  The Village is not required to take final action on an incomplete or untimely special event permit application. 
(D)  Final action on a completed special event permit application shall consist of one of the following: 
1.  Issuance of a special event permit in accordance with the terms of application after public hearing and by way of resolution or motion; 
2.  Administrative approval by the Village Manager or his/her designee in accordance to this section; 
3.  Denial of the special event permit applications by the Village Board, with the reason(s) for denial stated in the resolution or motion. 
(Ord. 6128, 4-22-2013; Ord. 6425, 7-11-2016) 
3-39-7. - Signatures. 
Each permit issued shall bear the signature of the Village Manager or his/her designee, or such other signatures as may be directed by the Village Board of Trustees only after such Village Code waiver and/or variation has been approved. 
(Ord. 6128, 4-22-2013) 
3-39-8. - Severability. 
In the event any provision or application of this chapter is found unenforceable by a court of competent jurisdiction, such finding shall not affect any other application or the remaining provisions of this chapter to the maximum extent permitted by law. 
(Ord. 6128, 4-22-2013) 
Chapter 40 - HOTELS 

3-40-1. - Intent and purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the health, safety and welfare of the hotel occupants, Village residents, and the general public by providing for the licensing to own and operate hotel properties, buildings, and rental units, and to require the periodic inspection of the premises to ensure it meets the minimum standards established by this chapter, this Code, Glen Ellyn ordinances, the DuPage County code of ordinances, and state and federal laws, rules, and regulations pertaining to hotel properties. 
(Ord. 6163, 9-9-2013) 
3-40-2. - Definitions. 
COOKING FACILITIES: A kitchen within a rental unit that includes a sink fixture, cooking appliance, and refrigeration appliance and meets the minimum area and workspace requirements specified for a dwelling unit in the ICC International Building Code currently adopted by the Village. 
EXTENDED STAY RENTAL UNIT: A space within a hotel intended and designed for temporary occupancy containing a living and sleeping area, and sanitation and cooking facilities and the rental agreement includes a rental rate generally for five days or longer. 
HOTEL: Any hotel, motel, inn, or other commercial building containing transient and extended stay units rented for a limited period and designed, intended, or used for temporary living and sleeping purposes and provided with housekeeping services, utilities and on site parking. 
HOTEL LICENSE: A document issued, and annually renewed, by the Village of Glen Ellyn that permits the operation of a hotel within the Village limits. 
MANAGER AND/OR OPERATOR: Any person, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, receiver, sublessee, franchisee, mortgagee, or agent, who manages the business operations of any hotel and may assign units, offer and collect rents, control access to units, directs employees, or oversees security and maintenance of the property. 
OWNER: Any person, agent, firm, or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property, or holding title to the property, or otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian, executor or administrator of the estate of such person. The owner shall be responsible for the conduct of the Manager and all employees while on the premises, and any act or omission of the manager or any employee constituting a violation of the provisions of this chapter or other applicable laws shall be deemed the act or omission of the owner for the purpose of determining whether the hotel license shall be renewed, suspended, or revoked. 
SANITATION FACILITIES: A bathroom within a rental unit that includes a water closet, lavatory, and bathtub or shower that meets the minimum requirements specified in the ICC International Residential Code currently adopted by the Village. 
TRANSIENT RENTAL UNIT: A space intended and designed for temporary occupancy containing a living and sleeping area and sanitation facilities and the rental agreement includes a daily occupancy and rental rate. 
(Ord. 6163, 9-9-2013) 
3-40-3. - License required. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful to rent transient or extended stay rental units for occupancy and operate a hotel within the Village limits without a hotel license issued by the Village of Glen Ellyn to the current property owner. A separate license shall be required for each hotel property with no exception for hotel properties under common ownership or management. The following properties are exempt from these license requirements: 
1.  Condominiums as declared under the Illinois Condominium Act. 
2.  Apartments generally designed and intended for a continuous occupancy of six months or more, where actual unit utility costs are charged to the occupant and where unit housekeeping services are not provided. 
3.  Assisted living homes, nursing homes, long term care facilities, convalescent homes, or other facilities providing care to persons with mental health or developmental disabilities and licensed under state law. 
4.  Properties owned and managed by governmental housing authorities. 
5.  Single-family and two-family (duplex) dwellings and townhomes. 
(B)  All existing hotels in the Village of Glen Ellyn that are currently in operation are required to submit an application for a hotel license to the Village of Glen Ellyn no later than January 9, 2013. Rental units that are occupied on September 9, 2013, and are in compliance with all requirements in this chapter, may continue to be occupied by the current residents but not longer than the occupancy period permitted in subsection 3-40-9(A) or (B) of this chapter. Vacant noncompliant rental units may not be occupied until they are brought into compliance with the requirements in this chapter. 
(Ord. 6163, 9-9-2013) 
3-40-4. - License application. 
An application for a hotel license shall be filed in accordance with sections 3-1-2, 3-1-3, and 3-1-4 of this title and with the Community Development Director. 
(Ord. 6163, 9-9-2013; Ord. 6674, 2-25-2019) 
3-40-5. - License investigation and inspection. 
An investigation and inspection of the property is required upon receipt of a hotel license application and shall be completed in accordance with sections 3-1-5 and 3-1-12 of this title. The application of a hotel license shall constitute, but not be limited to, the consent of the applicant and owner to an investigation and inspection of the entire premises including, but not limited to, all rental units, common areas, and service, equipment and storage spaces within buildings, building exteriors, the roof, and the site, at reasonable times by Code Enforcement Officers, Building Inspectors, Sanitarian Inspectors, Fire Inspectors, or other authorities with jurisdiction for the purpose of determining compliance with the provisions of all applicable codes, ordinances, laws, rules, and regulation pertaining to hotel properties. 
(Ord. 6163, 9-9-2013) 
3-40-6. - License fee. 
The hotel license fees shall be paid in accordance with section 3-1-6 of this title. The hotel license application fee and each annual hotel license renewal fee shall be $300.00 plus $10.00 for each rental unit on the property. These fees include one inspection and one reinspection of all required corrective work. Additional reinspections may be required until all corrective work is complete and approved and a reinspection fee of $100.00 shall be charged for each additional reinspection after the first reinspection. The annual hotel license fee is due and shall be paid if the annual investigation and inspection is not completed under the exception permitted in subsection 3-40-11(B) of this chapter. 
(Ord. 6163, 9-9-2013) 
3-40-7. - License issuance. 
After receipt of all required information, approval of all investigations and inspections, and payment of the applicable fee, a hotel license will be issued to the hotel owner. The issuance of a hotel license may be denied if one or more of the following conditions exists: 
(A)  The manager or owner failed to supply all of the information requested and required to act on the application. 
(B)  The manager or owner gave materially false, fraudulent or untruthful information on the application. 
(C)  The manager or owner has not fully complied with provisions in this chapter or any other federal, state or local laws and regulations affecting the conduct of business or the health and safety of the hotel occupants and the public. 
(D)  The manager or owner has had a license revoked pursuant to the provisions of this chapter for the same business or same type of business. 
(E)  The manager or owner is not at least 21 years of age. 
(F)  The manager or owner has been convicted of a felony within the last ten years or any criminal offense involving a crime or moral turpitude within the last ten years. 
(G)  The manager or owner is delinquent on any debt owed to the Village. 
(H)  The premises are not in a clean, sanitary and safe condition. 
(I)  The manager or owner knowingly allowed criminal activity to occur on the premises and failed to take corrective action or failed to contact enforcement officials. 
(J)  The property is found upon investigation and inspection to be not in compliance with all provisions of this chapter and all other applicable Village Codes, ordinances, rules and regulations, and the laws of the State of Illinois. 
(Ord. 6163, 9-9-2013) 
3-40-8. - Posting of documents. 
The hotel license shall be posted in accordance with section 3-1-14 of this title and the following additional information must also be posted: 
(A)  Rental unit rates, that may include a range of rates, shall be posted in a prominent location in all rental units and occupants shall not be charged in excess of the posted rates. 
(B)  Emergency telephone numbers and addresses of the Village of Glen Ellyn Police Department, Building Division, and Fire Company shall be posted in a prominent location in all rental units and in public reception areas. 
(Ord. 6163, 9-9-2013) 
3-40-9. - Occupancy requirements. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy a transient rental unit(s) for more than 60 days within any six month period except as follows: 
1.  Where there is a written contract or document between a hotel and a business, corporation, firm, individual or government agency to house employees or individuals; 
2.  Where there is written employer confirmation that the occupant is employed and engaged in local business that requires his personal attendance for an extended period; 
3.  Where there is a written contract between the hotel and a governmental, charitable or insurance agency to house families in crisis who are receiving temporary housing assistance from said governmental, charitable or insurance agency; or 
4.  Where the Building and Zoning Official authorizes in writing, after consultation with the Director of Community Development, a stay for up to 90 days to prevent residents from becoming homeless. In the event that appropriate alternative housing cannot be provided within 90 days, the period may be extended by the Building and Zoning Official. 
(B)  It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy an extended stay rental unit(s) for more than 365 days within any two-year period. 
(C)  In the event any persons occupy a rental unit for more than the maximum number of days permitted in subsection (A) or (B) of this section, the manager or owner shall diligently pursue all appropriate and legal actions required to evict such persons from the rental unit. 
(D)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or manager to allow occupancy of a rental unit to a person under a different or fictitious name to avoid the occupancy requirements. 
(E)  The owner or manager shall maintain an accurate and complete register of each rental unit for not less than two years and make the register available to Village officials upon request at any reasonable time. The register shall include the following information: 
1.  The name and permanent address of the person renting the unit. 
2.  The dates of occupancy including check in and check out times and room number. 
3.  A driver's license number or vehicle registration number, state of registration, and make and model of any vehicle operated on hotel property. 
4.  The name of each person occupying the rental unit. 
5.  The amount of the bill and method of payment. 
(F)  The owner or manager shall not knowingly rent, allow, or permit any unit or space on the premises to be used for any illegal purpose including, but not limited to: 
1.  Prostitution activities. 
2.  Gambling activities. 
3.  Drug use, sale, or manufacturing. 
(G)  It shall be unlawful for an owner or manager to rent or permit occupancy of a rental unit to a person less than 18 years of age. 
(H)  It shall be unlawful for an owner or manager to rent or permit occupancy of a rental unit to a person more than once between the hours of 6:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. except with a prior reservation and a necessary business purpose. 
(I)  It shall be unlawful for an owner or manager to permit the person renting the unit to sublease, sublet, or otherwise allow the use of the rental unit to persons other than the registered occupants. 
(Ord. 6163, 9-9-2013; Ord. 6674, 2-25-2019) 
3-40-10. - Property requirements. 
(A)  The hotel premises shall comply with all provisions of this Code, Glen Ellyn ordinances, the DuPage County code of ordinances, and all state and federal laws, rules, and regulations pertaining to hotel properties. 
(B)  The hotel premises shall be maintained in a clean, sanitary, and safe condition and areas accessible to rental unit occupants and the public shall be safely illuminated at all times they are open to use. 
(C)  The hotel premises shall be heated by space heating systems capable of maintaining a minimum temperature of not less than 65 degrees Fahrenheit when the outdoor temperature is above zero degrees Fahrenheit, and 60 degrees Fahrenheit when the outdoor temperature is below zero degrees Fahrenheit, in all common areas and habitable spaces including rental unit living and sleeping areas, kitchens, and bathrooms. Occupancy is prohibited in any rental unit where the minimum temperature is not continually maintained. 
(D)  Every rental unit shall be provided with housekeeping services each day they are occupied, and daily cleaning schedules shall be generated and used to ensure that clean and sanitary conditions are maintained. Daily cleaning schedules for the prior 30 days shall be retained and made available to Village officials upon request at reasonable times. Any occupant may decline some or all housekeeping services. 
(E)  The owner or manager shall be responsible to provide housekeeping services and to maintain, or cause to be maintained, the following conditions in all rental units: 
1.  Mattresses shall be free of stains, holes, rips or odors in excess of normal wear and tear, and maintained in a sanitary nondefective structural condition. 
2.  Bedding shall be free of stains, holes, rips or odors in excess of normal wear and tear and shall be cleaned or replaced upon a change of occupancy and each day the rental unit is occupied unless otherwise requested by the occupant. Bedding shall be cleaned with appropriate sanitizing products and methods to ensure disinfection. 
3.  Bath towels, cloths and mats shall be free of stains, holes, rips or odors in excess of normal wear and tear and shall be cleaned or replaced upon a change of occupancy and each day the rental unit is occupied unless otherwise requested by the occupant. Bath towels, cloths and mats shall be cleaned with appropriate sanitizing products and methods to ensure disinfection. 
4.  Bathroom fixtures shall be maintained without cracks, chips, or stains. Floors and fixtures shall be cleaned with appropriate sanitizing products and methods to ensure disinfection each day the rental unit is occupied or at least once a week when occupancy does not change. 
5.  Carpets shall be free of stains, holes, rips or odors in excess of normal wear and tear and shall be vacuumed clean each day the unit is occupied and maintained in a sanitary, nondefective condition. 
6.  Floor surfaces other than carpeting shall be made of nonabsorbent material and all surfaces and tile grout shall be maintained without cracks, rips, or missing elements. 
7.  Wall surfaces shall be maintained without spots, stains, flakes, chips, holes, etc., and be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. 
8.  All floor, wall and ceiling surfaces, windows, shower curtains and doors, appliances, fixtures, and furnishings shall be maintained free of mold, mildew, or decay. 
9.  All appliances, equipment, and furnishings including electrical receptacles, smoke alarms, fire detectors, televisions, and lighting fixtures, shall be maintained in complete and proper operating condition. 
10.  All window treatments including drapes, blinds and shades shall be sized to cover the entire window, made of opaque material, and maintained in proper operating and sanitary condition without stains, holes, rips or odors in excess of normal wear and tear. 
11.  All operable windows shall be provided with insect screens properly secured in their frame, free from holes and rips, and in proper operating condition. 
12.  The entry door to every rental unit shall be provided with a view port or window that allows the occupant to see the area immediately outside the unit. 
13.  The entry door to every rental unit shall be provided with a security lock and maintained in complete and proper operating condition. 
14.  All rental units shall be maintained free of rodents, insects and vermin infestation and free from conditions that encourage or harbor rodents, insects, and vermin and comply with the applicable provisions for pest elimination in the currently adopted ICC International Property Maintenance Code. 
(F)  No cooking activity or appliance shall be permitted within a transient rental unit except a coffeemaker and a microwave oven is permitted when operated in accordance with the product manufacturer's requirements. 
(G)  The owner shall provide pest extermination services as necessary to rid a unit or the premises of pest infestations and shall keep a record of the type of service, the service provider, and the date and location where the service was performed. This record shall be made available to Village officials upon request at reasonable times. In the event a pest infestation is a hazard to public health, as determined by Village officials, the occupants shall be ordered to vacate the unit or premises and the occupancy shall be temporarily revoked until the unit or premises are brought into compliance. 
(H)  If the owner or the manager fails to abate or correct existing conditions that are in violation of the provisions of this chapter or other applicable laws after due notice is given and reasonable opportunity is afforded, the Village may take the necessary and required actions to correct violations to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public. Costs for any abatement performed by, or on behalf of the Village, including the cost of Police services provided and including the relocation of occupants of the property, shall be recoverable by the Village. Expenses incurred by the Village pursuant to this chapter shall be charged to the owner of the property on which the work is done or improvements made, or charged against the real estate and attached as a lien. 
(I)  A rental unit may not be used for any purpose other than temporary living and sleeping purposes, and no rental unit shall become unavailable for use or allowed to remain uninhabitable unless the rental unit is in the process of construction, alteration, repair, redecoration, extermination, evacuation, occupancy revocation, or similar activity, and prompt and effective efforts are made to restore the rental unit to habitable and usable conditions. 
(Ord. 6163, 9-9-2013) 
3-40-11. - Property investigations and inspections. 
All investigations and inspections of hotel properties by the Village of Glen Ellyn shall be conducted in accordance with sections 3-1-5 and 3-1-12 of this title and as follows: 
(A)  An annual property investigation and inspection shall be conducted of the entire premises including, but not limited to, all rental units, common areas, and service, equipment and storage spaces within buildings, all building exteriors, and the site, at reasonable times by Village representatives for the purpose of determining compliance with the provisions of all applicable codes, ordinances, laws, rules, and regulation pertaining to hotel properties. 
(B)  An annual property investigation and inspection shall not be conducted the year following an annual property investigation and inspection that resulted in an inspection report listing no violations of the requirements of this chapter or other applicable codes and regulations. 
(C)  The owner or manager shall receive an inspection report from a Village representative that identifies any discovered violations and determines a reasonable date for reinspection by which time the violations must be corrected. 
(D)  Special inspections of the premises may be conducted upon receipt of a complaint from any person, occupant, or any authority with jurisdiction, or if there is probable cause that any person or portion of the premises may be in violation of the provisions of this chapter or any applicable law. With reasonable prior notice and upon presentation of proper identification to a rental unit occupant, a Village representative may enter a rental unit with the occupant's permission and conduct an inspection. In the event entry is denied, the Village of Glen Ellyn may revoke occupancy and order the rental unit to be vacated or pursue other remedies provided by law to gain entry. 
(E)  In cases of emergency, where a Village representative has reasonable cause to believe an extreme hazard exists which is known to cause imminent injury to a person, loss of life, or severe property damage, and upon presentation of proper identification, the Village representative may enter any space or occupied rental unit without permission. 
(F)  No vacant rental unit may be rented to or occupied by any person until any and all violations identified on an inspection report have been corrected, reinspected and approved by the Village of Glen Ellyn. 
(G)  Upon request from the owner or manager, and after the work necessary to correct all violations has been completed, inspected and approved, a Village representative shall issue to the owner or manager written confirmation that the violations identified in the inspection report have been corrected. This written confirmation does not represent, insure, warrant, or guaranty to any owner, manager, lessor, agent, attorney, lender, or insurer that no other violations exist or that the inspection report includes all existing violations at the time of inspection. 
(Ord. 6163, 9-9-2013) 
3-40-12. - Nuisances. 
A hotel shall be operated in a manner that does not cause a nuisance in accordance with section 3-1-11 of this title. The owner and manager shall not rent or permit the use of a building or premises for any business, pleasure or recreation which, by its boisterous nature, disturbs or destroys the peace of a neighborhood or is dangerous or detrimental to health. 
(Ord. 6163, 9-9-2013) 
3-40-13. - License termination and renewal. 
A hotel license shall terminate 12 months after the date of issuance unless the required hotel license renewal fee is received prior to the termination date. No hotel license renewal shall be issued unless the annual investigation and inspection has been completed and approved, or unless the annual investigation and inspection has been deferred as permitted in subsection 3-40-11(B) of this chapter. 
(Ord. 6163, 9-9-2013) 
3-40-14. - License transfer. 
A hotel license shall not be transferable or assignable from one person, firm, partnership, corporation or entity to another person, firm, partnership, corporation or entity. A hotel license shall be purely a personal privilege and shall not constitute property, nor shall it be subject to attachment, garnishment or execution. 
(Ord. 6163, 9-9-2013) 
3-40-15. - License suspension, revocation or denial. 
A hotel license may be suspended or revoked and a license application may be denied as determined by the Community Development Director for failure to meet the requirements and conditions specified in this chapter, this Code, or any applicable rules and regulations established by other agencies with jurisdiction. The hotel license owner or applicant shall be given written notice specifying the reasons and cause for suspension, revocation or denial. In the case of suspension, the written notice shall specify the period of suspension and the conditions on which the license suspension can be withdrawn upon remedial action taken by the owner. The owner or applicant may appeal the Community Development Director's decision to suspend, revoke or deny a hotel license. 
(Ord. 6163, 9-9-2013; Ord. 6674, 2-25-2019) 
3-40-16. - Appeals. 
Any person may contest or dispute the Community Development Director's decision to suspend, revoke or deny a hotel license by requesting an administrative hearing in accordance with the procedures and requirements specified in title 1, chapter 11 of this Code. 
(Ord. 6163, 9-9-2013; Ord. 6674, 2-25-2019) 
3-40-17. - Violation penalties. 
The penalty for failing to pay the hotel license renewal fee shall be in accordance with section 3-1-15 of this title. 
(Ord. 6163, 9-9-2013) 
Chapter 41 - VENDOR CARTS 

3-41-1. - Definition. 
The term "vendor cart" as used herein shall refer to any outdoor movable cart from which food or beverages are sold to walk-up customers and which are not self-propelled by an engine or other mechanism. 
(Ord. 6301, 2-23-2015) 
3-41-2. - License required. 
No person shall engage in the selling of food or beverage from a vendor cart without first having obtained a license therefor. Licenses shall be issued through the approval of a license agreement by the Village Board or Village Manager. The content of the license agreement shall be at the sole discretion of the Village. 
Vendor cart licenses shall be issued on an annual basis with a maximum number of three vendor cart licenses issued per calendar year. Said licenses shall be valid for the specific time frame identified in the approved license agreement. Permits for special events shall be considered separate from vendor cart licenses. 
(Ord. 6301, 2-23-2015) 
3-41-3. - Conditions of operation. 
Vendor carts shall be operated in accordance with the conditions of operation set forth below: 
(A)  Vendor carts shall only be used for the sale of food and beverages. The sale of other merchandise or goods from a vendor cart shall not be permitted. 
(B)  Vendor carts shall only be permitted on a public or private sidewalk in the C5A and C5B central business district zoning districts. 
(C)  Licensees must be at least 18 years of age and neither the licensee nor any of his/her employees shall be a registered sex offender as defined by the sex offender license act. 
(D)  Vendor carts shall be operated in compliance with all requirements of the DuPage County Health Department. A copy of a valid permit issued by the DuPage County Health Department shall be submitted to the Village prior to the operation of any vendor cart and a copy of said permit shall be available on site at all times and furnished to the Village upon request. 
(E)  A minimum of a five-foot wide pedestrian passageway shall be maintained adjacent to the vendor cart free of any obstructions. 
(F)  If the vendor cart is to be located on public property, the licensee shall enter into a license agreement with the Village and shall agree to hold the Village harmless from any claim, demand or damage to property or injury that may arise out of the exercise of the licensee's use of an approved license. 
(G)  Vendor carts must be self-contained and shall only draw power from an approved source. 
(H)  Vendor carts shall be attended by the licensee or his/her employees at all times. 
(I)  If there is no public trash receptacle within 30 feet of the cart, a trash receptacle adequate in size for containing the waste produced by the cart and its patrons must be provided by the licensee and the area immediately surrounding the vendor cart shall be maintained by the licensee free of any debris. Licensee shall be responsible for removal of garbage associated with this receptacle. The licensee shall be responsible for any additional cleanup costs associated with the operation of the cart. If there is a public trash receptacle within 30 feet of the cart, it must be maintained in accordance with the terms of the license agreement. 
(J)  In addition to the trash receptacle discussed in subsection (I) of this section, one other accessory structure, such as a cooler, may be placed in the approved vendor cart area, along with the cart and a chair, provided the structures do not take up more than six square feet of sidewalk area. 
(K)  The use of electronic or sound amplification equipment in association with the operation of a vendor cart shall be prohibited. 
(L)  No flags, balloons or other attention getting devices shall be permitted in association with a vendor cart and no signage shall be permitted to be located on the sidewalk, whether public or private. Signage may otherwise be permitted on the vendor cart as part of the approved license agreement. 
(M)  Vendor carts must be able to be secured in place without reliance on an outside structure and no holes, ropes, anchors or other physical attachments shall be permitted on the sidewalk, adjacent buildings or street furniture. 
(N)  The vendor cart must be stored indoors when not in operation. 
(O)  Vendor carts shall not be located in such close proximity to a vehicular access drive or the railroad tracks so as to create a safety hazard as determined by the Village. 
(P)  Vendor cart licenses shall be nonrenewable and nontransferable. 
(Q)  The licensee shall obtain a sales tax ID number from the state and furnish a copy of the same to the Village. 
(R)  The vendor cart must be operated in compliance with all Village Codes and ordinances. 
(Ord. 6301, 2-23-2015) 
3-41-4. - License agreement application fee. 
The application fee for a vendor cart license shall be as set forth in subsection 4-1-4(A)15. of this Code. 
(Ord. 6301, 2-23-2015) 
3-41-5. - Application requirements. 
An application for a vendor cart license shall be filed with the Community Development Department annually, on the forms provided by the Village, and must be submitted no later than March 1 of the licensing year. The application shall be accompanied by a minimum of the following information: 
(A)  General information, in narrative form, related to the proposed items to be sold, the hours of operation, number of on-site employees and cart storage arrangements. 
(B)  A copy of a valid driver's license or other state issued form of identification. 
(C)  If the vendor cart is to be located all or partially on public property, a certificate of insurance must be submitted in the amount of $2,000,000.00 listing the Village as an additional insured and including a statement that the policy shall not be changed or canceled without 30 days' written notice to the Village. 
(D)  If a vendor cart is to be located all or partially on private property, proof of ownership for the property and a letter signed by the property owner of record must be provided approving the proposed application and use of the property. 
(E)  The operator and all employees, 18 years of age and older, of the vendor cart will be required to submit to a fingerprint based background check conducted by the Glen Ellyn Police Department. 
(F)  A dimensioned site plan identifying the proposed location of the vendor cart, including the location of any surrounding buildings, doorways, trash receptacles, streetlights, street furniture and vehicular access drives and depicting the width of the sidewalk that would be maintained free and clear of any obstructions. If an external power source will be used, the proposed power source must be indicated on the site plan as well. 
(G)  Specifications for the proposed vendor cart including a picture. 
(H)  Dimensioned elevations or diagrams for any proposed signage along with information about the proposed sign placement. 
(I)  The Community Development Director may at his or her discretion, require the submission of such other additional materials or data related to the request that he/she deems necessary to evaluate the impact of the request on the general public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. 6301, 2-23-2015; Ord. 6674, 2-25-2019) 
3-41-6. - Application evaluation. 
All vendor cart license applications shall be considered by the Village pursuant to subsection 1-7-1(O) and section 8-1-11 of this Code, who will at its sole discretion either approve or deny the request. In considering the application, the Village shall consider: 
(A)  The impact the request may have on surrounding businesses and the economic well being of the Village. 
(B)  If the proposed operation or location of the vendor cart would pose any hazard to the public health, safety or welfare. 
(C)  If more than three applications are received, the Village may consider historical experience with the groups or individuals that have previously received vendor cart licenses from the Village. 
(D)  The extent to which a vendor cart application proposal introduces a food element not currently found within the downtown and enhances, not detracts from, the pedestrian and family friendly atmosphere and ambience of the downtown. 
(Ord. 6301, 2-23-2015) 
Chapter 42 - REAL ESTATE TRANSFER TAX 

3-42-1. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the following meanings: 
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint venture, public or private corporation or a receiver, executor, Trustee, conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court. 
RECORDATION: The recording of deeds or trust documents by the recorder of deeds, DuPage County, Illinois. 
TRUST DOCUMENT: A document required to be recorded or recorded pursuant to the Illinois land trust recordation act. 
VALUE: The amount of the full actual consideration for any transfer covered hereunder, including the amount of any lien or liens assumed by the grantee or purchaser. Value also includes the estimated purchase price of any new construction and/or remodeling, the effectuation of which is a term or condition of the sale of the real estate whether expressed or implied, for which a real estate transfer declaration, as defined in section 3-42-5 of this chapter, has been filed. The new construction and/or remodeling will be performed by the seller or under the direction of the seller, or by an entity under the control of the seller or the seller's heirs, executors, administrators, beneficiaries, representatives, successors and assigns and will be paid for by the buyer or at the direction of the buyer, or by an entity under the control of the buyer or the buyer's heirs, executors, administrators, beneficiaries, representatives, successors and assigns and wherein said residential new construction and/or residential remodeling does commence within two years of the closing date of the transaction for which the aforementioned real estate transfer declaration was filed. In the event that the construction does not commence within this time period, a refund for the tax paid for the contemplated construction or remodeling will, upon application, be made. 
(Ord. 4457, 12-16-1996; amd. Ord. 5026, 12-17-2001) 
3-42-2. - Tax imposed. 
A tax is imposed on the privilege of transferring title to real estate within the corporate limits of the Village as represented by the deed that is filed for recordation and on the privilege of transferring a beneficial interest in real property which is the subject of a trust as represented by the trust document that is filed for recordation, at the rate of $3.00 for each $1,000.00 of value or fraction thereof stated in the declaration provided for in this chapter. "Real estate" shall mean both land and any structures permanently affixed to the land. The tax herein levied shall be in addition to any and all other taxes. 
(Ord. 4457, 12-16-1996; amd. Ord. 5026, 12-17-2001) 
3-42-3. - Liability for tax. 
The ultimate incidence, and liability for payment, of the tax imposed by this chapter shall be borne by the grantor of any deed and the grantor, assignor, or transferor of any instrument conveying the beneficial interest in real property which is the subject of a land trust, subject to this chapter. 
(Ord. 4457, 12-16-1996) 
3-42-4. - Purchase of stamps. 
The tax levied by this chapter shall be paid by the purchase of tax stamps, or other designation determined by the Village through the Management Services Director or his or her agent. The payment of the tax shall be denoted by an adhesive stamp or stamps affixed to the face of the deed or trust document, or as otherwise determined and designated by the Village. 
(Ord. 4457, 12-16-1996) 
3-42-5. - Filing of declaration. 
At such time as the tax levied by this chapter is paid, there shall be filed with the Management Services Director a fully executed and completed copy of the "real estate transfer declaration" required by the provisions of the Illinois real estate transfer tax act and a copy of the fully executed and complete copy of the real estate contract, if any. 
(Ord. 4457, 12-16-1996) 
3-42-6. - Exemptions. 
The following shall be exempt from the tax levied by this chapter: 
(A)  Deeds or trust documents that secure debt or other obligation and through which no transfer of possession or use occurs; 
(B)  Deeds or trust documents that, without additional consideration, confirm, correct, modify or supplement a deed or trust document previously recorded; 
(C)  Deeds or trust documents where the actual consideration is less than $100.00; 
(D)  Tax deeds; 
(E)  Deeds or trust documents that release property that is security for a debt or other obligation; 
(F)  Deeds of partition; 
(G)  Deeds or trust documents made pursuant to mergers, consolidations or transfers of sale of substantially all of the assets of corporations pursuant to plans of reorganization under the federal internal revenue code or title 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Act; 
(H)  Deeds or trust documents made by a subsidiary corporation to its parent corporation for no consideration other than the cancellation or surrender of the subsidiary's stock; 
(I)  Deeds wherein there is an actual trade or exchange or real estate and trust documents wherein there is an actual trade or exchange of beneficial interests, except that money differences or money's worth paid from one to the other shall not be exempt from the tax; 
(J)  Deeds representing transfers subject to the imposition of a documentary stamp tax imposed by the government of the United States, except that such need shall not be exempt from filing the declaration; 
(K)  Deed or trust documents involving real estate acquired by or from any governmental body; 
(L)  Deeds or trust documents involving the exchange of real estate from one spouse to another as a result of a duly executed divorce; 
(M)  Deeds or trust documents recorded at a time that the real estate transfer account of the Village contains sufficient funds to pay for authorized outstanding projects or costs of the Village which were authorized in the manner set forth in section 3-42-7 of this chapter. The exemption shall also be in force at any time that the Village Board has not established an authorized project or cost or such authorized project or cost has been completed and been fully paid for. 
(Ord. 4457, 12-16-1996) 
3-42-7. - Real estate transfer tax account. 
There is hereby established the real estate transfer tax account. This account shall be maintained as a separate account of the Village, and the account shall contain the proceeds received from time to time from the imposition of the real estate transfer tax. Interest income earned from funds attributable to the real estate transfer tax account shall be retained and allocated to that account. Expenditures from the real estate transfer tax account shall only be made where the project or cost is established by Village ordinance to be paid from the real estate transfer tax account. Once a project or cost is designated as payable from the real estate transfer tax account, additional payments relating to the project or the approved cost need only be authorized by motion in the same manner as other Municipal expenditures. The determination that a project or cost shall be paid from the real estate transfer tax account shall be set forth in an ordinance of the Village. Such an ordinance may only be acted upon by the Village Board after a public hearing, the notice of which has been published in a newspaper of general circulation within the Village not less than 14 days before the hearing. When a project or a cost specifically so authorized by ordinance has been completed and paid for, further collections of the real estate transfer tax shall be suspended until another project or cost is established by ordinance. Any funds remaining within the real estate transfer tax account, when all projects or costs have been completed, shall remain within that account until additional projects or costs are authorized. If no projects or costs are authorized for a period of five years, any funds remaining within the real estate transfer tax account may be utilized for any authorized public purpose. 
(Ord. 4457, 12-16-1996) 
3-42-8. - Certificates of exemption. 
Every deed or trust document which is tax exempt pursuant to section 3-42-6 of this chapter shall be presented to the Management Services Director so as to be appropriately marked by the Director to be eligible for recordation without the payment of tax. At such time as a deed or trust document is presented to the Director, pursuant to this section, there shall be filed with the Director a certificate setting forth the facts which justify the exemption of the deed or trust document presented. The certificate shall be executed on behalf of either the grantor or grantee and shall be on a form provided by the Director. 
(Ord. 4457, 12-16-1996) 
3-42-9. - Real estate transfer tax stamps. 
(A)  The tax herein levied and imposed shall be collected by the Management Services Director of the Village through the sale of real estate transfer tax stamps, which shall be caused to be prepared by the Director in such quantities as said Management Services Director may from time to time prescribe. Such stamps shall be available for sale at and during the regular business hours of the Village offices and the offices of such agents as the Village may designate. For the purpose of reviewing the request for the stamps, the Village shall process a request within two working days. 
(B)  Upon payment of the tax herein levied and imposed, the stamps so purchased shall be affixed to the deed or trust document or other instrument of conveyance as required by this chapter. Any person so using and affixing a stamp shall cancel it and so deface it as to render it unfit for reuse by marking it with his or her initials and the day, month and year when the affixing occurs. Such markings shall be made by writing or stamping in indelible ink or by perforating with a machine or punch. The stamp or stamps, however, shall not be so defaced as to prevent ready determination of its denomination and genuineness. The Village of Glen Ellyn real estate transfer tax stamp shall be of a design determined by the Village Administrator. 
(C)  In the event a real estate transfer stamp issued under this chapter is lost or destroyed, a replacement stamp may be issued upon the payment of a $25.00 administration fee and the filing of a statement upon oath or affirmation stating that said stamp was lost or destroyed and an explanation of the circumstances surrounding said loss or destruction. Said affidavit shall be on a form provided by the Village. 
(Ord. 4457, 12-16-1996) 
3-42-10. - Recordation of deeds. 
After the effective date hereof, no deed conveying real property and no trust document transferring any beneficial interest in real property which is the subject of a land trust within the corporate limits of the Village shall be entitled to recordation by the recorder of deeds, DuPage County, Illinois, unless such deed shall bear either village real estate transfer tax stamp in the amount required by this chapter, or an exemption mark from the Village management services director. 
(Ord. 4457, 12-16-1996) 
3-42-11. - Proceeds of tax. 
All proceeds resulting from the collection of the tax imposed by this chapter, including interest and penalties, shall be paid into the treasury of the Village and shall be credited to and deposited in the real estate transfer tax account of the Village. 
(Ord. 4457, 12-16-1996) 
3-42-12. - Interest and penalties. 
In the event that any person or entity fails to pay the tax required by this chapter, or reports an amount of tax due which is less than the amount actually due, or conspires to pay less than the tax due, then, in addition to the amount of the tax, interest shall accumulate and be due and payable by that person upon the tax at the rate of one percent per month commencing as of the first day following the day when the deed or trust deed was recorded or the trust document was accepted by the trustee. In addition, a penalty of 25 percent of the tax and interest due shall be assessed and collected against any person or entity who fails to pay the tax imposed by this chapter or conspires to cause the payment of less than the tax due. 
(Ord. 5026, 12-17-2001) 
3-42-13. - Civil liability for tax. 
In the event that any person fails to pay to the Management Services Director the tax required hereunder when the tax shall be due, or reports an amount of tax due which is less than the amount actually due, or conspires to or takes action to cause or permit a false or incomplete payment to be made, said person shall be liable to the Village for such tax, together with interest and penalties. The Village may bring an action to collect such tax, interest and penalties in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 5026, 12-17-2001) 
3-42-14. - Fine for violation. 
In addition to the other provisions of this chapter, any person found guilty in a court of competent jurisdiction of violating, disobeying, providing false or incomplete information, omitting, neglecting or refusing to pay the tax provided for in this chapter or the ordinance it amends, or conspiring to violate or evade this chapter or the ordinance it amends, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $750.00 for each separate and distinct offense and may be required to pay the amount of tax, interest and penalty due. 
(Ord. 5026, 12-17-2001) 
3-42-15. - Other sums due the village. 
The Management Services Director shall issue no real estate transfer tax stamps or an exemption mark to any person or entity unless the most current billing including the final billing for water and sewer assessments for the real estate or beneficial interest in real estate which is the subject of the proposed transfer is paid in full. In addition, the Management Services Director shall issue no real estate transfer tax stamps to any person or entity unless all outstanding amounts due the Village by the grantor or relating to the property to be transferred and arising from any unpaid or due account, charge or liquidated claim of any kind are paid in full. Payment for any outstanding balances due to the Village shall be in the form of cash, money order or a cashier's check. The applicant shall also, if requested, certify that any recycling or garbage collection container issued shall remain on the property. 
A sump pump inspection will be required to determine if the building has an illegal sump pump connection to the sanitary sewer system before a real estate transfer stamp will be issued. The Village will perform the inspection before the date of stamp issuance but no sooner than three months before that date. A fee of $50.00 shall be collected to reimburse the Village for the cost of the inspection. 
Any illegal sump pump connections found during the inspection must be corrected bringing the building into compliance with this Code. If the illegal sump pump connection is corrected before the scheduled title transfer, the Village will document the corrective work and code compliance through a second inspection. A fee of $50.00 will be charged for a second inspection. 
In the event the illegal sump pump connection cannot be corrected before the scheduled date of title transfer, either the buyer or the seller can post a cash escrow in the amount of 150 percent of the cost of the work as determined by the Public Works Director to correct the illegal connection. When a cash escrow is posted, the real estate transfer stamp will be issued. The cash escrow will be returned to the party posting it after the illegal connection is corrected and documented by inspection. In the event the illegal connection is not corrected within six months of the posting of the cash escrow, the Village will use all means including court action to force elimination of the illegal connection. 
(Ord. 4457, 12-16-1996; Ord. 5445, 2-27-2006) 
3-42-16. - Refund of tax. 
A grantor, seller, assignor or transferor who has paid the tax provided for in this chapter shall be entitled to a refund of such tax in the event such grantor, seller, assignor or transferor satisfies all of the following requirements: 
(A)  He or she was the grantor or occupier of a property, including residential, commercial or industrial property within the corporate limits of the Village as to which taxes were paid pursuant to this chapter; and 
(B)  He or she did not rent or lease any portion of the previously owned dwelling or real estate to another person or persons for more than a period of one year within the last three years prior to sale and must have resided in the house being sold for a period of one year within the last three years prior to sale; and 
(C)  He or she has purchased and occupies at the date of the application for refund another property within the Village as a replacement for the property sold; or 
(D)  Notwithstanding the provisions identified in subsection (B) of this section, the entity contractually obligated to pay the tax is a not for profit corporation which is purchasing or selling a residential property within the corporate limits of the Village as part of a fundraising event in which the property was purchased and thereafter sold within one year and was constructed under a contract with a builder who agreed to transfer the property at the builder's actual cost of the land and the construction; and 
(E)  He or she makes the application for refund not later than one year after the tax payment has been made and provides adequate evidence of the fulfillment of each requirement for a refund. 
(F)  In the event he or she has purchased a replacement property as required in subsection (C) of this section. for the purpose of constructing a new home on said property, and he or she has an active building permit issued for the construction of a new home at the time of the expiration of the one year period as defined in subsection (B) of this section, he or she may receive an extension in time of no more than an additional six months (18 months from the tax payment date) in which to complete and occupy the replacement property. For the purposes of this subsection, the occupancy requirement shall be deemed satisfied upon the issuance of an occupancy permit. 
(Ord. 4457, 12-16-1996; amd. Ord. 5188, 8-25-2003; Ord. 5534, 12-18-2006) 
Chapter 43 - FILM PRODUCTION 

3-43-1. - Statement of policy and purpose. 
It is the policy of the Village to allow interior or exterior locations on public or private property to be used in film production, as hereinafter defined, only if the personal and property rights of affected residents and businesses can be adequately protected, unreasonable and unnecessary disruptions to the community can be avoided, the rights of the public to the safe and normal use of the public streets, rights-of-way and property can be protected, the rights of the public to the orderly functioning of government and the provision of public services can be protected and hazards to the public health, safety, and welfare can be prevented. It is the purpose of this chapter to establish standards for evaluating requests for the use of public or private property as a location for film production be evaluated on a case-by-case basis, recognizing that the nature of the film, the type of production, the location desired to be used, the length of time of production activities, and the impact of such activities on Village operations and services makes each request unique. 
(Ord. 6442, 10-16-2016) 
3-43-2. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings and be constructed in accordance with the definitions set forth below: 
FILM PRODUCTION: The process of recording live action on film, magnetic tape, digital storage, or any other medium, for later sale or distribution as a movie, commercial, training film, or educational program, and any activities relating thereto including set-up and site restoration. 
FILM PRODUCTION EQUIPMENT: Any object used in film production, including but not limited to: lighting equipment, sound equipment, cameras, dressing rooms, trailers, props, furnishings, and vehicles. 
FILM PRODUCTION PERMIT: A permit issued in accordance with the procedures and provisions of this chapter. 
VILLAGE MANAGER: The Manager of the Village of Glen Ellyn, Illinois, or his/her designee. 
(Ord. 6442, 10-16-2016) 
3-43-3. - Permit required. 
No person, group of persons, or entities shall use any interior or exterior public or private location or property in the Village of Glen Ellyn for film production, or place any film production equipment on any public street or right-of-way, on any public property, or on the exterior of any private property without first having obtained a film production permit from the Village in accordance with the procedures established in this chapter. 
(Ord. 6442, 10-16-2016) 
3-43-4. - Application and permit fees. 
All applications for film production permits shall be accompanied by a fee as outlined by section 4-1-4 of this Code and determined by the Village Manager or his/her designee. Late permit applications shall be subject to a late fee, as outlined by section 4-1-4 of this Code. 
(Ord. 6442, 10-16-2016) 
3-43-5. - Submission for application for a permit. 
(A)  All applications for a film production permit shall be submitted on a standard form prescribed by the Village and to be made available in the Village Manager's Office and on the Village's website. The completed application shall be filed with the Village Manager no less than ten days prior to the proposed commencement of film production. The application shall be accompanied by all documentation and statements required under sections 3-43-6 through 3-43-11 of this chapter. In addition, the application shall provide the following information: 
1.  The name, permanent address, local address, e-mail address, and mobile telephone number of the applicant. If the applicant is an entity, the nature of the entity shall be described and proof of its current, lawful existence provided. 
2.  The name, permanent address, local business address, permanent phone number, and local phone number of the individual or individuals responsible for the day-to-day operations of the film production. 
3.  A statement that the person signing the application is authorized to do so. 
4.  A description of the type of film production and type of film production equipment to be used. 
5.  The proposed dates for the film production. 
6.  The proposed hours for the film production. 
7.  A letter or statement signed by the owner or owners and occupants of each property which the applicant proposes to use as a location for film production in the format provided in section 3-43-6 of this chapter. 
8.  The identification of the location of all public streets, public ways, and public property which the applicant proposes to use for the film production or for the location and/or storage of film production equipment. 
9.  A description of all public streets and public rights-of-way for which the applicant requests the imposition of restrictions on or the alteration of normal parking or vehicular pedestrian traffic patterns, and the nature of such restriction or alteration. 
10.  A description of the personnel and equipment the applicant proposes to have on the film production location to provide emergency medical treatment for persons involved in the film production. 
11.  A description of the methods and procedures to be used for food service and health and sanitation on the film production location. 
12.  A description of the methods and procedures for the removal of garbage and other waste from the film production location. 
13.  Such other and further information as the Village Manager may deem necessary in order to evaluate and process the application. 
(Ord. 6442, 10-16-2016) 
3-43-6. - Notification of neighbors. 
Once the application for permit has been approved by the Village Manager, the applicant must notify all owners of record and occupants of all property situated within two blocks in every direction of each separate film production location of the proposed film production within three days of approval. The notice must be delivered personally or sent by certified mail, return receipt requested. The notice shall contain a written description of the proposed film production, including the proposed production schedule and the type of film production activities and film production equipment the applicant proposes to use. 
(Ord. 6442, 10-16-2016) 
3-43-7. - Property owner letter of approval. 
The letter or statement required by subsection 3-43-5(A)7. of this chapter shall state the approval and consent of the owner or owners and, where applicable, the lessee or lessees of the property to its use as a location for film production. The letter of approval shall contain the following statement: 
I hereby certify that I am the owner of record (or, where applicable, the occupant) of the property located at (street address) which will be used for film production. I hereby waive any claim against the Village of Glen Ellyn arising out of or in connection with the issuance of the film production permit and will indemnify and hold harmless the Village of Glen Ellyn for and from any loss, damage, expense, claims, and costs of every nature and kind arising out of or in connection with the film production pursuant to said permit. 
(Ord. 6442, 10-16-2016) 
3-43-8. - Certificate of insurance. 
The film production permit application shall be accompanied by a certificate of insurance, issued by a company acceptable to the Village and authorized to do business in the State of Illinois. The certificate of insurance shall be in an amount of not less than $2,000,000.00 general liability, including bodily injury, property damages, and automobile liability. The certificate of insurance shall name the Village as an additional insured, using the following language: 
The Village of Glen Ellyn and its respective elected and appointed officials, employees, agents, consultants, attorneys and representatives, are, and have been endorsed, as an additional insured under the above reference policy number on a primary and non-contributory basis for general liability and automobile liability coverage for the duration of the film production. 
(Ord. 6442, 10-16-2016) 
3-43-9. - Workers' compensation and employer's liability insurance. 
The application for film production permit shall be accompanied by proof acceptable to the Village Manager that the applicant has provided workers' compensation insurance, employer's liability insurance, and all other insurance required by law to be provided for the employees of the applicant. 
(Ord. 6442, 10-16-2016) 
3-43-10. - Indemnification and hold harmless agreement. 
The application for a film production permit shall be accompanied by an indemnification agreement in a form acceptable to the Village wherein the applicant agrees to defend and hold the Village of Glen Ellyn, its officers, employees and agents, harmless from any loss, damage, expense, claim and cost of every nature and kind whatsoever, including attorney's fees, arising out of or in connection with applicant's use of the public property, public right-of-way, public equipment, or public personnel specified in the film production permit or arising out of or in connection with the film production authorized under the permit. 
(Ord. 6442, 10-16-2016) 
3-43-11. - Restoration and repair of property. 
The application for film production permit shall contain a statement of the applicant agreeing to pay in full, promptly upon receipt of an invoice, the cost of repair for any and all damage to public property, resulting from or in connection with, the film production, and to restore the property to its condition prior to the film production. Any permit issued pursuant to this section shall be conditioned upon such agreement. At the discretion of the Village Manager, the applicant may be required to submit a security deposit based upon the circumstances of the film production and its impact upon public property, in order to secure such restoration. Such funds shall be placed in escrow by the Village. The Village may draw against said escrow to pay any portion of an invoice for the repair or restoration of public property that is not paid within 14 days of its issuance. 
(Ord. 6442, 10-16-2016) 
3-43-12. - Use of village personnel. 
The applicant shall agree to pay in full the direct costs of any Police, public works, or other Village personnel resulting from the film production. Such costs shall include costs of services specifically requested by the applicant and costs of services which, in the judgment of the Village Manager, is directly related to the film production. The costs billed for such direct Village labor shall be equal to the fully burdened labor rate for each individual Village employee so assigned, including any applicable overtime. The Village reserves the right to assign additional Police personnel to the film production or film production location, where in the opinion of the Chief of Police such protection is warranted by the nature of the film production. 
(Ord. 6442, 10-16-2016) 
3-43-13. - Use of village equipment. 
The use of Village equipment as film production equipment is prohibited. 
(Ord. 6442, 10-16-2016) 
3-43-14. - Use of village property. 
The applicant shall agree to pay in full the costs for the use of all Village property and public ways. The costs billed for such use of Village property shall be at the rates deemed reasonable and appropriate by the Village Manager, based on the extent of interference with or disruption of the normal use and operation of Village property or public way. For the partial closure or obstruction of any public street or right-of-way within any block, and/or creation of temporary no parking zones, the applicant shall be required to pay the Village's "time and material" rates. Total closure of any public street or right-of-way is generally prohibited, unless otherwise authorized by the Village Manager or his/her designee. 
(Ord. 6442, 10-16-2016) 
3-43-15. - Processing of application. 
The Village Manager shall distribute copies of the completed application for film production permit to the Chief of Police, Public WorksDirector, and Community Development Director ("Department Directors"), who collectively shall evaluate the application to determine its impact on the functions of their respective departments and the extent of need to provide additional personnel and/or services in the event the permit is issued. In addition, the Department Directors shall evaluate the application on the basis of the impact of use on the public streets, the impact on traffic safety, and any other potential hazards to the health, safety, and welfare of the public. The reports of the Department Directors shall be forwarded to the Village Manager, who shall determine as to whether the permit should be granted. 
(Ord. 6442, 10-16-2016; Ord. 6674, 2-25-2019) 
3-43-16. - Authority of Village Manager. 
The Village Manager shall review the report and recommendation of the Department Directors based on all of the circumstances surrounding the film production permit application and the assessed impact of the film production. If the size, scope, and extended duration of the proposed film production poses a significant impact to the community, the applicant may be required to appear before the Village Board to seek approval. The Village Manager shall recommend to the Village Board of Trustees whether to issue or deny the film production permit for an extended period. 
(Ord. 6442, 10-16-2016) 
3-43-17. - Reservation of rights. 
(A)  The Village hereby reserves the following rights: 
1.  To prohibit the issuance of the film production permit in the event that the applicant does not meet the conditions of the permit; 
2.  To order the cessation of the film production in the event the Village Manager determines either that any of the terms and conditions upon which the film production permit was issued have been violated or that the operation of the film production has otherwise caused a detriment to the public health, safety, and welfare; 
3.  To inspect all structures, devices and/or film production equipment to be used in connection with the film production at any time the film production is in process; 
4.  To impose such regulations, conditions or restrictions other than or in addition to those provided in this section as the Village, acting through the Village Manager, may deem necessary to protect the public health, safety, or welfare, which regulations, conditions, or restrictions shall be stated in the permit. 
(Ord. 6442, 10-16-2016) 
3-43-18. - Number of permits limited. 
Film productions at any given location shall not exceed a total of ten days within a calendar year. 
(Ord. 6442, 10-16-2016) 
3-43-19. - Time limitation for permit. 
Any film production permit issued under this section shall be valid only for the time period specified within the permit. 
(Ord. 6442, 10-16-2016) 
3-43-20. - Hours of production. 
Film production, including time for set-up and restoration, shall be limited to the hours of between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on Monday through Saturday, and 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. on Sunday. 
(Ord. 6442, 10-16-2016) 
3-43-21. - Specific location for permit. 
Film production must have a specific location. Random filming from Village streets is prohibited, unless specifically authorized by the Village Manager. The use of film production equipment is not to be mobile on Village streets, unless authorized by the Village Manager or his/her designee. 
(Ord. 6442, 10-16-2016) 
3-43-22. - Compliance with applicable ordinances, regulations, conditions, and restrictions. 
All film production permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall be conditioned upon the applicant's compliance with all applicable ordinances of the Village of Glen Ellyn and with any additional regulations, conditions, or restrictions set forth in the permit. 
(Ord. 6442, 10-16-2016) 
3-43-23. - Compliance with police orders. 
The Village hereby reserves the right of the Chief of Police to order any holder of a permit under this section to immediately vacate the public ways and/or public property if, in his determination, such action is necessary to protect the public health, safety, or welfare. All film production permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall be conditioned upon the applicant's immediate compliance with any such order. 
(Ord. 6442, 10-16-2016) 
3-43-24. - Severability. 
In the event any provision or application of this chapter is found unenforceable by a court of competent jurisdiction, such finding shall not affect any other application or the remaining provisions of this chapter to the maximum extent permitted by law. 
(Ord. 6442, 10-16-2016) 
3-43-25. - Violations and penalties. 
(A)  General penalty: Any person who violates a provision of this chapter, who makes a alse statement in obtaining a permit under this chapter, or who violates a condition of any permit issued under this chapter, shall be subject to a fine of not less than $250.00 or more than $1,000.00. 
(B)  Revocation of permit: Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked y the Village Manager upon any violation of the terms or conditions upon which it was issued, or upon the violation of this chapter or any other applicable Village ordinance or State law. Such revocation may be in addition to any fine imposed for any such violation. 
(C)  Separate offenses: Each act of violation and each day on which a violation of this hapter or a permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. 
(D)  Liability of permit holder: Every permit holder shall be subject to penalties or violations of this chapter or a permit issued pursuant to this chapter by an officer, director, manager, employee, agent or representative of the permit holder as if such violation had been committed by the permit holder personally. 
(Ord. 6442, 10-16-2016) 
Chapter 44 - FOOD AND BEVERAGE TAX[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. 6629, adopted Sept. 24, 2018, shall be in full force and effect upon its adoption; however, the tax shall not take effect until March 1, 2019. 

3-44-1. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings: 
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR: Any alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer sold at retail for consumption on the premises where sold. 
FOOD AND BEVERAGE: Any and all material or commodities, whether solid, semisolid, or liquid (including both alcoholic and nonalcoholic liquid) used or intended to be used for human consumption, for enjoyment or nourishment of the human body. 
PREPARED FOOD ITEM: Any and all commodities, whether solid, semi-solid, or liquid (including both alcoholic and non-alcoholic liquid) used or intended to be used for human consumption, enjoyment or nourishment of the human body, whether simple compound or mixed and which has been prepared for immediate consumption. 
PURCHASE AT RETAIL: To obtain food, beverages and alcoholic liquor for use or consumption in exchange for a consideration, whether in the form of money, credits, barter or any other nature, and not for resale. 
RETAIL FOOD FACILITY: Any place at which food items are served and/or prepared where said food items are intended to be, or are permitted to be, consumed on the premises, including, but not limited to those establishments commonly called an inn, restaurant, eating place, drive-in, restaurant, bakery, buffet, cafeteria, cafe, lunch counter, fast food outlet, catering service, coffee shop, diner, sandwich shop, soda fountain, tavern, bar, cocktail lounge, soft drink parlor, ice cream parlor, tea room, delicatessen, movie theatre, mobile food or beverage or ice cream vehicle, hotel, motel, or club, where a facility only partially intended to permit on-site consumption of food (such as a grocery store with a prepared food service area), only that portion of the facility selling prepared food shall be considered a retail food facility. 
RETAIL LIQUOR FACILITY: Any establishment licensed under Chapter 19 of this title with respect to the sale of liquor where the liquor sold is intended to be consumed on the premises. 
RETAILER: A person who sells or offers for sale food, beverages, and alcoholic liquor for use or consumption and not for resale at a retail food facility or retail liquor facility. Includes an individual, corporation, partnership, limited partnership, or an officer or employee of any such entity, or such officer, employee or member is performing the act in respect of which any violation occurs. 
(Ord. 6629, 9-24-2018) 
3-44-2. - Tax imposed. 
Commencing on March 1, 2019, a tax, in addition to any and all other taxes is hereby levied and imposed, upon the privilege of the retail purchase of alcoholic liquor, food or beverages at any retail food facility or retail liquor facility, as herein defined, within the Village at the rate of one and one half percent of the purchase price of such alcoholic liquor, food or beverage, the ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of which shall be borne by the purchaser thereof. 
The tax will be administered in accordance with the Local Government Taxpayers' Bill of Rights Act, 50 ILCS 45/1, et seq. 
The tax will terminate the month after final retirement and repayment of any bonds issued to finance a parking garage, CBD street and streetscape, train station, and/or Civic Center HVAC improvement. The bonds will be issued with a term of 20 years or less. 
(Ord. 6629, 9-24-2018) 
3-44-3. - Exemptions. 
No such tax shall be levied or imposed upon purchasers for the privilege of purchasing: 
(A)  Food and beverages which are exempt from tax under the provisions of the retailers' occupation tax or the Illinois service occupation tax, as amended from time to time. 
(B)  Prepared food items for immediate consumption purchased in hermetically sealed containers and not reasonably expected or intended by the seller for immediate on-premises consumption. 
(C)  Prepared food items for immediate consumption purchased from institutions such as churches, day care establishments, schools, hospitals, nursing homes, retirement centers or similar residential care facilities or programs for the central preparation of meals to be delivered and consumed at private residences of invalids or the elderly and other medical treatment centers and transitional shelters. 
(D)  Prepared food items, excluding alcohol, for immediate consumption by students purchased from community college cafeteria and food establishments. 
(E)  Prepared food items for immediate consumption purchased from the park district, library, and not for profit associations or corporations. However, when these entities make any portion of their facility(ies) available to a for profit organization, this exemption does not apply and the tax must be paid as otherwise required. 
(F)  Food or beverages purchased from vending machines. 
(G)  Food and beverages purchased from vendors at community wide festivals and events, including, but not limited to the Village Fair, Taste of Glen Ellyn, and JazzUp, except to the extent that such vendor has a brick and mortar location. 
(Ord. 6629, 9-24-2018) 
3-44-4. - Collection of tax(es) by retailer. 
The owner and operator of each Retail Food and Liquor Facility within the Village shall jointly and severally have the duty to collect and account for said tax(es) from each purchaser at the time that the consideration for such purchase is paid. 
(Ord. 6629, 9-24-2018) 
3-44-5. - Books and records. 
Each person required to pay the tax provided for hereunder shall, personally or through his/her authorized agents, maintain complete books and records covering the operation of the Retail Food Facility and Retail Liquor Facility so taxed, indicating therein all receipts from the operation of said facilities. Said records shall include the gross receipts for sales of food, beverages and alcoholic liquor and taxes collected each day pursuant to the food and beverage tax, purchase orders, invoices and receipts, and other documents listing, summarizing or pertaining to the transactions that gave rise, or may have given rise, to the tax liability or exemption that may be claimed and copies of the Illinois retailers' occupation tax and Illinois service occupation tax returns filed with the Illinois Department of Revenue (IDOR). Such books shall be maintained on the premises and shall be subject to inspection and audit by the Village and its duly authorized agents, following written notice specifying the tax and time frame to be audited, at all reasonable hours during business hours of the day. 
No person shall prevent, hinder or interfere with the Village and its duly authorized agent(s) in the discharge of his/her duties in the performance of this article. 
(Ord. 6629, 9-24-2018) 
3-44-6. - Filing of return, penalty for failure. 
The owner and the operator of each retail food facility and each retail liquor facility within the Village shall jointly and severally have the duty to cause to be filed a sworn return(s) with the Finance Director for each retail facility located in the Village. Said return shall be prepared and submitted on forms prescribed by the Village. Said return shall be filed by the filing date or postmarked the filing date (either of which shall constitute timely payment), and at the same time intervals and frequencies as the Retailers' Occupational Tax return, Form ST-1, is due to be filed with the Illinois Department of Revenue. Said return shall also be accompanied by payment to the Village of all taxes imposed by this chapter which are due and owing for the period covered by said return, except that one percent of the amount due may be deducted if payment is made in a timely manner. Said return shall also be accompanied with a copy of the return filed with the Illinois Department of Revenue covering the same reporting period. 
The failure to file a timely return shall lead to the imposition of a penalty of up to 25 percent of the total tax due for the applicable filing period for which the return was due, in the discretion of the Village. 
(Ord. 6629, 9-24-2018) 
3-44-7. - Determination of improper tax payment. 
In the event that the Finance Director makes a determination that a tax payment properly due and owing has not been remitted in full, the Finance Director will issue by United States Registered or Certified Mail a written notice of a tax assessment determination to the Retail Food Facility or Retail Liquor Facility. The Retail Food Facility or Retail Liquor Facility shall pay the tax assessment or file an appeal or protest of the assessment within 45 days of service of the Notice. The appeal shall be conducted in accordance with Title 1, Chapter 11, of the Glen Ellyn Municipal Code, as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. 6629, 9-24-2018) 
3-44-8. - Amendment to food and beverage tax returns. 
In the event the retailer which has made payment of any Food and Beverage Tax to the Village and believes that said payment was in excess of what was legally required to be paid, that party shall have a period of one year from the date of payment to amend its Food and Beverage Tax returns. Upon confirmation of overpayment, the Village shall process said amendment and repay any excess amount paid to the Village for any fees collected within one year of the request being made. In the event the Village determines that no excess payment of the tax legally required to be paid, the Village shall notify the retailer in writing of its determination. 
(Ord. 6629, 9-24-2018) 
3-44-9. - Late payment penalty. 
If any tax imposed herein is not paid when due, a late payment penalty equal to five percent of the unpaid tax shall be added for each month, or any portion thereof, that such tax remains underpaid and the total of such late payment penalty shall be paid along with the tax imposed herein. In addition to the five percent penalty imposed above, any retailer participating in community festivals whose tax(es) is not timely filed or paid, will be denied necessary permits to participate in any future community festivals. 
In addition, the failure to collect, account for, and pay over said tax and any penalty shall be cause for suspension or revocation of any Village license or permit issued for such Retail Food Facility or Retail Liquor Facility. Any suspension or revocation of any license or permit shall not release or discharge the owner or operator from any liability for the payment of the tax nor from prosecution for such offense. 
Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax as herein provided, the Village shall have the right to bring, or cause to be brought, an action in accordance with Title 1, Chapter 13A, et seq. to enforce the payment of the tax(es) on behalf of the Village, or may bring an action in any court having competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 6629, 9-24-2018) 
3-44-10. - Transmittal of excess tax collections 
If any person collects an amount upon a sale not subject to the tax imposed herein, but which amount is purported to be the collection of said tax, or if a person collects an amount upon a sale greater than the amount of the tax so imposed herein and does not for any reason return the same to the purchaser who paid the same before filing the return for the period in which such occurred, said person shall account for and pay over those amounts to the Village along with the tax properly collected. 
(Ord. 6629, 9-24-2018) 
3-44-11. - Registration. 
Every owner and operator of any Retail Food Facility and Retail Liquor Facility within the Village shall register with the Finance Director on a form prescribed by the Village no later than March 1, 2018, or the date of becoming such an owner and operator, whichever is later. 
The form shall designate an individual, either by name or job title, to receive any written communication from the Village regarding the Food and Beverage Tax. Each person so designated shall be employed at a facility located within the Village of Glen Ellyn and for purposes of this section may be referred to as "agent". Each owner and operator of each facility may additionally designate an individual, either by name or job title, outside of the corporate limits of the Village to receive the same information or inquiries provided to the person so designated within the Village. It shall be the obligation of each owner or operator of the facility to notify the Village in writing via certified mail of any change of person so designated within ten days of any change. 
(Ord. 6629, 9-24-2018) 
3-44-12. - Violations. 
Any owner or operator found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished, upon conviction thereof, by a fine of not less than $200.00 nor more than $500.00 for the first offense, and not less than $500.00 nor more than $1,000.00 for the second and each subsequent offense in any 180-day period. A separate and distinct offense shall be deemed committed each day upon which said violation shall continue. 
(Ord. 6629, 9-24-2018) 
TITLE 4 - BUILDING REGULATIONS 
Chapter 1 - BUILDING CODE 

4-1-1. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known as and may be called the Building Code of Glen Ellyn. 
(Ord. 3129, 8-26-1985, eff. 10-1-1985) 
4-1-2. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to: 
(A)  Prescribe the strength and manner of constructing all buildings, structures and their accessories and of the construction of fire escapes thereon; 
(B)  Adopt the provisions, as amended herein, of the 2009 ICC International Building Code; 
(C)  Adopt the provisions, as amended herein, of the 2009 ICC International Mechanical Code; 
(D)  Adopt the provisions, as amended herein, of the 2009 ICC International Residential Code; 
(E)  Adopt the provisions, as amended herein, of the 2009 ICC International Energy Conservation Code; 
(F)  Adopt the provisions, as amended herein, of the 2009 ICC International Property Maintenance Code; 
(G)  Adopt the provisions, as amended herein, of the 2009 ICC International Fuel Gas Code; 
(H)  References: 
1.  Whenever the ICC International Codes reference the ICC Electrical Code, the provisions of the currently adopted NFPA 70 National Electrical Code shall apply. 
2.  Whenever the ICC International Codes reference the ICC Plumbing Code, the provisions of the currently adopted IDPH Illinois Plumbing Code shall apply. 
3.  Whenever the ICC International Codes reference the ICC existing Building Code, the provisions of the currently adopted ICC International Codes and the NFPA 101 Life Safety Code shall apply. 
(Ord. 5214, 12-15-2003, eff. 3-1-2004; Ord. 5995, 5-14-2012, eff. 6-1-2012; Ord. 5996, 1-30-2012, eff. 3-1-2012) 
4-1-3. - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise expressly stated or the context clearly indicates a different sense, the following terms shall, for the purpose of this chapter, have the meanings indicated in this section: 
ADDITION: The change to a structure or part thereof that increases the floor area of the building. 
ALTERATION: Any physical change to the exterior structure (not surface) of a building or part thereof including, but not limited to, renovation, rehabilitation, reconstruction, restoration, replacement, rearrangement of structural parts or elements, or changes affecting the plan configuration of walls or roof, spaces or bulk of a building. 
AUTHORITY OF THE JURISDICTION: The corporate authorities of the Village consisting of the President and Board of Trustees. 
BUILDING OFFICIAL: The Building and Zoning Official of the Village, as that position is defined in section 4-4-1 of this Title. 
COMMERCIAL: All buildings and structures, except those defined as residential, regulated under the International Building Code. 
CONSTRUCTION NECESSITATED VARIATION: A variation requested after the issuance of a valid building permit related to the variation or a variation needed for any phase of construction that is in progress or has already occurred, either with or without a valid building permit and approved plans, that violates applicable Zoning Code regulations. 
DEMOLITION: The systematic destruction of a building or structure, all or in part, including a "tear down", deconstruction, or razing. 
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate including, but not limited to, construction of or improvements to buildings or other structures, the placement of mobile homes, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations. 
DEVELOPMENT, COMMERCIAL: Any development intended for a public, business, industrial, educational, institutional, or similar use, including multi-family housing and townhomes, but excluding single-family and two-family dwellings. 
EXTERIOR STRUCTURE: The total combined area used to define the percentage of alteration to an existing structure based on the following descriptions: 
Roof area: The square footage of the horizontal plane(s) formed by the outside top edge of the perimeter walls, and 
Wall area: The square footage of all outside wall surfaces from a point eight inches above the adjacent grade to the soffit or eave. 
HARD COST: The cost of all labor, materials, overhead and profit to complete remodeling of an existing building. Remodeling work includes, but is not limited to, improvements and alterations to foundations, walls, roofs, floors, ceilings, stairs, doors, windows, and electrical, mechanical, plumbing systems, and fixtures and equipment. 
For purpose of determining hard cost, remodeling work does not include the following: 
1.  Interior or exterior non-structural demolition work or removal of existing improvements, fixtures or equipment. 
2.  Work to install a fire sprinkler system or increase the size of the water service to a building as required to serve a fire sprinkler system. 
3.  Work to install a fire alarm and detection system. 
4.  Installation of interior floor, wall and ceiling finishes such as paint, wallcoverings, paneling or tile over wallboard, or carpet, wood or tile flooring over a subfloor. 
5.  Cabinets and casework, countertops, shelving units, or door, window, base and ceiling trim. 
6.  Furniture, appliances, decorative fixtures, window treatments or business sales, display or service fixtures and equipment. 
JURISDICTION: The Village of Glen Ellyn. 
MECHANICAL OFFICIAL: The Building and Zoning Official of the Village, as that position is defined in section 4-4-1 of this Title. 
REMODELING: Any change to the interior of a building or part thereof and includes, but is not limited to, renovation, rehabilitation, reconstruction, restoration, replacement, rearrangement of structural parts or elements, or that affects the plan configuration of walls or spaces of a building. 
REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE: The restoration to good condition, or keeping in an existing state, of a building, structure, or its appurtenant equipment. Ordinary repairs and maintenance shall not include the cutting away of any wall, partition, or portion thereof; removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support; removal or change of any required means of egress or the rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the exit requirements; addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, soil, waste, vent, or similar piping, electric wiring, mechanical or other work which affects the public health or safety. 
RESIDENTIAL: One- and two-family dwellings and townhouses not more than three stories above grade with a separate means of egress and their accessory structures regulated under the International Residential Code. 
SITE IMPROVEMENT COST: The cost of all site improvements on private property excluding buildings, and improvements in the adjacent public right-of-way for a commercial development including, but not limited to, hazard remediation, clearing, excavation, fill, grading and topsoil, pavement, curbs, gutters, retaining walls, domestic water and sanitary sewer mains and service lines to the building including all manholes and appurtenances thereto, storm sewer mains and all drainage lines, inlets, manholes, culverts, catch basins, and appurtenances thereto, stormwater retention and detention facilities, sediment and erosion control measures, fire protection system water lines, valves, hydrants, and appurtenances thereto, irrigation systems, landscaping and ground cover, fencing and screening, parking lot striping, traffic control signals and signing, streetlights, and site lighting. 
STRUCTURE, NEW: A building or structure constructed or erected on the ground or attached to a fixed location on the ground that did not exist prior to the commencement of construction or erection. 
WATERING HOSE: A minimum one and one-half inch diameter hose designed for high volume and high capacity distribution of water required during the demolition process. 
WATERING TRUCK: Any vehicle designed for the transport and disbursement of water that has a minimum capacity of 2,000 gallons. 
(Ord. 3129, 8-26-1985, eff. 10-1-1985; amd. Ord. 4746, 8-9-1999; Ord. 5245, 3-8-2004; Ord. 5432, 2-13-2006; Ord. 5476, 6-12-2006; Ord. 5996, 1-30-2012, eff. 3-1-2012; Ord. 6074, 9-24-2012; Ord. 6603, 5-29-2018) 
4-1-4. - Fee and deposit schedule. 
(A)  The schedule of fees and deposits applies to all new or reconstructed buildings and structures, new additions, alterations or remodeling to existing buildings, structures or accessory structures, and all property development unless otherwise specified. 
(B)  The schedule of fees and deposits shall be subject to a biennial increase based on the Consumer Price Index (CPI) as defined under Section 1-5 of the Property Tax Extension Limitation Law. This represents the applicable December to December change in the national CPI for all urban consumers for all items as published by the United States Department of Labor. The increase shall be equal to the prior two year cumulative increase and all dollar amounts shall be rounded to the nearest $5.00. 
(C)  Schedule of fees and deposits : No permit for the construction of any new building, structure or accessory structure, addition, alteration or remodeling of an existing building, structure or accessory structure, change of use or occupancy of an existing structure or space, or construction, modification to, or demolition of any system or structure regulated by the Zoning Code or Building Codes shall be issued within the Village corporate limits or outside the Village corporate limits, when appropriate, until the following fees and deposits are paid in full: 
1.  Permit fees: 
(a)  The permit fee is the sum of the applicable building fees and plan review fees established in the following table. Where the project scope includes work listed on separate line items, the permit fee shall be the total of the associated building, application and plan review fees. 
(b)  The minimum building fee shall be $50.00. 
(c)  Building fees are due and payable at the time of issuance of a building permit. 
2.  Plan review fees: 
(a)  A plan review fee in the amount of 110 percent of the consultant's cost of a building, stormwater, landscaping, tree preservation or other plan review consultant shall be paid by the applicant when such a review is required by the nature of the project or will, at the request of the applicant, expedite the review. A consultant may be used when a project contains specialty equipment, has unusual construction methods or materials, has been reviewed by a Village Board or Commission, or is deemed necessary by the Community Development Department because of the size, nature, occupancy, use or complexity of the development. When a consultant is determined to be necessary, the applicant shall pay an initial deposit of $2,000.00 at the time the plans are submitted to cover the cost or part thereof of the plan review service provided by the consultant. When the building permit is issued, the final plan review fee will be adjusted to account for this initial payment; and any unused portion will be refunded. Any additional consultant fees should be billed to, and promptly paid by, the applicant. No building permit or occupancy certificate will be issued, or inspection scheduled if a consultant invoice has not been paid. If a project is abandoned, the applicant will be responsible for all costs incurred by the plan review consultant. 
(b)  The plan review fee for all new or reconstructed buildings or structures and remodeling and alterations of existing buildings, structures, utilities, and site improvements shall be as indicated in the schedule of fees and deposits. 
(c)  The minimum plan review fee shall be $30.00. 
(d)  Plan review fees are due and payable at the time of application for building permit. Permit applications will not be accepted without receipt of payment of the applicable plan review fee. In the event that the applicant abandons the project, this fee is not refundable. 
(e)  The plan review fee for each plan review completed after the second review shall be $200.00. 
3.  Inspections: 
(a)  The fee for annual or biannual fire prevention inspections, change of occupancy or ownership, elevator and construction-related inspections shall be as indicated in the schedule of fees and deposits. 
(b)  Fees established in the schedule of fees and deposits allow for an initial rough inspection and a final inspection for work of each construction trade and one re-inspection thereof. Re-inspection fees apply to each re-inspection after the second inspection fails, until such time as a subsequent inspection of the same work passes. 
4.  Zoning fees : The required fee for application for modification of the specific requirements of the zoning ordinance, subdivision regulations code, sign code and other zoning related matters shall be as indicated in the schedule of fees and deposits. The schedule also includes fees to process requests for annexation, exterior appearance review and amendments. 
5.  License/registration fees : The fee for annual or biennial contractor registration and annual business license or registration shall be as indicated in the schedule of fees and deposits. 
6.  Administrative fees : The fee for administrative items such as issuance of certificate of occupancy, permit extensions or renewals and other construction related items shall be as indicated in the schedule of fees and deposits. 
7.  Public right-of-way : The fee for license agreements for private use of the public right-of-way or vacation thereof shall be as indicated in the schedule of fees and deposits. 
SCHEDULE OF FEES AND DEPOSITS 
The following schedule applies to all new or reconstructed buildings and structures, new additions, alterations or remodeling to existing buildings, structures or accessory structures, and all property development unless noted otherwise in this section of the Glen Ellyn Village Code. Where a project includes multiple work items listed as separate line items in this schedule the fees shall be cumulative in nature to include all work items in the project scope of work. 
Construction Scope of Work Building or
Application
Fee Plan
Review Fee Refundable
Deposit or
Escrow A - New Construction 1 Non-residential or mixed-use building, principal structure, total square footage of all levels, including all attached or detached structures: 
a. Fees include connection fee for up to maximum 1" water service line, and 1" water meter. For larger water service line or meter sizes, the building fee shall be increased by the difference in cost between 1-inch and the required size(s) (see chapters 7-11-30 and 7-11-32 of this Code). The cost difference between a 1-inch line and the required line size shall be added to the permit fees indicated herein. 
b. Fees do not includes sewer connection fees (see section (F) of this schedule). 
c. Fees do not include site development/stormwater fees or deposits. 
d. For food service establishments, add $250.00 to the plan review fee. 
e. Fees do not include elevator fees (see section (D) of this schedule). 
f.  Fees do not include fire alarm and detection or fire sprinkler systems (see section (D) of this schedule). 
g. Fees include up to two plan reviews (Additional plan reviews shall be charged per Note 1). 
h. Fees do not include systems that collect or convert geothermal, solar or wind energy (see section D of this chart).  Up to 2,000 square feet       See Note 7 6,100 1,900 5,000  2,001 to 3,500 square feet       See Note 7 6,300 2,250 5,000  3,501 to 5,000 square feet       See Note 7 6,550 3,000 5,000  5,001 to 6,500 square feet       See Note 7 6,900 3,600 5,000  6,501 to 8,000 square feet       See Note 7 7,400 4,100 5,000  over 8,000 square feet       See Note 7 See Note 14 $0.20/sf 5,000 2 Residential 1- and 2-family dwelling, principal structure, total floor area square footage of all levels: 
a. Fees include all impervious surfaces, attached structures such as porches and decks, up to three detached accessory structures such as garages or pergolas, as allowed by the zoning code for the applicable zoning district. 
b. Fees include connection fee for sewer line and up to maximum 1" water service line, and 1" water meter. For larger water service line or meter sizes, the building fee shall be increased by the difference in cost between 1-inch and the required size(s) (see chapter 7-11-30 of this Code). 
c. Fees include site development/stormwater fees and deposits. 
d. Fees include up to two plan reviews (Additional plan reviews shall be charged per Note 1). 
e. Fees do not include systems that collect or convert geothermal, solar or wind energy (see section D of this chart).  Up to 2,000 square feet 4,900 800 5,000  2,001 to 6,500 square feet 5,100 1,100 5,000  6,501 to 9,500 square feet 5,500 1,500 5,000  9,501 to 13,500 square feet 6,000 1,900 5,000  13,501 to 18,000 square feet 6,700 2,600 5,000  over 18,000 square feet 7,600 3,300 5,000 3 Residential multi-family dwelling, principal structure. 
a. Fees do not include water or sewer connection fee, see chapters 7-11-30 and 7-11-32 of this Code. 
b. Fees do not include site development/stormwater fees or deposits. 
c. Fees do not include elevator fees (see section (D) of this schedule). 
d. Fees do not include fire alarm and detection or fire sprinkler systems (see section (D) of this schedule). 
e. Fees include up to two plan reviews (Additional plan reviews shall be charged per Note 1). 
f. Fees do not include systems that collect or convert geothermal, solar or wind energy (see section D of this chart).  Fee per dwelling unit 2,000 each unit See Note 1 5,000  Fee for associated structures other than new dwelling units See Note 14 $0.20/sf 5,000 B - Additions - Fees do not include fire sprinkler, fire alarm and detection or elevator work if required/provided. 1 New level to existing primary building for 1- and 2-family dwellings 2,250 800 4,000 New level to existing multi-family, mixed-use or non-residential building See Note 14 1,700 5,000 2 To accessory structures for 1-, 2- and 3-family dwellings 450 200 2,000 3 To accessory structures for 4-family and larger dwellings 600 300 2,000 4 To residential primary building for 1-, 2- and 3-family dwellings, total new square footage of all levels, not including water service upgrade if necessary:  Up to 500 square feet 1,125 500 2,000  501 to 1,000 square feet 2,250 600 2,000  1,001 to 2,000 square feet 3,375 700 2,000  over 2,000 square feet 5,100 1,100 5,000 5 To residential primary building for 4-family and larger dwellings, total square footage of all levels, not including water service upgrade if necessary:  Up to 500 square feet 1,125 1,300 2,000  501 to 1,000 square feet 2,250 1,400 2,000  1,001 to 2,000 square feet 3,375 1,700 2,000  Over 2,000 square feet See Note 14 $0.20/sf 5,000 6 To non-residential or mixed-use building, total square footage of all levels, not including water service upgrade if necessary:  Up to 500 square feet 1,125 500 2,000  501 to 1,000 square feet 2,250 600 2,000  1,001 to 2,000 square feet 3,375 700 2,000  2,001 to 3,500 square feet 6,300 1,800 5,000  3,501 to 5,000 square feet 6,550 2,000 5,000  5,001 to 6,500 square feet 6,900 2,400 5,000  6,501 to 8,000 square feet 7,400 2,700 5,000  over 8,000 square feet See Note 14 $0.20/sf 5,000 C - Alterations and Remodeling - Fees do not include fire sprinkler, fire alarm and detection, or elevator work if required/provided. 1 - Residential a Attic buildout 1,000 200 N/A b Basement alterations/buildout 1,000 200 N/A c Bathroom, new or alteration 500 60 N/A d Foundation Underpinning 250 75 N/A e Interior alterations, 1- and 2-family dwellings, multiple rooms, one level. Fee does not include plumbing inspections if required. 750 300 N/A f Interior alterations, 1- and 2-family dwellings, multiple rooms, two levels. Fee does not include plumbing inspections if required. 1,000 400 N/A g Interior alterations, multiple rooms, more than two levels. Fee does not include plumbing inspections if required. 1,500 500 N/A h Interior alterations to 2 to 4 multi-family dwelling units, and/or limited common area work. Fee does not include plumbing inspections if required. 1,100 300 N/A i Interior alterations to 5 or more multi-family dwelling units, and/or major common area work. Fee does not include plumbing inspections if required. 2,200 400 N/A j Kitchen, new or alteration 900 75 N/A k Structural modification or repair 150 75 N/A 2 - Commercial Buildings a Food Service Establishment buildout: 
Fees do not include the following work items: 
a. water service upgrade, if required (see section (F) of this schedule). 
b. fire detection and alarm or fire sprinkler systems (see section (D) of this schedule). 
c. new grease interceptor, if required (see section (F) of this schedule). 
d. sewer connection fee, if required (see section (F) of this schedule).  up to 1,000 square feet 1,200 1,600 N/A  1,001 to 2,000 square feet 2,400 1,700 N/A  2,001 to 3,000 square feet 3,600 1,900 N/A  3,001 to 4,000 square feet 4,800 2,100 N/A  Over 4,000 square feet 6,000 2,500 N/A b Kitchen exhaust hood/Ansul system, replacement unit not part of tenant buildout 130 per hood 250 per hood N/A c Storefront or façade alteration, stand alone alteration project with no interior remodeling 250 60 N/A d Structural modification or repair 150 75 N/A e Tenant buildout, including all mechanical, electrical and plumbing work. Fire alarm and detection or fire sprinkler work not included.  up to 1,000 square feet 1,000 1,400 N/A  1,001 to 2,000 square feet 2,000 1,500 N/A  2,001 to 3,000 square feet 3,000 1,700 N/A  3,001 to 4,000 square feet 4,000 1,900 N/A  Over 4,000 square feet 5,000 2,300 N/A f Tenant modification of floor plan layout, up to 500 square feet, no mechanical, electric or plumbing modifications 75 75 N/A g Tenant modification of floor plan layout, over 500 square feet, no mechanical, electric or plumbing modifications 175 150 N/A h Tenant modification of lighting or electric power distribution system 175 75 N/A i Tenant modification of mechanical system 75 150 N/A j Tenant modification of plumbing system 450 150 N/A k Toilet room, new or remodeling 400 75 N/A l White Box buildout, including interior demolition of previous tenant space down to demising walls, floor and ceiling system, no new work 500 150 N/A D - Miscellaneous Permits (see Note 9) 1 Accessibility modifications, interior or exterior, not within the public right-of-way 65 60 N/A 2 Arbor, trellis, pergola, ornamental gate or other similar structures 65 30 N/A 3 Canopy or Fixed Awning, new or alteration 65 30 N/A 4 Commercial filming 150 N/A N/A 5 Commercial filming, application late fee 75 N/A N/A 6 Deck or Porch construction/replacement, single level 225 60 N/A 7 Deck or Porch construction/replacement, multiple levels 350 80 N/A 8 Demolition (refer to section N of this schedule for applicable demolition tax based on area of demolition): 
See Note 3  Detached garage 80 30 2,000  Interior only, non-structural 175 30 N/A  Primary structure - greater than 300 to 1,000 square feet 275 350 3,000  Primary structure - 1,001 to 4,000 square feet 425 350 3,000  Primary structure - greater than 4,000 square feet, not exceeding 45 feet height 500 350 4,000  Primary structure - greater than 4,000 square feet and exceeding 45 feet in height 600 350 4,000 9 Drain tile and sump pit/pump 65 30 N/A 10 Driveway, new, replacement or expanded if over 299 square feet in area, add site development fee 65 30 See Note 13 11 Driveway approach only (same size and location) 65 30 N/A 12 Elevator or other conveyance, new 200 per stop 120 N/A 13 Elevator modifications 355 120 N/A 14 Exit stairway, exterior 225 30 N/A 15 Fascias, soffits, gutters and/or downspouts 65 N/A N/A 16 Fence, new 65 15 N/A 17 Fence, repair (see note 16) 65 N/A N/A 18 Fireplace, new interior or exterior 80 30 N/A 19 Fire alarm and detection system, new or modified:  up to 10,000 square feet 80 280 N/A  10,001 to 15,000 square feet 150 420 N/A  Over 15,000 square feet 200 550 N/A 20 Fire sprinkler system, pipe schedule design:  1 to 20 sprinkler heads 125 280 N/A  21 to 100 sprinkler heads 200 300 N/A  101 to 200 sprinkler heads 275 400 N/A  201 to 300 sprinkler heads 350 450 N/A  301 to 500 sprinkler heads 425 700 N/A  over 500 sprinkler heads 500 See Note 1 N/A 21 Fire sprinkler system, hydraulically calculated:  1 to 20 sprinkler heads 125 300 N/A  21 to 100 sprinkler heads 200 600 N/A  101 to 200 sprinkler heads 275 810 N/A  201 to 300 sprinkler heads 350 920 N/A  301 to 500 sprinkler heads 425 1,325 N/A  over 500 sprinkler heads 500 See Note 1 N/A 22 Garage - residential, 1-story, detached 600 300 2,000 23 Garage - residential, 2-story, detached 650 300 2,000 24 Geothermal systems 250 125 N/A 25 Gazebo or Greenhouse (If disturbed area is 300 square feet or larger, then add site development fee) 65 30 N/A 26 Key box (Village purchase cost plus 10%) cost + 10% N/A N/A 27 Masonry tuckpointing, over 300 square feet 65 N/A N/A 28 Miscellaneous construction, under $15,000 construction hard cost valuation 250 60 See Note 4 29 Miscellaneous construction, over $15,000 construction hard cost valuation See Note 9 200 See Note 4 30 Other appliances, equipment or structures not listed 65 30 See Note 4 31 Outdoor fire pit, oven or kitchen 65 30 N/A 32 Paved or impervious surface (including sport courts) greater than 100 and less than 300 square feet in area 65 30 N/A 33 Paved or impervious surface (including sport courts) greater than 299 square feet in area 260 110 2,000 34 Pavement grinding/resurfacing 65 30 N/A 35 Prescribed burn 80 N/A N/A 36 Radon system, active (power ventilated) 80 N/A N/A 37 Radon system, passive (natural ventilation) 65 N/A N/A 38 Restripe parking lot 65 30 N/A 39 Retaining wall, over 8 inches in height 65 75 N/A 40 Roofing, residential over 300 square feet 65 N/A N/A 41 Roofing, commercial over 300 square feet 150 30 N/A 42 Shed or other accessory structure less than 150 square feet in area 65 30 N/A 43 Shoring, raising or moving of any building 600 150 5,000 44 Sidewalk, new $20.00/lin ft N/A N/A 45 Siding or stucco over 300 square feet 80 N/A N/A 46 Site development fees, new construction: Water, sanitary and sewer fees included within construction fees unless noted otherwise.  Development from 300 to 1,500 square feet in area 425 250 5,000  Development located within the principal building side yard setbacks, excluding a driveway approach 425 330 5,000  Development over 1,500 square feet for single-family home or townhome 700 600 5,000  Development over 1,500 square feet for commercial and multi-family (see section 4-1-4(I) of this Code) See Note 6 See Note 7 5,000 47 Solar panel system, including connection to electric system only 250 75 N/A 48 Solar panel system, including connection to electric and plumbing system 350 100 N/A 49 Storage tank installation or removal 125 50 2,000 50 Swimming pool, spa or hot tub, above ground 
 *Deposit of $2,000 required if disturbed area is larger than 300 square feet 100 30 *N/A 51 Swimming pool, spa or hot tub, in-ground 200 60 2,000 52 Telecommunication sites, alterations or co-locate (other than small wireless facility) 250 450 2,000 53 Telecommunication sites, new construction, not in public right-of-way (other than small wireless facility) 500 750 2,000 54 Telecommunication site, single co-located small wireless facility 200 450 4,000 55 Telecommunication site, additional small wireless facilities, after the first co-located site under the same permit application 200 each 150 each 4000 each 56 Temporary bleachers, platform, stage or tent (tent greater than 400 square feet) 75 30 N/A 57 Wind turbine 250 75 N/A E - Heating, Ventilation and Air Conditioning 1 Air conditioning coil and/or condenser replacement 65 N/A N/A 2 Air distribution system modification 65 N/A N/A 3 Boiler 120 N/A N/A 4 Chimney or vent, replacement or chimney re-liner 65 N/A N/A 5 Solid fuel-burning equipment or stove 65 N/A N/A 6 Fuel-gas or fuel-oil piping modification 120 N/A N/A 7 Heating/cooling equipment: residential furnace, heat pump, new or replacement 65 30 N/A 8 Heating/cooling equipment: commercial furnace, heat pump, rooftop unit, new or replacement 120 30 N/A F - Plumbing 1 Cross connection control device, new 140 N/A N/A 2 Flood/sewer backup control system 215 60 N/A 3 Grease interceptor, new or replacement 140 60 N/A 4 Hydrant Meter 550 N/A N/A 5 Irrigation systems - lawn 140 30 See Note 4 6 Modified overhead sewer, not part of a remodeling project 140 30 N/A 7 Reconfigure interior waste, water or vent system, not part of a remodeling project 140 30 N/A 8 Service disconnection, waste or water 200 60 4,000 9 Sewer connection fee (Village base fee as shown, plus Glenbard Wastewater Authority fee) 
 Base fee, plus $278.00 per PE (population equivalent) 1,000 N/A N/A 10 Sewer line inspection (Clear Water Program) 
 Note: This fee is not included within new construction, additions, alterations or remodeling fees 100 N/A N/A 11 Water heater, replacement 120 N/A N/A 12 Water meter See Note 12 50 N/A 13 Water, sewer or storm line, 1-, 2- and 3-family dwellings (add connection fee based on service line size per chapters 7-11-30 and 7-11-32 of this Code) 240 60 3,000 14 Water, sewer or storm line, multi-family, mixed -use or commercial (add connection fee based on service line size per chapters 7-11-30 and 7-11-32 of this Code) 340 75 3,000 15 Water, sewer or storm line repair (private property) 140 N/A N/A 16 Water, sewer or storm line repair (public property) 240 N/A 5,000 G - Electrical 1 Emergency generator 65 30 N/A 2 Exit signs 65 30 N/A 3 Lighting fixtures 65 N/A N/A 4 Openings for wiring, each 25 or portion thereof 65 N/A N/A 5 Re-circuiting 80 N/A N/A 6 Service feeders 80 N/A N/A 7 Service upgrade, up to 200 amps 100 N/A N/A 8 Service upgrade, up to 400 amps 125 N/A N/A 9 Service upgrade, over 400 amps 150 N/A N/A 10 Service upgrade, each additional meter 65 N/A N/A 11 Service panel or sub panel 65 N/A N/A 12 Temporary electrical service 80 N/A N/A 13 Transformer 65 N/A N/A 14 Underground service 80 N/A N/A 15 Wired connection, appliances or equipment 65 N/A N/A H - Signs 1 Banners 50 each N/A N/A 2 Comprehensive sign plan 500 N/A N/A 3 Freestanding sign 175 each N/A N/A 4 Illuminated sign 150 each N/A N/A 5 Non-illuminated sign 100 each N/A N/A 6 Panel replacement 100 each N/A N/A I - Plan Reviews 1 Additional fees:  Plan review completed in-house after the second plan review has been completed N/A 200 N/A  Stormwater plan review performed after the third review (see section 4-1-4(I) of this Code) N/A 75 per hour N/A  Stormwater plan review performed on revised drawings submitted after drawings have been approved (see section 4-1-4(I) of this Code) N/A 75 per hour N/A 2 Deferred submittal: elevator or other conveyance (cost added to plan review fee indicated elsewhere in this schedule) N/A 100 N/A 3 Deferred submittal: fire alarm system or fire suppression system (cost added to plan review fee indicated in section (D) of this schedule) N/A 250 N/A 4 Deferred submittal: truss shop drawings (cost added to base permit fee of project) N/A 100 N/A 5 Deferred submittal: other, with approval of the Building and Zoning Official (cost added to applicable plan review fee indicated elsewhere in this schedule) N/A 250 N/A 6 Elevator or other conveyance N/A 120 each conveyance N/A 7 Expedited plan reviews, 1- and 2-family dwellings (additional cost for up to 5 business day turnaround time) N/A 500 N/A 8 Expedited plan reviews, 1- and 2-family dwellings (additional cost for up to 3 business day turnaround time) N/A 1,000 N/A 9 Expedited plan reviews, multi-family, mixed-use or commercial N/A See Note 1 2,000 10 Plan reviews performed by a consultant (see subsection 4-1-4(C)2(a) of this Code) N/A See Note 1 2,000 11 Plan review necessitated by drawing revisions after issuance of permit N/A 75 N/A 12 Miscellaneous assemblies, equipment or structures reviewed by in-house staff N/A 75 per hour N/A J - Administrative Fees 1 Appeal of administrative decision of the Community Development Director or the Building & Zoning Official 250 N/A N/A 2 Certificate of Occupancy, other than for new construction 100 N/A N/A 3 Permit extension (see subsection 4-1-4(G) of this Code) 50 per month N/A N/A 4 Phased permit, foundation and underground utilities only permit, 1- and 2-family (fees in addition to scheduled building and plan review fees) 250 200 N/A 5 Phased permit, foundation and underground utilities only permit, other than 1- and 2-family (fees in addition to scheduled building and plan review fees) 500 500 N/A 6 Phased permit, building shell only (fees in addition to scheduled building and plan review fees) 1,000 500 N/A 7 Renewal of suspended permit See Note 8 N/A N/A 8 Renewal of expired permit application 500 N/A N/A 9 Temporary Certificate of Occupancy or renewal thereof (see subsection 4-1-4(E) of this Code) 450 N/A N/A 10 Waiver of code for special event (in accordance with sections 1-1-6 and 3-39-3 of this Code) 50 N/A N/A 11 Work exceeding scope of permitted work ;300% of original permit fee 500 minimum N/A N/A 12 Work Started without Permit 200% of original permit fee 250 minimum N/A N/A K - Inspections 1 Annual Fire Prevention Inspection: Group Occupancy Use: A-1 thru 5 Assembly 150 N/A N/A A-2 Assembly - Food/Drink Service Establishment, up to 1,000 square feet 75 N/A N/A A-2 Assembly - Food/Drink Service Establishment, over 1,000 square feet 150 N/A N/A A-2 Assembly - Food Service Establishment, commercial hood and duct 50 N/A N/A B Business, up to 1,000 square feet 50 N/A N/A B Business, over 1,000 square feet 75 N/A N/A E Educational 100 N/A N/A E Educational, day care facility 75 N/A N/A F Factory 125 N/A N/A H-1 thru 5 High-hazard 125 N/A N/A I-1 thru 4 Institutional 150 N/A N/A M Mercantile, up to 1,000 square feet 50 N/A N/A M Mercantile over 1,000 sf up to 4,000 square feet 75 N/A N/A M Mercantile over 4,000 square feet 150 N/A N/A R-1 Residential, transient 150 N/A N/A R-2 Residential, non-transient and multi-family building common areas 50 N/A N/A R-3 Residential, non-transient (refer to Building Code for occupancy uses) 125 N/A N/A R-4 Residential, non-transient (refer to Building Code for occupancy uses) 150 N/A N/A S-1 Storage, moderate hazard 75 N/A N/A S-2 Storage, low hazard 50 N/A N/A U Utility and Miscellaneous 50 N/A N/A 2 Change of occupancy inspection (new use or business) 50 N/A N/A 3 Code compliance for 1-, 2- or 3-family dwellings, per request of owner or agent 175 N/A N/A 4 Elevator or other conveyance:  Annual inspection 150 N/A N/A  Annual no- load pressure test 150 N/A N/A  Five-year conveyance load test 350 N/A N/A  Re-inspection fee 75 N/A N/A 5 Re-inspection fee - Plumbing (after second inspection fails) 100 N/A N/A 6 Re-inspection fee - Other than Plumbing (after second inspection fails) 100 N/A N/A 7 Water pressure test, single family residential 200 N/A N/A L - Contractor Registration 1 General contractor (12-month application or renewal) 100 N/A N/A 2 General contractor (24-month application or renewal) 190 N/A N/A 3 Independent contractor (12-month application or renewal) 50 N/A N/A 4 Independent contractor (24-month application or renewal) 95 N/A N/A 5 Reinstatement, for a suspended registration 125 N/A N/A 6 Appeal, (denied application, renewal or suspended registration) plus   reimbursement of fees agreement and escrow fund deposit (see section 4-1-11(J) of this Code) 250 N/A N/A M - Business License/Registration 1 New business 100 annual N/A N/A 2 Change of address, remaining within Glen Ellyn 30 annual N/A N/A 3 Change of business ownership 30 annual N/A N/A 4 Change of business name 30 annual N/A N/A N - Taxes, Demolition 1 Tax, demolition (applies to any project when over 50 percent of the exterior roof and wall area is structurally altered or when a building or structure, or part thereof, greater than 1,000 and up to 4,000 square feet is demolished) 550 N/A N/A O - Developer's Donation/Cash Contribution (Fire Company) 1 Single-family dwelling (attached or detached), per new dwelling unit 1,500 N/A N/A 2 Multi-family dwelling units, per new dwelling unit 500 N/A N/A 3 Congregate housing for the elderly, per new unit 500 N/A N/A P - Zoning and Appearance Applications 1 Administrative zoning variation 250 N/A N/A 2 Annual outdoor beautification display 25 N/A N/A 3 Appeals 700 N/A See Note 5 4 Construction necessitated variations (see section 4-1-4(F) of this Code) 1,100 N/A 2,000 5 Exterior appearance review 200 N/A N/A 6 Live entertainment 150 N/A N/A 7 Planned unit development 2,500 N/A See Note 5 8 Planned unit development amendment 2,500 N/A See Note 5 9 Planned unit development amendment - not requiring a public hearing 1,000 N/A N/A 10 Planned unit development amendment:   where only previously approved signage is being amended regardless if a public hearing is required or not 500 N/A See Note 5 11 Pre-application meeting (see section 4-1-4(D) of this Code) 250 N/A See Note 5 12 Sign variation 500 N/A See Note 5 13 Special use 750 N/A See Note 5 14 Special use amendment, not requiring a public hearing 350 N/A N/A 15 Special use, preexisting - Administrative approval 350 N/A N/A 16 Stormwater variation 150 N/A See Note 5 17 Zoning application plan review 
 (after third review) increasing $50.00 each additional review thereafter 100 N/A N/A 18 Zoning map amendment 500 N/A See Note 5 19 Zoning text amendment 500 N/A See Note 5 20 Zoning variation 550 N/A See Note 5 21 Zoning verification letter 100 N/A N/A Q - Public Right-of-way 1 License agreement, outdoor seating 50 annual N/A N/A 2 License agreement, vendor cart 150 annual N/A N/A 3 Obstructions:  Parking stall (base fee, plus $5.00 per stall, each additional day) 25 N/A N/A  Sidewalk (base fee, plus $5.00 each additional day) 25 N/A N/A  Street 50 per day N/A N/A 4 Right-of-way vacation application 300 N/A N/A R - Annexation 1 Single-family detached home 250 N/A N/A 2 Non-Single-family detached home 1,000 per acre N/A N/A S - Subdivision 1 Major, 5 or more lots 3,500 N/A N/A 2 Minor, 3 or 4 lots 1,400 N/A N/A 3 Two-lot subdivision 250 N/A N/A 4 Land transfer certificate 250 N/A N/A 5 Lot consolidation 250 N/A N/A T - Recapture 1 Pay to Village - Transfer to builder (varies per ordinance) Varies N/A N/A 2 Pay to Village - Processing fee 100 N/A N/A Notes: 
1. Plan review fee shall be equal to 110 percent of consultant fee (see subsection 4-1-4(C)2(a) of this Code). 
2. See section 4-1-4(G) of this Code for plan review fee and deposit amount. 
3. A demolition tax is applied to any project when over 50 percent of the exterior roof and wall area is structurally altered or when a building or structure, or part thereof, greater than 1,000 and up to 4,000 square feet is demolished. 
4. Deposit amount varies at discretion of the Director of Community Development or the Building and Zoning Official based on proposed scope of work and impact on the public right-of-way. 
5. Escrow amount to be determined by the Community Development Director, minimum $1,000.00 (see section 4-1-4(H) of this Code). 
6. The stormwater permit fee shall be one and one-half percent of the site improvements costs, minimum $600.00 (see subsection 4-1-4 (I) of this Code. 
7. The stormwater plan review fee shall be one and one-quarter percent of the site improvements costs, minimum $600.00 (see subsection 4-1-4 (I) of this Code. 
8. Renewal fee shall be 50% of original permit fee, $1,000.00 maximum. 
9. Fee for miscellaneous scope of work not listed in the schedule and with hard cost valuation over $15,000.00 shall be as follows: 
   $150.00 plus $10.00 for each $1,000.00 of estimated hard cost valuation over $15,000.00 for all commercial roofing, siding and pavement replacement work, and 
   $150.00 plus $20.00 for each $1,000.00 of estimated hard cost valuation over $15,000.00 for all other work. 
10. Follow schedule for new construction. 
11. Escrow amount of $2,000.00 is required (see subsection 4-1-4(F) of this Code). 
12. Contact Public Works Department for current pricing. 
13. Required deposit is included within the site development fee if added to this line item. 
14. Building fee shall be calculated as the total building square footage of all floors multiplied by the most current (but no sooner than three months prior to the date of permit application) square foot construction costs published by the International Code Council multiplied by 0.01. 
15. For the purpose of determining fees within this schedule, the floor area of a building or structure shall be taken as the sum of the gross horizontal area of all occupiable floor levels in the building or structure, measured to the exterior face of exterior walls for floor levels above grade, or the external face of perimeter walls for below grade levels (including, but not limited to basements and walk out basements), and to the exterior edge of porches, balconies and roof decks, and excluding the roof, attics and attached decks not supported wholly by the principal structure. 
16. Fence repair is defined as the removal and replacement of fence boards or fabric with a total area of new boards or fabric not to exceed the area of two average panels in the fence, and/or the removal and replacement of up to three posts.  
(D)  Preapplication meeting fee: Every preapplication petition reviewed before the Plan Commission, or Zoning Board of Appeals shall be accompanied with a fee as indicated in the schedule of fees and deposits. 
(E)  Temporary occupancy certificate; deposit and renewals: Upon the request of the holder of a permit, a temporary occupancy certificate shall be issued before the completion of the entire work covered by the permit provided the following requirements are satisfied: 
1.  A written request with an itemized cost estimate of all unfinished work shall be submitted and approved; 
2.  A cash deposit shall be made for all unfinished work, where a cash deposit has not been paid at the time a permit was issued, in an amount equal to 125 percent of the itemized cost estimate, which deposit shall be held until all the work is complete and paid for or lien waivers are submitted; 
3.  The cash deposit may be used by the Village to cover the cost of any incomplete work at the time the temporary certificate expires; 
4.  Any unused portion of the cash deposit used to complete unfinished work will be returned to the depositor; 
5.  Any additional expenses in conjunction with unfinished work incurred by the Village shall be the responsibility of the property owner; 
6.  The allowed time period during which the temporary occupancy certificate is valid shall be established by the Building and Zoning Official. The temporary occupancy certificate shall be valid for no more than 180 days from the date of issuance; 
7.  A renewal of a temporary occupancy may be granted only by the Building and Zoning Official, the Community Development Director, or the Village Manager. The renewal period shall not be longer than 180 days from the date of expiration of the original certificate. 
8.  A temporary occupancy will be granted only when final engineering has been submitted and it reasonably appears that the building can safely be inhabited and where such habitation involves no risk to life, safety, or public welfare, and the temporary occupancy may be withdrawn at any time that either of the above conditions are not met; and 
9.  For the cost of a temporary occupancy certificate and all approved renewals, see subsection (C)1 of this section. 
(F)  Construction necessitated variation fee: A variation application fee shall be paid in the amount of $1,100.00, and $2,000.00 shall be deposited into an escrow fund. The application shall include, in addition to the items required in the Village of Glen Ellyn Zoning Code, the following documents: 
1.  A current site survey showing the details of the variation; 
2.  A time line to show the key events leading to the variation; 
3.  A list of alternative solutions, with designs, plans, and cost estimates; and 
4.  The petitioner's preferred solution. 
(G)  Permit extension fee: Any building permit holder may request an extension of a valid permit for up to six months provided the request is in writing and includes: 
1.  The owner's name; 
2.  The address of the property where the work is being done; 
3.  The building permit number; 
4.  A description of the work to be completed; 
5.  The number of months to be extended; and 
6.  A justifiable cause. 
(H)  Escrow fund (public meetings and public hearings): Any application for a public meeting or public hearing shall require the applicant to submit an amount determined by the Community Development Director, unless otherwise specified, for the reimbursement of all actual Village expenses incurred for publication, legal service, engineering, plan review and inspection services. An escrow fund is not required for residential variations reviewed by the Zoning Board of Appeals, but petitioners must reimburse the Village for the actual cost to publish the public hearing notice in the newspaper. 
Each application for a project to be reviewed by the Plan Commission shall include an agreement to reimburse the Village for all out of pocket costs associated with this development. These out of pocket costs will cover services provided by the Village's consulting engineer, consulting attorney, consulting planner, traffic consultant, appraiser, transcriber, or other consultant deemed necessary by the Community Development Director, as well as reproduction costs, recording costs, etc. 
The agreement shall be accompanied by an initial deposit in an amount to be determined by the Director of Community Development but no less than $1,000.00. The Village will provide an itemized list of Village expenses related to this development, and the applicant will deposit funds to reimburse the Village for those expenses upon notice from the Village that the deposit has dropped below $300.00. If the expenses are not reimbursed, then reviews associated with out of pocket costs will cease, and the application will not be moved forward through the review process. At the completion of the review process, and development of the project, if appropriate, any remaining balance from the deposit will be returned to the petitioner, without interest, after all expenses have been paid. 
(I)  Site improvement cost: The stormwater fee for commercial development is calculated as a percentage of the total site improvement cost. A site improvement cost estimate is required to be signed and certified by the project engineer and submitted for review and approval. To validate the site improvement cost estimate, the applicant may be required to submit additional information to confirm the amounts listed or submit sworn statements from all contractors performing site work listing their contract amounts. The stormwater fee for a commercial development project shall be paid in two installments: 
1.  A stormwater plan review fee of one and one-quarter percent of the site improvement costs shall be paid upon submittal of preliminary or final development plans for Village Board approval. The minimum plan review fee shall be $600.00. The plan review fee shall be paid upon application for the building permit if Village Board approval is not required. 
2.  A stormwater permit fee of one and one-half percent of the site improvement costs shall be paid prior to the issue of a stormwater certification or building permit. The minimum permit fee shall be $600.00. 
3.  The stormwater fee listed in subsection 4-1-4(J) includes reasonable and necessary staff time to review plans, observe site conditions, inspect for compliance, attend project meetings regarding permitting processes and Code requirements, and respond to requests for information or the interpretation or application of applicable regulations. An additional plan review fee of $100.00 shall be paid by the applicant for time expended to complete each staff plan review after the third review, or to re-review approved plans that have been revised and resubmitted. 
(Ord. 5762, 5-26-2009; amd. Ord. 5768, 6-22-2009; Ord. 5851, 2-22-2010; Ord. 5854, 3-8-2010, eff. 3-15-2010; Ord. 5886, 9-13-2010; correspondence dated 2-24-2012; Ord. 5996, 1-30-2012, eff. 3-1-2012; Ord. 6074, 9-24-2012; Ord. 6076, 9-24-2012; Ord. 6128, 4-22-2013; Ord. 6301, 2-23-2015; Ord. 6304, 3-9-2015; Ord. 6441, 10-10-2016; Ord. 6442, 10-16-2016; Ord. 6520, 7-24-2017; Ord. 6603, 5-29-2018; Ord. 6608, 6-25-2018; Ord. 6625, 8-27-2018; Ord. 6674, 2-25-2019) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 6625, adopted Aug. 27, 2018, shall be in full force and effect on or after Jan. 1, 2019, with the exception of the annual fire prevention inspections and business license/registrations which shall be in full force and effect on or after Oct. 1, 2018. 
4-1-5. - General requirements. 
The following general requirements shall apply to all property within the Village of Glen Ellyn Municipal limits in addition to the requirements in all adopted Building Codes and ordinances: 
(A)  Building permit required: No demolition, relocation, site improvements, construction, alteration, addition, remodeling, restoration or repair work to any building or structure or associated site grading or improvements of any kind shall be undertaken until a building permit has been issued, and no change to the permitted work may be completed until revised submittal documents are approved by the Building Official, unless the work is exempt from a permit as specified in this Code. 
(B)  Building permit conditions: No building permit shall be issued until all the following conditions are met: 
1.  A building permit application is completed, submitted and certified by the permit applicant and the property owner with their dated signatures. 
2.  All required building permit submittals have been received and reviewed for Code compliance by all applicable Village departments and governmental agencies with jurisdiction. 
3.  All contractors who are required to comply with the contractor registration requirements are listed on the permit application and registered (see section 4-1-11 of this chapter). 
4.  All applicable permit fees and taxes are paid in full and all required deposits are received. 
5.  All actual expenses incurred by the Village for legal, engineering, plan review and inspection services required beyond the reasonable and customary permit fees, taxes and deposits assessed at the time a permit is issued are paid in full. This condition applies until such time as a certificate of occupancy has been issued for the subject property. 
6.  All outstanding debts to the Village, related to the property, incurred by the current property occupant, owner or owner's agent who are individuals, partnerships, corporations, land trusts, or other business entities, are paid in full. 
7.  The hard costs, as defined in this Code, for all remodeling work improvements are listed on the permit application, and upon request, sworn statements listing the hard cost from all contractors and suppliers is received and approved by the Building and Zoning Official. 
(C)  Deposits required: Deposits shall be required, submitted and released in accordance with the following conditions: 
1.  Restoration deposit: A refundable cash deposit is required for the items listed in subsection 4-1-4(C)1 of this chapter at the time a building permit is obtained for all new principal buildings, additions to existing buildings that increase the floor area over 75 percent, alterations to existing buildings that structurally alter over 50 percent of the exterior wall and roof area, demolition of any building or structure, or part thereof, with a gross floor area over 1,000 square feet or where otherwise required in this Code. 
2.  Demolition site restoration deposit: The demolition site restoration deposit (subsection 4-1-4(C)1 of this chapter) may be credited toward the stormwater facilities/grading deposit if commencement of construction of a new structure is planned to occur within 90 days after completion of the demolition. 
3.  Special conditions deposit: In the event a project is determined to have a significant impact on the public health, safety and welfare of the surrounding property, the Community Development Director may require an additional deposit to be posted by the applicant (subsection 4-1-4(C)1 of this chapter). Said deposit shall be for the purpose of completing any unfinished work or for the cost of any unforeseen expenses associated with the work which require immediate response when the applicant has not completed the work at the request of the Village, or is unable to be contacted, or to return the site to a safe and clean condition. The special conditions deposit is not included within any deposit indicated in the schedule of fees and deposits. 
4.  Deposit refund to depositor: After all final inspections have been completed and approved, deposits shall be refunded to the depositor, less any fines or costs incurred by the Village for damages to public trees or other public property, in accordance with applicable rules, ordinances and regulations. 
5.  Deposit release to Village: Where the permitted work has not been completed in accordance with applicable rules, ordinances and regulations and the depositor has failed to complete the work, repair damages or obtain final approved inspections after due notice has been served and reasonable opportunity has been given to the depositor and permit applicant, the deposit shall be forfeited by the depositor and released to the Village. The Village may use the deposit, or award all or part of the deposit to others, to complete the work or repair damages. Any remaining deposit balance shall be refunded to the depositor. 
6.  Deposit award to owner: The property owner or any other person or entity with a possessory interest in a property may request the Village award them any released deposits for their use to complete the work, repair damages or restore the site. Such request shall include a written description of the work to be completed, a schedule and contractor proposals that include all applicable costs, submitted for review and approval by the Community Development Director. Upon the owner's scheduled completion of the work, proof of payment for the work, final approved inspections, and execution of an indemnity agreement with the Village, the owner will be awarded an amount of the released deposit up to the approved cost. 
(D)  Permit suspension or revocation: 
1.  A building permit shall be suspended and no work shall be performed upon receipt of an application request from the property owner or agent for a zoning variation or construction necessitated variation from the Glen Ellyn Zoning Code. 
2.  A building permit may be suspended or revoked if any one of the conditions required in subsection (B) of this section is not in compliance. 
(E)  Professional certification: The construction documents required for a building permit shall be prepared and certified by an architect or structural engineer licensed in the State of Illinois, or prepared, reviewed and approved under his or her direction, and bear the seal and signature of the architect or engineer and a statement that the construction documents comply with all provisions of the adopted codes and ordinances of the Village of Glen Ellyn and all other applicable laws and regulations governing the design and engineering of the work. Such seal, signature and statement shall be affixed to every page or sheet of the submittal documents or affixed to a table of contents page or sheet indicating the certification applies to each document listed in the table of contents. Professional certification is required for all new buildings, structures and additions, and or all alteration and remodeling of existing buildings and structures that includes changes to the structural, fire protection, and life safety conditions as determined by the Building Official. 
Exception: Professional certification shall not be required for new residential accessory buildings and structures or for alteration or remodeling of existing residential buildings provided the permit documents or construction plans include a complete description of the work and adequate structural and life safety information to verify Code compliance. 
(F)  Stormwater management: All developments including the construction of new and the alteration of all existing buildings and structures and site improvements shall meet the following stormwater management requirements prior to the issue of a building permit: 
1.  Special flood hazard areas: All development in, or within a designated distance from, a special flood hazard area, including floodplains, wetlands, wetland buffers, and riparian environments, shall meet all requirements specified in chapter 7 of this Title. 
2.  Stormwater permit: All developments that disturb over 1,500 square feet of ground cover, or a drainage easement, shall require the submittal and approval of a stormwater management permit in accordance with the DuPage County Countywide Stormwater and Floodplain Ordinance as amended and adopted by the Village of Glen Ellyn. 
3.  Drainage plan: All developments that disturb between 300 square feet and 1,500 square feet of ground cover shall require the submittal and approval of a drainage plan indicating the direction of existing and proposed stormwater flow on the site and other information as necessary to verify compliance with the DuPage County Countywide Stormwater and Floodplain Ordinance as amended and adopted by the Village of Glen Ellyn. 
(G)  Tree preservation: All work on public and private property must comply with the tree preservation requirements in title 8, chapter 4, "Forestry Management", and title 4, chapter 8, "Tree Preservation", of this Code. 
(H)  Construction hours: Construction, demolition, excavation, grading, deliveries, hauling, loading, staging, operating portable engines and other construction related work activities on the site may only be completed between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday and between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. on Sundays, except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public health and safety. 
(I)  Inspections: All construction being performed pursuant to a building permit under the provisions of this Code may be inspected by the Building Official or his representative at any reasonable time and shall be subject to inspections in accordance with the adopted codes and the following requirements: 
1.  Foundation survey: The applicant shall submit a foundation location survey prepared by a registered surveyor upon completion of the foundation for all new buildings, additions or roofed over accessory structures that are located within two feet of the minimum required zoning setback, and no further work shall be done, other than installing drain tile and waterproofing the foundation, until the location survey and a backfill inspection have been approved. 
2.  Height certification: The applicant shall submit a ridge and eave height certification prepared by a registered surveyor upon completion of the framework for all new principal buildings or additions that are constructed within two feet of the maximum permitted zoning heights, and no further work shall be done, other than rough electrical, mechanical, and plumbing work, until the ridge and eave height certification has been approved. 
(J)  Penalty: Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this Code or other provisions of the Building Code of the Village of Glen Ellyn shall be guilty of a business offense punishable by a fine of not less than $50.00 nor more than $750.00 for each offense. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. 5996, 1-30-2012; Ord. 6603, 5-29-2018; Ord. 6674, 2-25-2019) 
4-1-6. - Adoption of Building Code. 
(A)  The 2009 ICC International Building Code is adopted by reference as the standards and regulations for governing the demolition, construction, enlargement, alteration, restoration or repair of buildings and structures and their appurtenances, as this Code is intended, recommended, maintained and published by the international code council except such portions thereof as are deleted, modified, or amended in this chapter. At least one copy of the 2009 ICC International Building Code shall be maintained on file in the office of the Village Clerk for inspection and copying as a public record. 
(B)  The provisions of the 2009 ICC International Building Code, are hereby deleted, modified, and amended as follows: 
1.  Amend section 101.1 to read as follows: 
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Building Code of the Village of Glen Ellyn, hereinafter referred to as "this Code." 
2.  Delete section 101.4.3 in its entirety and substitute the following: 
101.4.3 Plumbing. Wherever reference to the international Plumbing Code is made, substitute the Plumbing Code, department of public health, State of Illinois. 
3.  Delete section 105.1.1 in its entirety and substitute the following: 
105.1.1 Site Development Permit. The Building Official is authorized to issue a site development permit for site clearing, rough grading, excavation, trenching, footings, foundation walls, underground utilities and temporary power and facilities after submittal and approval of applicable construction documents, approved site inspections, and payment of all applicable fees and deposits, subject to the provisions of section 107.3.3 of this Code. 
4.  Delete section 105.1.2 in its entirety. 
5.  Delete section 105.2 in its entirety and substitute the following: 
105.2 Work Exempt from Permit. Exemptions from permit requirements of this Code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this Code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction. Permits shall not be required for the following: 
(a)  Property: 
(1)  Landscaping work to remove existing or plant new trees, shrubs, plants or grass provided tree removal is completed in accordance with the requirements in the tree preservation ordinance and the disturbed area does not exceed 300 square feet. 
(2)  Paving work to add new, or replace existing, impervious surface materials upon the ground provided the new paved area does not exceed 100 square feet and complies with all Zoning Code regulations. 
(3)  Grade changes, excavation or fill provided the disturbed site area does not exceed 300 square feet and the natural existing stormwater runoff from the property is not altered or cause a nuisance, hazard or damage to adjacent property and complies with the requirements of the countywide stormwater and flood plain ordinance of DuPage County, IL. 
(4)  Retaining walls that do not exceed eight inches in height provided the natural existing stormwater runoff from the property is not altered or cause a nuisance, hazard or damage to adjacent property and complies with the requirements of the countywide stormwater and flood plain ordinance of DuPage County, IL. 
(5)  Installation of recreational and play equipment, prefabricated swimming pools that are less than 24 inches deep, and outdoor furnishings, that are portable or removed after occasional or seasonal use provided the location and use complies with all Zoning Code regulations. 
(b)  Buildings and structures: 
(1)  Installation or removal of interior wall, floor or ceiling finishes such as paint, tile, carpet, and wall coverings completed in accordance with the requirements in this Code for sanitation and fire resistance and with federal and state regulations governing the removal of lead, asbestos or other hazardous materials. 
(2)  Placement of free standing partitions, fixtures, cases, racks, counters, or furnishings not to exceed five feet nine inches in height. 
(3)  Minor electrical repairs including lamp, receptacle and breaker replacement or the removal of existing and installation of equivalent new electrical fixtures at existing electrical outlets. 
(4)  Electrical wiring, fixtures and equipment operating at less than 25 volts and not capable of supplying more than 50 watts of energy, except alarm systems. 
(5)  Minor mechanical repairs including the removal of existing and installation of equivalent new pumps and motors that do not alter approval of the equipment or make it unsafe. 
(6)  Installation of portable electrical or mechanical equipment with cord and plug electrical connections. 
(7)  Work to stop leaks or clear obstructions in the plumbing system or the removal of existing and installation of equivalent new plumbing fixtures, limited to toilets, sinks, tubs and showers without any alteration to existing water supply, drain, waste or vent outlets. 
(8)  Replacement or repair of exterior finish materials on wall and roof surfaces up to a maximum of 300 square feet or 20 percent of the total roof or wall area. 
6.  Amend section 105.3 item 6 to read as follows: 
6. Be signed by the applicant and by the property owner(s), including the name and registered address of the owner, corporate officer, registered agent, partner, trustee or managing member, upon whom any legal notice, complaint or citation may be served. 
7.  Amend section 105.3 item 7 to read as follows: 
7. Give such other data and information as required by the Building Official including the name(s) and address(s) of all persons with a beneficial interest in the property under a land trust and all shareholders owning in excess of 5% of the stock in a corporation. 
8.  Amend section 105.5 to read as follows: 
105.5 Expiration. A permit for commercial buildings, structures, and site improvements is valid for eighteen (18) months after its issuance. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work on the site authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or if the work authorized on the site by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the time the work is commenced. The Building Official is authorized to grant, in writing, one or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 180 days each. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. 
9.  Amend section 105.7 to reads as follows: 
105.7 Placement of Permit. The building permit or copy shall be kept on the site of the work until completion of the project and shall be displayed in a prominent location visible from the public way. 
10.  Amend section 109.4 to read as follows: 
109.4 Work Commencing Before Permit Issuance. Any person who commences any work on a site, building or structure, or on any electrical, gas, mechanical, fire protection or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to an additional fee of 200% of the building permit fee. 
11.  Delete section 111.2 in its entirety and substitute the following: 
111.2 Certificate Issued. After the Building Official inspects the building or structure and finds no violations of the provisions of this Code or other laws, the Building Official shall issue a certificate of occupancy that contains the following: 
1.  The address of the structure. 
2.  The name and address of the owner. 
3.  A description of the portion of the building for which the certificate is issued. 
4.  The use and occupancy of the portion of the building for which the certificate is issued. 
5.  Any special stipulation and conditions of the building permit. 
6.  The name of the Building Official. 
12.  Amend section 113.1 to read as follows: 
113.1 General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the Building Official relative to the application and interpretation of this Code, there shall be a Building Board of Appeals. The structure, responsibilities and procedures of the Building Board of Appeals is established in chapter 7 Building Board of Appeals, title 2 boards and commissions, in the Glen Ellyn Village Code. 
13.  Delete section 113.3 in its entirety. 
14.  Delete section 202 definition Historic Buildings in its entirety and substitute the following: 
Historic Buildings: Buildings that are listed in the National Register of Historic Places, or designated as historic under appropriate state law, or buildings, structures, works of art, or other objects surveyed and identified as having historic or architectural significance by the Historic Preservation Commission in accordance with Glen Ellyn Village Code, chapter 13. 
15.  Amend section 406.1.4 item 1 to read as follows: 
1.  The attached private garage that shares a common wall with a dwelling unit, or the detached private garage that is within 20 feet of a dwelling unit, shall be separated from a dwelling unit and its attic area by means of a minimum 1/2 inch gypsum board applied to all walls and ceilings in the garage. Garages beneath habitable rooms shall be separated from all habitable rooms above by not less than 5/8 inch type X gypsum board or equivalent. All joints shall be flat taped. Door openings between a private garage and the dwelling unit shall be equipped with either solid wood doors or solid or honeycomb core steel doors not less than 13/8 inches thick, or doors in compliance with section 715.4.3. Openings from a private garage directly into a room used for sleeping purposes shall not be permitted. Doors shall be self-closing and self-latching. 
16.  Delete section 706.6 exception 4 in its entirety. 
17.  Delete section 902 Definitions in its entirety. 
18.  Delete section 903 Automatic Sprinkler Systems in its entirety. 
19.  Delete section 904 Alternative Automatic Fire-Extinguishing Systems in its entirety. 
20.  Delete section 905 Standpipe Systems in its entirety. 
21.  Delete section 906 Portable Fire Extinguishers in its entirety. 
22.  Delete section 907 Fire Alarm and Detector Systems in its entirety. 
23.  Delete section 908 Emergency Alarm Systems in its entirety. 
24.  Delete section 910 Smoke and Heat Vents in its entirety. 
25.  Delete section 911 Fire Command Center in its entirety. 
26.  Delete section 912 Fire Department Connections in its entirety. 
27.  Delete section 913 Fire Pumps in its entirety. 
28.  Delete section 914 Emergency Responder Safety Features in its entirety. 
29.  Delete section 915 Emergency Responder Radio Coverage in its entirety. 
30.  Add new section 1204.2 to read as follows: 
1204.2 Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling units or sleeping units on terms, either express or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply heat during the period from October 1 to May 15 to maintain a room temperature of not less than sixty five degrees Fahrenheit (65°F) (18°C), in all habitable spaces, bathrooms and toilet rooms. 
Exception: When the exterior temperature falls below zero degrees Fahrenheit (0°F) (-18°C) and the heating system is operating at its full capacity, a minimum room temperature of sixty degrees Fahrenheit (60°F) (16°C) shall be maintained at all times. 
31.  Amend section 1408.4 to read as follows: 
1408.4 Weather Resistance. EIFS shall comply with section 1403 and shall be designed and constructed to resist wind and rain in accordance with this section and the manufacturer's application instructions and include the installation of a drainage medium layer incorporated into the system as specified by the product manufacturer. 
32.  Amend section 1408.5 to read as follows: 
1408.5 Installation. Installation of EIFS with drainage shall be in accordance with the EIFS manufacturer's instructions and completed by trained and qualified installers. A copy of the installer's current certification as an EIFS mechanic, issued by the Association of the Wall and Ceiling Industry, or other certification, must be submitted with the permit application for approval by the Building Official. 
33.  Amend table 1505.1 to reads as follows: 
IA IB IIA IIB IIIA IIIB IV VA VB B B B B B B B B B  
34.  Amend section 1612.3 to read as follows: 
To establish flood hazard areas, the applicable governing authority shall adopt a flood hazard map and supporting data. The flood hazard map shall include, at a minimum, areas of special flood hazard as defined by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in an engineering report entitled "The Flood Insurance Study For The Village Of Glen Ellyn", as amended or revised with the accompanying flood insurance rate map (FIRM) panels 502, 503, 505, 506, 508, 509 and 604 and related supporting data along with any revisions thereto. The adopted flood hazard map and supporting data are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be part of this section. 
35.  Add new section 1808.6.5 to read as follows: 
1808.6.5 Slab on Grade Foundation. One-story frame detached accessory structures are permitted on trench wall and slab foundations monolithically poured, consisting of a minimum 4" concrete slab with minimum 40 pounds per 100 square foot welded wire fabric reinforcing on a compacted minimum 4" gravel base with a continuous thickened perimeter edge minimum 20" wide and extending down a minimum of 10" below grade or to undisturbed subsoil. 
36.  Amend section 1809.5 item 1 to read as follows: 
1.  Extending three (3) feet six (6) inches below the adjacent finished grade; 
37.  Delete section 1809.9 in its entirety. 
38.  Delete section 1809.12 in its entirety. 
39.  Delete section 2901.1 in its entirety and substitute the following: 
2901.1 Scope. The design, construction, installation, alteration, repair and maintenance of plumbing systems and their components shall comply with the standards and regulations established in the Illinois department of public health Plumbing Code as currently adopted. 
40.  Add new section 2901.2 to read as follows: 
2901.2 Structure Protection. In the process of installing or repairing any part of a plumbing and drainage installation, the structural framing members shall not be cut, bored or notched beyond the limitations in this Code unless restored to safe structural condition in accordance with the building requirements in this Code. 
41.  Add new section 2901.3 to read as follows: 
2901.3 Piping Protection. In concealed locations, where piping, other than cast iron or galvanized steel, is installed through holes or notches in studs, joists, rafters or similar members less than 11/2 inches from the nearest edge of the member, the pipe shall be protected by steel shield plates. Such shield plates shall have a thickness of not less than .0575 inch (no. 16 gauge). Such plates shall cover the area of the pipe where the member is notched or bored, and shall extend a minimum of 2 inches above sole plates and below top plates. 
42.  Add new section 2901.4 to read as follows: 
2901.4 Through Wall Protection. Any pipe that passes through a foundation wall shall pass through a pipe sleeve two pipe sizes greater than the pipe passing through. All annular spaces between sleeves and pipes shall be filled or tightly caulked in accordance with the building requirements in this Code or as approved by the Building Official. 
43.  Delete section 2902 in its entirety. 
44.  Delete section 2903 in its entirety. 
45.  Delete section 3001.2 in its entirety and substitute the following: 
3001.2 Reference Standards. The design, construction, installation, alteration, repair and maintenance of elevators and conveying systems and their components shall comply with the standards and regulations established by the Office of the Illinois Fire Marshall. 
46.  Delete chapter 32 Encroachments into the Public Right-Of-Way in its entirety. 
47.  Add new section 3302.3 to read as follows: 
3302.3 Safety And Security Fencing. The demolition or construction of a principal building or structure, or part thereof, or an excavation over 30 inches deep, shall require the installation of a safety and security fence, with a latching gate, that encloses the work area. The safety and security fencing shall be a minimum of 4 feet high and constructed of chain link fabric and steel pipe posts and rails or equivalent materials approved by the Building and Zoning Official. The fence shall be maintained in an upright, stable and secure condition and the gate shall be latched closed at all times the demolition or construction site is unattended. A safety and security fence shall not reduce or eliminate any other safeguards required in this Code. 
48.  Add new section 3403.5 to read as follows: 
3403.5 Fire Protection Improvements. All exposed combustible framing members, combustible voids or similar spaces throughout an existing building or structure shall be covered with five-eighths (5/8") inch type X gypsum board, or provided with equivalent protection, when any addition to the building or structure is constructed that exceeds $15,000 in hard cost and the building or structure is not equipped throughout with an approved fire sprinkler system. 
49.  Add new section 3403.6 to read as follows: 
3403.6 Building and Property Improvements. The following improvements within an existing building and on public or private property shall be required when a building addition increases the floor area of an existing building by more than 75%: 
1.  All improvements included in section 3403.5. 
2.  Abandon the existing water service line between the water main and the existing building or proposed addition and install a new water service line, water meter and copper horn in accordance with current standards, codes and ordinances. 
3.  Abandon the existing sanitary service line between the sanitary sewer main and the existing building or proposed addition and install a new sanitary service line if the structural integrity or water-tightness of the service line does not meet current standards, codes and ordinances. 
4.  Provide an overhead sanitary service line and sewage ejector pump in accordance with current standards, codes and ordinances. 
5.  Remove any existing gravel driveway and provide a hard surface driveway, approach and depressed curb and gutter and in accordance with current standards, codes and ordinances. 
6.  Provide a public sidewalk across the frontage of the property if no sidewalk presently exists, or repair any existing damaged sidewalk squares, in accordance with current standards, codes and ordinances. 
7.  Repair damaged or disturbed parkway grades and restore parkway groundcover or provide new groundcover where no groundcover exists. 
Exception: The existing water and sanitary service lines may remain, upon approval of the Public Works Director, if existing conditions comply with, or are repaired and maintained to comply with current standards, codes and ordinances. Existing sanitary line conditions must be verified by a video and an audio or written report in the format required by the public works department. 
50.  Add new section 3403.7 to read as follows: 
3403.7 Building and Property Improvements. The following improvements within an existing building and on public or private property shall be required when a building addition increases the floor area of an existing building by more than 150%: 
1.  All improvements included in section 3403.6. 
2.  The existing building or structure on the property shall comply, or be upgraded to comply, with all provisions of the Village Codes, regulations and ordinances for a new building or structure. 
51.  Add new section 3404.7 to read as follows: 
3404.7 Fire Protection Improvements. All exposed combustible framing members, combustible voids or similar spaces within an existing building or structure without fire sprinklers shall be covered with five-eighths (5/8") inch type X gypsum board, or provided with equivalent protection, when the existing exterior wall and roof surface area is structurally altered, or when interior remodeling work is completed, that exceeds $15,000 in hard cost. 
52.  Add new section 3404.8 to read as follows: 
3404.8 Building and Property Improvements. The following improvements within an existing building and on public or private property shall be required when over 50% of the existing exterior wall and roof area is structurally altered or when interior remodeling work exceeds $100,000 in hard cost: 
1.  All improvements included in section 3404.7. 
2.  Abandon the existing water service line between the water main and the existing building or proposed addition and install a new water service line, water meter and copper horn in accordance with current standards, codes and ordinances. 
3.  Abandon the existing sanitary service line between the sanitary sewer main and the existing building or proposed addition and install a new sanitary service line if the structural integrity or water-tightness of the service line does not meet current standards, codes and ordinances. 
4.  Provide an overhead sanitary service line and ejector pump in accordance with current standards, codes and ordinances. 
5.  Remove any existing gravel driveway and provide a hard surface driveway, approach and depressed curb and gutter and in accordance with current standards, codes and ordinances. 
6.  Provide a public sidewalk across the frontage of the property if no sidewalk presently exists, or repair any existing damaged sidewalk squares, in accordance with current standards, codes and ordinances. 
7.  Repair damaged or disturbed parkway grades and provide or restore parkway groundcover where no ground is established. 
Exception: The existing water and sanitary service lines may remain, upon approval of the Public Works Director, if existing conditions comply with, or are repaired and maintained to comply with current standards, codes and ordinances. Existing sanitary line conditions must be verified by a video and an audio or written report in the format required by the public works department. 
53.  Add new section 3404.9 to read as follows: 
3404.9 Building and Property Improvements. The following improvements within an existing building and on public or private property shall be required when over 75% of the existing exterior wall and roof area is structurally altered: 
1.  All improvements included in section 3404.8. 
2.  The existing building and structure on the property shall comply, or be upgraded to comply, with all provisions of the Village Codes, regulations and ordinances for a new building or structure. 
54.  Add new section 3404.10 to read as follows: 
3404.10 Building and Property Improvements. The following improvements within an existing building and on public or private property shall be required when the hard cost of all remodeling work exceeds $1,000,000 or 25% of the market value of the building or structure: 
1.  All improvements included in section 3404.8. 
2.  The remodeled area shall comply, or be upgraded to comply, with all provisions of the Village Codes, regulations and ordinances for a new building or structure. 
(Ord. 5996, 1-30-2012; Ord. 6603, 5-29-2018) 
4-1-7. - Adoption of Mechanical Code. 
(A)  The 2009 ICC International Mechanical Code is adopted by reference as the standards and regulations for governing the design and installation of mechanical systems, appliances, appliance venting, duct and ventilation systems, combustion air provisions, hydronic systems and solar systems, as this Code is intended, recommended, maintained and published by the International Code Council except such portions thereof as are deleted, modified, or amended in this chapter. At least one copy of the 2009 ICC International Mechanical Code shall be maintained on file in the office of the Village Clerk for inspection and copying as a public record. 
(B)  The provisions of the 2009 ICC International Mechanical Code are hereby deleted, modified, and amended as follows: 
1.  Amend section 101.1 to read as follows: 
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the mechanical code of the Village of Glen Ellyn, hereinafter referred to as "this Code." 
2.  Add new section 101.5 to read as follows: 
101.5 Administration And Enforcement. This Code shall be administered and enforced in accordance with the provisions in chapter 1 of the ICC International Building Code as adopted and amended by the Village of Glen Ellyn. 
3.  Delete section 103, Department of Mechanical Inspection, in its entirety. 
4.  Delete section 104, Duties and Powers of the Code Official, in its entirety. 
5.  Delete section 105, Approval, in its entirety. 
6.  Delete section 106, Permits, in its entirety. 
7.  Delete section 107, Inspections and Testing, in its entirety. 
8.  Delete section 108, Violations, in its entirety. 
9.  Delete section 109, Means of Appeal, in its entirety. 
10.  Delete section 110, Temporary Equipment, System And Uses, in its entirety. 
(Ord. 5967, 10-24-2011, eff. 12-5-2011) 
4-1-8. - Adoption of Residential Code. 
(A)  The 2009 ICC International Residential Code is adopted by reference as the standards and regulations for governing the demolition, construction, enlargement, alteration, restoration or repair of buildings and structures and their appurtenances, as this Code is intended, recommended, maintained and published by the International Code Council except such portions thereof as are deleted, modified, or amended in this chapter. At least one copy of the 2009 ICC International Residential Code shall be maintained on file in the office of the Village Clerk for inspection and copying as a public record. 
(B)  The provisions of the 2009 ICC International Residential Code, are hereby deleted, modified, and amended as follows: 
1.  Amend section R101.1 to read as follows: 
R101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the residential code of the Village of Glen Ellyn, hereinafter referred to as "this Code." 
2.  Add new section R102.4.1 to read as follows: 
R102.4.1 Plumbing. Wherever reference to the international Plumbing Code is made, substitute the Plumbing Code, department of public health, State of Illinois. 
3.  Add new section R102.4.2 to read as follows: 
R102.4.2 Building. Where "this Code" does not address any specific application, material, or method of construction, the 2009 ICC International Building Code shall be applicable. 
4.  Add new section R102.7.2 to read as follows: 
R102.7.2 Partial Improvements Required. The following improvements within an existing building and on public or private property shall be required when a building addition increases the floor area of an existing building by more than 75%, or when more than 50% of the existing exterior wall and roof structure area is altered, or when interior remodeling work exceeds $100,000 in hard cost: 
1.  Abandon the existing water service line between the water main and the existing building or proposed addition and install a new water service line, water meter and copper horn in accordance with current standards, codes and ordinances. 
2.  Abandon the existing sanitary service line between the sanitary sewer main and the existing building or proposed addition and install a new sanitary service line if the structural integrity or water-tightness of the service line does not meet current standards, codes and ordinances. 
3.  Provide an overhead sanitary service line and sewage ejector pump in accordance with current standards, codes and ordinances. 
4.  Remove any existing gravel driveway and provide a hard surface driveway, approach and depressed curb and gutter and in accordance with current standards, codes and ordinances. 
5.  Provide a public sidewalk across the frontage of the property if no sidewalk presently exists, or repair any existing damaged sidewalk squares, in accordance with current standards, codes and ordinances. 
6.  Repair damaged or disturbed parkway grades and restore parkway groundcover or provide new groundcover where no groundcover exists. 
Exception: The existing water and sanitary service lines may remain, upon approval of the Public Works Director, if existing conditions comply with, or are repaired and maintained to comply with current standards, codes and ordinances. Existing sanitary line conditions must be verified by a video and an audio or written report in the format required by the public works department. 
5.  Add new section R102.7.3 to read as follows: 
R102.7.3 All Improvements Required. The following improvements within an existing building and on public or private property shall be required when a building addition increases the floor area of an existing building by more than 150%, or when more than 75% of the existing exterior wall and roof structure area is altered, or when interior remodeling work exceeds $200,000 in hard cost: 
1.  All improvements included in section R102.7.2. 
2.  The existing buildings and site shall comply, or be upgraded to comply, with all provisions of the Village Codes, regulations and ordinances for a new building or structure. 
Exception: A fire sprinkler system shall be required for remodeling work only within the remodeled area when the remodeling work exceeds $300,000 in hard cost. 
6.  Add new section R102.8 to read as follows: 
R102.8 Historic Buildings. The provisions of this Code relating to the construction, repair, alteration, addition, restoration and movement of structures, and change of occupancy shall not be mandatory for historic buildings where such buildings are judged by the Building Official to not constitute a distinct life safety hazard. 
7.  Delete section R105.2 in its entirety and substitute the following: 
R105.2 Work Exempt from Permit. Exemptions from permit requirements of this Code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this Code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction. Permits shall not be required for the following: 
(a)  Property: 
(1)  Landscaping work to remove existing or plant new trees, shrubs, plants or grass provided tree removal is completed in accordance with the requirements in the tree preservation ordinance and the disturbed area does not exceed 300 square feet. 
(2)  Paving work to add new or replace existing impervious surface materials upon the ground provided the new paved area does not exceed 100 square feet and complies with all Zoning Code regulations. 
(3)  Grade changes, excavation, or fill, provided the disturbed site area does not exceed 300 square feet and natural existing stormwater runoff from the property is not altered or cause a nuisance, hazard or damage to adjacent property and complies with the requirements of the countywide stormwater and flood plain ordinance of DuPage County, IL. 
(4)  Retaining walls that do not exceed 8 inches in height, provided the natural existing stormwater runoff from the property is not altered or cause a nuisance, hazard or damage to adjacent property and complies with the requirements of the countywide stormwater and flood plain ordinance of DuPage County, IL. 
(5)  Installation of recreational and play equipment, prefabricated swimming pools that are less than 24 inches deep, and outdoor furnishings that are portable or removed after occasional or seasonal use provided the location and use complies with all Zoning Code regulations. 
(b)  Buildings or structures: 
(1)  Installation or removal of interior wall, floor or ceiling finishes such as paint, tile, carpet, and wall coverings completed in accordance with the requirements in this Code for sanitation and fire resistance and with federal and state regulations governing the removal of lead, asbestos or other hazardous materials. 
(2)  Window awnings that are self-supported by the exterior wall which do not project more than 54 inches from the exterior wall. 
(3)  Minor electrical repairs including lamp, receptacle or breaker replacement or the removal of existing and installation of equivalent new electrical fixtures at existing electrical outlets. 
(4)  Electrical wiring, fixtures and equipment operating at less than 25 volts and not capable of supplying more than 50 watts of energy. 
(5)  Minor mechanical repairs including the removal of existing and installation of equivalent new pumps, motors or other equipment that does not alter approval of the equipment or make it unsafe. 
(6)  Installation of portable electrical or mechanical equipment and appliances with cord and plug electrical connections. 
(7)  Work to stop leaks or clear obstructions in the plumbing system or the removal of existing and installation of equivalent new plumbing fixtures, limited to toilets, sinks, tubs and showers without any alteration to existing water supply, drain, waste or vent outlets. 
(8)  Replacement or repair of exterior finish materials on wall and roof surfaces up to a maximum of 300 square feet or 20% of the total roof or wall area. 
8.  Amend section R105.3 item 6 to read as follows: 
6.  Be signed by the applicant and by the property owner(s) including the name and registered address of the owner, corporate officer, registered agent, partner, trustee or managing member, upon whom any legal notice, complaint or citation may be served. 
9.  Amend section R105.3 item 7 to read as follows: 
7.  Give such other data and information as required by the Building Official including the name(s) and address(es) of all persons with a beneficial interest in the property under a land trust and all shareholders owning in excess of 5% of the stock in a corporation. 
10.  Delete section R105.3.1.1 in its entirety. 
11.  Amend section R105.5 to read as follows: 
R105.5 Expiration. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after issuance or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the time the work is commenced. The Building Official is authorized to grant, in writing, one or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 180 days each. The extension shall be requested in writing and demonstrate justifiable cause. 
1.  A permit for new one and two family dwelling units and townhomes is valid for eighteen (18) months after its issuance. 
2.  A permit for additions, alterations and remodeling of existing one and two family dwelling units and townhomes is valid for twelve (12) months after its issuance. 
3.  A permit for new residential accessory buildings and structures and for additions, alterations and remodeling of existing residential accessory buildings and structures is valid for twelve (12) months after its issuance. 
12.  Amend section R105.7 to reads as follows: 
R105.7 Placement Of Permit. The building permit or copy shall be kept on the site of the work until completion of the project and shall be displayed in a prominent location visible from the public way. 
13.  Amend section R108.6 to read as follows: 
R108.6 Work Commencing Before Permit Issuance. Any person who commences any work on a site, building or structure, or any electrical, gas, mechanical, sprinkler or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to an additional fee of 200% of the basic permit fee. 
14.  Delete section R109.3 in its entirety and substitute the following: 
R109.3 Inspection Requests. It shall be the duty of the permit holder or their agent to notify the Building Official that such work is ready for inspection and to have the work complete and prepared for AM inspections by 8:00 AM and complete and prepared for PM inspections by noon. 
15.  Add new section R109.5 to read as follows: 
R109.5 Inspection Conditions. The work to be inspected must be prepared and complete and an approved means to access the work must be provided to the inspector. The inspector is not authorized to conduct an inspection if these conditions do not exist and the inspection may be cancelled by the inspector. No further work may be completed until a reinspection fee is paid and a reinspection is requested, scheduled, completed and approved. 
16.  Amend section R110.1 to add exception 3 to read as follows: 
3.  Additions, alterations and remodeling of existing buildings and structures as determined by the Building Official. 
17.  Delete section R110.3 in its entirety and substitute the following: 
R110.3 Certificate Issued. After the Building Official inspects the building or structure and finds no violations of the provisions of this Code or other regulations, the Building Official shall issue a certificate of occupancy that contains the following: 
1.  The address of the structure. 
2.  The name and address of the owner. 
3.  A description of the portion of the building for which the certificate is issued. 
4.  The use and occupancy of the portion of the building for which the certificate is issued. 
5.  Any special stipulation and conditions of the building permit. 
6.  The name of the Building Official. 
18.  Amend section R112.1 to read as follows: 
R112.1 General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the Building Official relative to the application and interpretation of this Code, there shall be a Building Board of Appeals. The structure, responsibilities and procedures of the Building Board of Appeals is established in chapter 7 Building Board of Appeals, title 2 Boards And Commissions, in the Glen Ellyn Village Code. 
19.  Delete section R112.2.1 in its entirety. 
20.  Delete section R112.2.2 in its entirety. 
21.  Delete section R112.3 in its entirety. 
22.  Amend section R113.4 to read as follows: 
Any person who violates a provision of this Code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the Building Official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this Code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed in section 4-1-5(J) in the Village Code. 
23.  Amend section R301.2 table R301.2(1) to add design criteria as follows: 
1. Ground snow load: 25 psf 2. Wind speed: 90 mph 3. Wind topographic effects: No 4. Seismic design category: B 5. Weathering: Severe 6. Frost line depth: 42 inches 7. Termite: Moderate 8. Winter design temp: 0 degrees F 9. Ice barrier underlayment required: Yes 10. Flood hazards: Yes 11. Air freezing index: 2,000 12. Mean annual temp: 50 degrees F  
24.  Amend section R302.2 to read as follows: 
R302.2 Townhouses. Each townhouse shall be considered a separate building and shall be separated from each other by fire-resistant-rated wall and/or floor-ceiling assemblies having not less than a 2 hour fire resistance rating when tested in accordance with ASTM E 119 or UL 263. Fire resistant rated wall assemblies shall be rated for fire exposure from both sides and shall extend to and be tight against the exterior wall and roof deck. 
25.  Amend section R302.6 to delete the exception in its entirety. 
26.  Amend table R302.6 to read as follows: 
Separation Material From the residence and attics Not less than 5/8 inch type X gypsum board or equivalent applied to the garage side with all joints flat taped Garages located less than 20 feet from a dwelling unit on the same lot Not less than 1/2 inch gypsum board or equivalent applied to the interior side of all exterior walls and ceilings with all joints flat taped  
27.  Add new section R305.1.2 to read as follows: 
R305.1.2 Crawl Spaces. Crawl spaces below the floor of any part of a building or structure shall have a clear height of not less than 3 feet, except beams, girders, ducts or other obstructions may project to within 2 feet of the crawlspace floor. 
28.  Amend section R311.4 to read as follows: 
R311.4 Vertical Egress. Egress from habitable levels including basements but excluding unfinished habitable attics, not provided with an egress door in accordance with section R311.2, shall be by ramp in accordance with section R311.8 or a stairway in accordance with section R311.7. 
29.  Add new section R312.5 to read as follows: 
R312.5 Safety And Security Fence. The demolition or construction of a principal building or structure, or part thereof, or an excavation over 30 inches deep, shall require the installation of a safety and security fence, with a latching gate or equivalent opening, that encloses and secures the work area. The fencing shall be a minimum of 4 feet high and constructed of chain link fabric, plastic mesh, or wooden slats secured to steel posts not to exceed 8 feet on center or equivalent materials approved by the Building and Zoning Official. The fence shall be maintained in an upright and stable condition and the gate shall be secured at all times the demolition or construction site is unattended. 
30.  Add new section R312.6 to read as follows: 
R312.6 Window Well Guards. Window and door wells that extend more than 30 inches below the adjacent grade shall be provided with bars, grilles, covers, screens or similar devices that are designed and listed to resist human impact unless other guards that comply with section R312 of this Code are provided. Window well guards enclosing emergency escape and rescue openings shall meet the minimum opening area requirement and be operable from the inside of the well without the use of keys, tools, or special knowledge or effort. 
31.  Amend section R313.1.1 to read as follows: 
R313.1.1 Design And Installation. Automatic residential fire sprinkler systems for townhouses shall be designed and installed in accordance with NFPA 13D standards. 
32.  Add new section R403.1.3.3 to read as follows: 
R403.1.3.3 Foundations For Accessory Structures. One-story frame detached accessory structures are permitted on trench wall and slab foundations monolithically poured, consisting of a minimum 4" concrete slab, with minimum 40 pounds per 100 square foot welded wire fabric reinforcing, on a minimum 4" compacted gravel base, with a continuous thickened minimum 20" wide perimeter edge, and extending down a minimum of 10" to undisturbed subsoil. 
33.  Amend section R404.1 to read as follows: 
R404.1 Concrete And Masonry Foundation Walls. Concrete foundation walls shall be selected and constructed in accordance with the provisions of section R404.1.2. 
Masonry foundation walls shall not be permitted. 
34.  Delete sections R404.1.1 and R404.1.1.1 in their entirety. 
35.  Amend section R404.2 to read as follows: 
R404.2 Wood Foundation Walls. Wood foundations walls shall not be permitted. 
36.  Delete sections R404.2.1 through R404.2.6 in their entirety. 
37.  Add new section R502.1.8 to read as follows: 
R502.1.8 Light-Weight Floor Framing. Light-weight floor framing including, but not limited to, wood floor trusses, parallel chord trusses, wood I-beams, box beams, metal trusses, or bar joists shall be permitted only in dwellings or parts thereof equipped throughout with an automatic fire sprinkler system installed in accordance with NFPA standards. 
38.  Amend section R801.3 to read as follows: 
R801.3 Roof Drainage. All dwellings shall have a controlled method of water disposal from roofs, consisting of gutters and downspouts or equivalent means, which will collect and discharge roof drainage to the ground surface at least 5 feet (1524 mm) from the foundation walls or to an approved drainage system. 
39.  Amend section G2406.2 item 4 to read as follows: 
4.  A single wall-mounted unvented room heater is installed in a bedroom and such unvented room heater is equipped as specified in section G2445.6 and has an input rating not greater than 10,000 Btu/h (2.93 kW). The bedroom shall meet the required volume criteria of section G2407.5 and be provided with a carbon monoxide detector that is listed, labeled and complies with the standards of an approved testing agency. 
40.  Delete section P2501.1 in its entirety and substitute the following: 
P2501.1 Scope. The design, construction, installation, alteration, repair and maintenance of plumbing systems and their components shall comply with the standards and regulations established in the Illinois department of public health Plumbing Code as currently adopted. 
41.  Delete section P2501.2 in its entirety and substitute the following: 
P2501.2 Structure Protection. In the process of installing or repairing any part of a plumbing and drainage installation, the structural framing members shall not be cut, bored or notched beyond the limitations in this Code unless restored to a safe structural condition in accordance with the building requirements in this Code. 
42.  Add new section P2501.3 to read as follows: 
P2501.3 Piping Protection. In concealed locations, where piping, other than cast iron or galvanized steel, is installed through holes or notches in studs, joists, rafters or similar members less than 11/2 inches from the nearest edge of the member, the pipe shall be protected by steel shield plates. Such shield plates shall have a thickness of not less than .0575 inch (no. 16 gauge). Such plates shall cover the area of the pipe where the member is notched or bored, and shall extend a minimum of 2 inches above sole plates and below top plates. 
43.  Add new section P2501.4 to read as follows: 
P2501.4 Through Wall Protection. Any pipe that passes through a foundation wall shall pass through a pipe sleeve of a greater size that allows the installation of a sealant in accordance with the sealant manufacturer's specifications. All annular spaces between sleeves and pipes shall be filled and water sealed in accordance with the building requirements in this Code or as approved by the Building Official. 
44.  Add new section P2501.5 to read as follows: 
P2501.5 Tank Leak Protection. Where water heaters or hot water storage tanks are installed in locations where leakage of the tanks or connections will cause damage, the tank or water heater shall be installed in a galvanized steel pan having a material thickness of not less than .0236 inch (no. 24 gauge) or other pans approved for such use. Listed pans shall comply with CSA LC3. The pan shall be not less than 11/2 inches deep and drained by an indirect waste pipe having a minimum diameter of 3/4 inch and terminate over a suitably located indirect waste receptor or shall extend to the exterior of the building and discharge not more than 24 inches or less than 6 inches from grade. A leak protection pan shall not be required if a water heater tank is located on a concrete floor on grade and a floor drain is provided on the same floor level. 
45.  Delete section P2502 in its entirety. 
46.  Delete section P2503 in its entirety. 
47.  Delete chapters 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, and 32 in their entirety. 
48.  Delete chapters 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, and 43 in their entirety. 
(Ord. 5995, 5-14-2012; Ord. 6603, 5-29-2018) 
4-1-9. - Adoption of Energy Conservation Code. 
(A)  The 2009 ICC International Energy Conservation Code is adopted by reference as the standards and regulations for energy efficient building envelopes and the installation of energy efficient mechanical, lighting and power systems in the Village of Glen Ellyn as published by the International Code Council except such portions thereof that are modified, or amended in this chapter. At least one copy of the 2009 ICC International Energy Conservation Code shall be maintained on file in the office of the Village Clerk for inspection and copying as a public record. 
(B)  The title of the 2009 ICC International Energy Conservation Code is hereby stated as follows: 
1.  Amend section 101.1 to read as follows: 
101.1 Title. This Code shall be known as the International Energy Conservation Code of the Village of Glen Ellyn, and shall be cited as such. It is referred to herein as "this Code." 
(Ord. 5938, 8-22-2011, eff. 10-3-2011) 
4-1-10. - Demolition requirements. 
The following demolition requirements shall apply to all property within Glen Ellyn municipal limits: 
(A)  A building permit for demolition work shall be required for the removal of any building, structure or any part thereof, except for the removal of any residential accessory building or for the removal of a principal building, or any part thereof, less than 300 square feet in area. 
(B)  A building permit for the demolition of a building or structure, or part thereof, greater than 300 and less than 1,000 square feet in area shall require the following supporting documents: 
1.  Building permit application. 
2.  Plat of survey (except for interior only demolitions). 
3.  Written statement or drawings describing the work. 
(C)  A building permit for the demolition of a building or structure, or part thereof, greater than 1,000 and less than 4,000 square feet in area, and not exceeding 45 feet in height, shall require the following supporting documents and is subject to the following requirements and submittals: 
1.  A building permit application for the demolition work. 
2.  A plat of survey of the property (except for interior only demolitions). 
3.  A building permit application for the demolition work and for a new building or structure if construction is to commence within 90 days from the issuance of the building permit for the demolition work. 
4.  A site management plan shall be submitted for review and approval if new construction is to commence within 90 days from the issuance of the building permit for the demolition work, and indicate the following items: 
(a)  The property drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals 20 feet. 
(b)  Existing buildings and structures to be removed or retained. 
(c)  All easements, existing utility lines, well and septic systems on the subject property and all adjacent parkways and property within 20 feet. 
(d)  Trees on the subject property, adjacent parkway and within 15 feet on adjacent properties in accordance with the tree preservation ordinance. 
(e)  Silt fencing, protective tree fencing, and perimeter safety fencing in required locations. 
(f)  Means of primary ingress/egress from the public ways to the site and points for emergency access, traffic control devices and measures, and on site and off site parking areas. 
(g)  Temporary areas for the storage or staging of debris, soil, construction materials and construction equipment. 
(h)  Portable toilets, dumpsters and refuse container locations. 
5.  A site restoration plan shall be submitted for review and approval if new construction will not commence within 90 days from the issuance of the building permit for the demolition work, and indicate the following items: 
(a)  The property drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals 20 feet. 
(b)  Measures to restore the site in accordance with the DuPage County Countywide Stormwater and Floodplain Ordinance to the natural grade, establish soil stabilization or groundcover, and an itemized cost estimate to complete the work. 
(c)  Any existing underground structures or utilities to remain or be abandoned including any foundation walls that are required to be removed to a level not less than four feet below the restored grade. 
(d)  A statement indicating that the site restoration work will be completed within a required 90-day period after substantial completion of the demolition work. An extension of time may be granted by the Director of Community Development or the Building Official if unforeseen circumstances are determined to impede the completion of the restoration. 
6.  A certificate of insurance acceptable to the Village attorney. Said certificate shall establish that the applicant or property owner has insurance coverage in a minimum amount of $500,000.00 per occurrence for damages to adjacent private and public property resulting from the work by the applicant, contractor, or subcontractor, owner, or other agent of the applicant or owner. 
7.  A photograph of the front of the structure and a second photograph of the rear of the structure or part thereof that is to be demolished. 
8.  The name, address, and cell phone numbers of the primary contact for the developer and for the demolition contractor who will be working on the site and controlling or managing the demolition work. 
9.  A copy of applications and permits from all applicable agencies including, but not limited to, the Federal Emergency Management Agency, Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, State Fire Marshal, and DuPage County in the event the demolition work involves lead, asbestos or other hazardous materials, underground fuel tanks, well and septic systems, special flood hazard areas, historic structures or other work under the jurisdiction of other authorities. 
10.  A written description of how the utility lines will be removed or abandoned, wells sealed and capped, and septic systems abandoned in accordance with all applicable codes, ordinances and regulations of the Village and the DuPage County Health Department. 
11.  Public notices and a waiting period shall be provided as follows: 
(a)  The Village shall provide written notification within 15 days of receipt of the demolition application to all property owners within 250 feet of the subject property. 
(b)  The contractor shall provide written notification to the Village and surrounding property owners by mail no more than ten days or less than seven days prior to the scheduled demolition. The notice shall state a window of three possible days for the demolition. The first date will be the anticipated date of demolition and the second and third dates are reserved for delays. The notice shall follow the format provided by the Village and shall include the developer's contact information. The Village will provide the contractor with the sample notice, the map of addresses, and mailing labels. The contractor shall mail the notices to the properties listed and a signed certification statement shall be delivered to the Village confirming that the notices were mailed. If the demolition does not occur within the specified window of three possible days, the contractor shall provide another notice of the rescheduled dates as required above. 
(c)  Upon receipt of a complete application and supporting documents, a minimum waiting period of 30 calendar days shall be established prior to issue of a building permit for demolition work to ensure all surrounding property owners have been notified and all departments of the Village and fire company have completed a review of the application and plans. 
12.  Demolition preparation work shall be completed prior to the issuance of the building permit for demolition work as follows: 
(a)  The applicant contacts the public works department to request installation of a hydrant meter in accordance with subsection 7-10-9(B) of this Code. A minimum prior notice of 48 hours is required and the applicant schedules and coordinates the work directly with the public works department. 
(b)  The applicant installs tree protection fencing, silt fencing and security fencing as indicated on the site management plan, restoration plan or tree preservation plan and contacts the public works department to request an inspection of the fencing. A minimum prior notice of 48 hours is required and the applicant schedules and coordinates the inspection directly with the public works department. 
(c)  The applicant completes a water and sewer disconnect to the property and contacts the public works department to request an inspection of the work. A minimum prior notice of 24 hours is required and the applicant schedules and coordinates the inspection directly with the public works department. No water or sewer disconnection work may be completed in the right-of-way until a work in the parkway application has been approved by the Public Works Director or designee and the building permit for demolition has been issued. 
(D)  A building permit for the demolition of a building or structure, or part thereof, greater than 4,000 square feet in area or exceeding 45 feet in height shall require the following supporting documents and is subject to the following requirements: 
1.  All requirements and submittals identified in subsection (C) of this section shall apply except the minimum insurance amount shall be increased to $1,000,000.00. 
2.  The applicant, contractor and all subcontractors shall conduct a predemolition meeting with the appropriate Village representatives a minimum of seven days prior to commencement of demolition. 
(E)  All demolition work shall be completed as follows: 
1.  All demolition work shall be performed in compliance with the applicable provisions of the 2009 International Building Code including chapter 33, safeguards during construction. 
2.  The use of a village water hydrant shall be required per subsection 7-10-9(D) of this Code for the purpose of controlling dust and other airborne particles during the demolition, cleaning vehicles prior to leaving the site, and maintaining the public ways free and clear of debris and accumulation of dirt at all times. The public works department shall install the hydrant meter. The contractor shall provide the watering hose. Watering shall be dispensed throughout the demolition process, during the collection and disbursement of debris and during the loading of any hauling vehicle. The use of a watering truck is permissible, but it shall not eliminate the requirement for a hydrant meter, which will provide a backup source of water for use during demolition or for refilling the watering truck, cleaning vehicles prior to leaving the site and maintaining the public ways free and clear of debris and the accumulation of dirt or erosion at all times. When the outdoor temperature is 32 degrees or less, a hydrant meter shall not be required for demolition unless authorized by the Public Works Director, and in lieu thereof a watering truck must be provided as a source of water to control dust and airborne particles during the demolition process. 
3.  Public streets and sidewalks shall be maintained open and free and clear for passage of vehicles and pedestrians at all times unless written approval is granted by the Public Works Director a minimum of 48 hours in advance of any anticipated closing. 
4.  The contractor shall perform the demolition work as indicated on the approved site management plan or the site restoration plan in accordance with all directions from the Public Works Director or designee and in compliance with all applicable requirements of this Code. The Building Official, or his duly authorized representative, shall make periodic inspections of the demolition work and in the event the contractor fails to comply with the requirements in this Code, a stop work order may be issued, a citation may be served to the developer, contractor or property owner, or the building permit may be suspended or revoked. 
(Ord. 5996, 1-30-2012, eff. 3-1-2012; Ord. 6674, 2-25-2019) 
4-1-11. - Contractor registration required. 
It shall be unlawful for any contractor to perform construction or demolition work within the Village of Glen Ellyn that requires a building permit unless the contractor holds a current valid contractor registration. 
(A)  Application for contractor registration: Application for contractor registration shall be made to the Director of Community Development, on such forms that are provided including an application, documents that include all required information, applicant's signature, submittal date and payment of applicable fees. 
(B)  Contractor classifications: A "contractor" is any person, partnership, corporation or other business entity engaged in the business of constructing, altering, repairing or demolishing buildings, structures, utilities, site improvements or topography. Contractor classifications are based on the work they perform and the contractual relationships established as follows: 
1.  A "general contractor" is a contractor who employs or manages the work of one or more independent contractors. A general contractor may also be the developer, builder, construction manager or property owner. 
2.  An "independent contractor" is a contractor who only manages his own work or the work of his own employees and performs one trade or craft. Independent contractors are generally contracted by a property owner, owner's agent or building occupant or subcontracted by a general contractor. 
3.  A "public utility contractor" is a contractor completing public improvement work in the rights-of-way under agreements and licenses with the Village of Glen Ellyn and managed by the public works department. 
4.  A "subcontractor" is any contractor working under a contract agreement with a general contractor. 
(C)  Contractor registration exemptions: 
1.  An independent contractor is exempt from the contractor registration requirements of this section when all of the following conditions are met: 
(a)  The independent contractor is not required to hold a professional license issued by the State of Illinois or Illinois Municipality to perform their work. 
(b)  The independent contractor is subcontracted by the general contractor to perform work under the same building permit for which the general contractor is the building permit applicant. 
(c)  The independent contractor has been listed on the building permit application as a contractor working under subcontract to the general contractor. 
2.  A property owner who hires contractors to work on their property, or personally works on their property, is exempt from the contractor registration requirements provided the property owner is not also a general contractor. However, all contractors working on the property must meet the contractor registration requirements. 
3.  A public utility contractor is exempt from the contractor registration requirements of this section for all work completed in the rights-of-way. 
4.  Any person providing design, engineering or testing services, furnishing materials and equipment, completing cleaning and maintenance work or performing any activity for which a building permit is not required is exempt from the contractor registration requirements. 
5.  A licensed electrical contractor is exempt from the requirement to pay a contractor registration fee as provided under Illinois state statutes. 
6.  A licensed contractor is exempt from the requirement to provide a surety bond and/or certificate of insurance provided a surety bond and/or certificate of insurance is a licensing requirement under Illinois state statutes. 
(D)  Application documents: 
1.  Contractors must possess and submit a copy of their current professional license issued by the State of Illinois, Illinois Municipality or other entity authorized to issue such license. This includes contractors performing electrical, plumbing, irrigation, roofing, fire sprinkler, elevator/conveyance equipment work or other construction work that requires a State of Illinois license. 
2.  Contractors must possess and submit a surety bond issued by a company approved and authorized to issue bonds by the State of Illinois. The surety bond shall assure that the contractor's work will be completed in accordance with the requirements of the building permit and this Code. The surety bond shall be in the minimum amount of $20,000.00 and list the Village of Glen Ellyn and third party beneficiaries as the obligees. Contractors completing stormwater work under a stormwater permit are exempt from the requirement to provide a security bond under this section. 
3.  Contractors must possess and submit a certificate of insurance issued by a company approved and authorized to issue insurance by the State of Illinois. The certificate of insurance shall list the Village of Glen Ellyn as an additional insured and include the following insurance in the minimum amounts: 
(a)  General contractor: 
General liability each occurrence ..... $1,000,000.00 
General liability each person ..... 100,000.00 
Property damage ..... 10,000.00 
Workers' compensation ..... As required by law 
(b)  Independent contractor: 
General liability each occurrence ..... $500,000.00 
General liability each person ..... 100,000.00 
Property damage ..... 10,000.00 
Workers' compensation ..... As required by law 
4.  Contractors must submit a notarized affidavit stating that they have no employees if the certificate of insurance excludes workers' compensation. 
(E)  Processing of applications: Applications received by the Director of Community Development shall be examined for complete and accurate information. The Director shall have the authority to require the applicant to submit supplemental evidence to confirm the application information or respond to any objection to the issuance, renewal or reinstatement of the contractor's registration. Contractor registration applications shall be granted or denied by the Director by written notice within 30 days of receipt of all required application documents. 
(F)  Term of contractor registration: Contractor registration shall be valid through a 12 or 24-month registration term as selected by the applicant provided that the required contractor license, surety bond and certificate of insurance have not expired or been suspended or terminated by the issuing authority. 
(G)  Renewal of contractor registration: Contractor registration may be renewed during the registration term or after the registration term by submittal of a new application, current application documents and payment of the renewal fee. 
(H)  Suspension of contractor registration: Contractor registration is immediately suspended upon the expiration, revocation or termination of any required contractor license, surety bond or certificate of insurance during the registration term. The contractor is prohibited from performing any work during the period in which the contractor's registration is suspended. No notice shall be issued to the contractor prior to suspension. A written notice of suspension and a stop work order shall be issued to the contractor on or after the suspension date. A suspended registration may be reinstated by the Director upon submittal of a new application, current application documents and payment of the reinstatement fee. 
(I)  Denial of a contractor registration application, renewal or reinstatement: Contractor registration applications, renewals and reinstatements may be granted or denied by the Director by written notice within 30 days of the submittal date. Applications, renewals and reinstatements will be denied for failure to submit the required application documents, submitting false information or failure to pay the application, renewal or reinstatement fee. 
(J)  Appeal of a denied application or renewal or a suspended contractor registration: All appeals from the decisions of the Director of Community Development must be filed with the Community Development Department within 30 days after the contractor's receipt of the written notice. The appeal must include a petition submitted by the contractor describing the basis upon which the appeal is founded and payment of an administrative appeal fee. The Director of Community Development shall transmit the appeal to the Building Board of Appeals for a public hearing. The board shall review evidence and hear testimony relevant to the appeal and reach a decision. The decision of the board shall be the final administrative decision. 
(K)  Enforcement: No building permit shall be issued for any work if the permit applicant or the contractors listed on the permit application are not in compliance with this section. Contractors shall provide personal identification and identify their employers to the Building Inspector or other authorized Village official on the work site to verify compliance with these contractor registration requirements. A contractor performing work in violation of this section may be served with a citation and a stop work order may be issued and the building permit may be suspended or revoked by the Building Official. 
(L)  Penalty: Any persons violating the provision of this section shall be fined not less than $150.00 nor more than $750.00 for each offense and a separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. 5854, 3-8-2010, eff. 3-15-2010; Ord. 6674, 2-25-2019) 
4-1-12. - Adoption of Property Maintenance Code. 
(A)  The 2009 ICC International Property Maintenance Code is adopted by reference as the standards and regulations for the maintenance and occupancy of all existing property, buildings and structures as this Code is intended, recommended, maintained and published by the International Code Council except such portions thereof that are deleted, modified, or amended in this chapter. At least one copy of the ICC 2009 International Property Maintenance Code shall be maintained on file in the office of the Village Clerk for inspection and copying as a public record. 
(B)  The provisions of the 2009 ICC International Property Maintenance Code are hereby deleted, modified and amended as follows: 
1.  Amend section 101.1 to read as follows: 
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the International Property Maintenance Code of the Village of Glen Ellyn, hereinafter referred to as "this Code". 
2.  Amend section 102.3 to read as follows: 
102.3 Application of Other Codes. Repairs, additions or alterations to a structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in accordance with the procedures and provisions of the building and fire codes as adopted and amended by the Village of Glen Ellyn and nothing in this Code shall be constructed to cancel, modify or set aside any provision of the Illinois Code for safety to life from fire in buildings and structures (Life Safety Code), the Illinois Plumbing Code, the Illinois accessibility code, the Illinois energy conservation code or any other applicable rules or regulations established by the State of Illinois. 
3.  Amend section 102.7 to read as follows: 
102.7 Referenced Codes And Standards. 
Exception: Wherever reference to the international Plumbing Code is made, substitute the Plumbing Code, department of public health, State of Illinois. 
Exception: Wherever reference to the international Zoning Code is made, substitute the Zoning Code, title 10 of the Glen Ellyn Village Code. 
Exception: All reference to the international existing Building Code shall be deleted. 
Exception: Wherever differences occur between provisions of this Code and the 2009 NFPA 101 Life Safety Code the most restrictive provisions shall apply. 
4.  Delete section 103.1 in its entirety and substitute the following: 
103.1 General. Where referenced in this Code, the department of property maintenance shall be the planning and development department of the Village of Glen Ellyn and the Code Official shall be the Building and Zoning Official of the Village of Glen Ellyn. 
5.  Delete section 103.5 in its entirety. 
6.  Add new section 104.3.1 to read as follows: 
104.3.1 Search Warrant. If the Code Official is refused entry after a reasonable attempt to obtain consent to enter the premises to make an inspection, the Code Official may seek in the circuit court of DuPage County a search warrant. An owner, occupant or other person in charge of a dwelling, structure or property subject to the provisions of this Code, who is presented with a search warrant obtained pursuant to this section, shall not refuse, impede, inhibit, interfere with, restrict or obstruct entry and free access to any part of the structure or premises where an inspection authorized by search warrant is sought to be made. 
7.  Delete section 106.4 in its entirety and substitute the following: 
106.4 Violation Penalties. Any person who violates a provision of this Code shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than $50.00 nor more than $750.00 unless a fine for the violation of this Code is listed in the Glen Ellyn Village Code then the more stringent shall apply. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. 
8.  Add new section 108.2.2 to read as follows: 
108.2.2 Closing Safeguards. Vacant structures that are ordered to be closed and secured shall have all doors, windows and openings completely covered and securely fastened with solid weather resistant material to temporarily prevent access to the premises. The covering material shall match or be painted to match the general color of the structure. 
9.  Amend section 109.5 to read as follows: 
109.5 Cost Of Emergency Repairs And Temporary Safeguards. Costs incurred in the performance of emergency work and temporary safeguards shall be paid by the jurisdiction. The legal counsel of the jurisdiction shall institute appropriate action against the owner of the premises where the unsafe structure or condition is or was located for the recovery of such costs. 
10.  Delete section 111.2 in its entirety. 
11.  Delete section 111.3 in its entirety. 
12.  Delete section 111.4 in its entirety. 
13.  Delete section 111.5 in its entirety. 
14.  Delete section 111.6 in its entirety. 
15.  Delete section 111.7 in its entirety. 
16.  Amend section 112.4 to read as follows: 
112.4 Failure To Comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of not less than $50.00 dollars or more than $750.00 dollars. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. 
17.  Amend section 202 to insert the following definition: 
Code Official. The official, or a duly authorized representative, who is charged with the administration and enforcement of this Code, under the direction and approval of the director of planning & development or the Village Manager. 
18.  Amend section 302.2 to read as follows: 
302.2 Grading And Drainage. All premises shall be graded and suitable vegetation or ground cover shall be established and maintained to prevent the erosion of soil by water or wind action and to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water thereon, or within any structure located thereon. 
19.  Delete section 302.4 in its entirety and substitute the following: 
302.4 Weeds. The control of weeds shall be in accordance with title 7 health and sanitation, chapter 12 weeds, in the Glen Ellyn Village Code. 
20.  Delete section 302.8 in its entirety and substitute the following: 
302.8 Motor Vehicles. The control of abandoned vehicles shall be in accordance with title 7 health and sanitation, chapter 8 abandoned vehicles, in the Glen Ellyn Village Code. 
21.  Amend section 302.9 to insert the following: 
302.9  Defacement Of Property. The removal of graffiti shall be in accordance with title 7 health and sanitation, chapter 2 nuisances, in the Glen Ellyn Village Code. 
22.  Add new section 302.10 to read as follows: 
302.10 Corner Lot Landscaping. All landscaping on corner lots within the visibility triangle shall be maintained in accordance with subsection 10-5-5(B)2 in the Glen Ellyn Village Code. 
23.  Add new section 302.11 to read as follows: 
302.11 Composting. Yard waste materials from the premises and adjoining parkway may be placed in a compost pile or container(s) intended for composting use. The placement of materials other than grass, vegetation or leaves in a compost pile or container(s) which attracts animals or vermin or which causes an obnoxious odor is prohibited. One compost pile or container(s) shall be permitted on a zoning lot and shall not exceed .5% of the lot area and a maximum height of 4 feet. A compost pile or container(s) is only permitted in the rear yard and set back a minimum distance of 5% of the lot width, but not less than 3 feet, from any property line and not less than 30 feet from any adjacent residential dwelling and shall not be placed in a utility or storm water easement or in any location that obstructs the natural flow of storm water runoff. 
24.  Add new section 302.12 to read as follows: 
302.12 Outdoor Storage. Outdoor storage of materials and equipment is prohibited except where specifically permitted in a zoning district, or in Zoning Code section 10-5-6, or where granted by ordinance as a special use. Material and equipment prohibited from being stored outdoors includes rubbish and garbage, construction and building materials, ice melting salt, soil or land fill material, brush and limbs, logs and firewood, snow removal equipment, landscaping equipment, construction equipment, furnishings and fixtures intended for use within a building and similar items. The following items are permitted to be stored outdoors when located in the rear yard and set back a minimum distance of 10% of the lot width, but not less than 6.5 feet, from any property line; rubbish and garbage in approved refuse containers, firewood not to exceed two face cords, outdoor cooking equipment, recreational equipment, and construction equipment and materials required for a current construction project. 
25.  Add new section 302.13 to read as follows: 
302.13 Holiday Decorations. Holiday displays, lights, signs and temporary decorative items may be displayed for not more than 60 days. They may be displayed no sooner than 45 days prior to the holiday and must be removed no later than 60 days after the holiday. All displays that include electrical fixtures and equipment shall be installed in compliance with all requirements for temporary power and lighting in accordance with title 4 building regulations, chapter 2 Electrical Code, in the Glen Ellyn Village Code. 
26.  Add new section 304.3.1 to read as follows: 
304.3.1 Unit Identification. Every dwelling unit and every commercial business unit that shares a common entrance door in a building with another unit shall be provided with a room, apartment, suite or other identification number. Identification numbers shall be Arabic numerals or alphabet letters with a minimum height of 2 inches and a minimum stroke width of .25 inches in a contrasting color with their background and shall be installed and maintained on or adjacent to the entrance door of the unit at a height not less than 5 feet or more than 6 feet above the floor. 
27.  Amend section 304.7 to read as follows: 
304.7 Roofs And Drainage. Roof rain water, ground water or water within sump pits, pools, spas or other containers shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a public nuisance or increases or concentrates the natural water runoff flow causing soil erosion, or the accumulation of water, soil or debris, or a hazardous condition or damage on or to adjacent public or private property. Accumulated surface water on a property may be discharged to the public storm sewer in the street or other location with the prior approval of the director of public works. 
28.  Amend section 304.13 to read as follows: 
304.13 Window, Skylight And Door Frames. No temporary repair of a broken or damaged window, skylight or door shall remain in place for more than 30 days unless an extension has been granted by the Code Official. 
29.  Amend section 304.14 to insert the following dates where indicated: April 1st to November 1st. 
30.  Delete section 305.1.1 in its entirety. 
31.  Delete section 305.2 in its entirety. 
32.  Delete section 305.3 in its entirety. 
33.  Delete section 305.4 in its entirety. 
34.  Delete section 305.5 in its entirety. 
35.  Delete section 305.6 in its entirety. 
36.  Delete section 308.1 in its entirety and substitute the following: 
308.1 Accumulation Of Rubbish And Garbage. The control of rubbish and garbage shall be in accordance with title 7 health and sanitation, chapter 6 solid waste collection and disposal, in the Glen Ellyn Village Code. 
37.  Delete section 308.2 in its entirety. 
38.  Delete section 308.3 in its entirety. 
39.  Delete section 602.3 in its entirety and substitute the following: 
602.3 Heat Supply. Heating requirements shall be in accordance with title 4 building regulations, chapter 1 Building Code, in the Glen Ellyn Village Code. 
40.  Amend section 602.4 to insert the following dates where indicated: October 1st to May 15th. 
41.  Delete section 606.1 in its entirety and substitute the following: 
606.1 General. Elevators, dumbwaiters, escalators and lifts shall be maintained in compliance with the Safety Code for Elevators and Escalators (ASME A17.1-2007/CSA B44-07), Performance Based Safety Code for Elevators and Escalators (ASME A17.1-2007/CSA B44.7-07), Guide for the Inspection of Elevators, Escalators and Moving Walks (ASME A17.2-2007), Safety Code for Existing Elevators and Escalators (ASME A17.3-2005), Safety Standard for Platform Lifts and Stairway Chairlifts (ASME A18.1-2005) and Standard for the Qualification of Elevator Inspectors (ASME QEI-1-2007) in accordance with the Elevator Safety Act (225 ILCS 312/) and the Administrative Code, title 41, chapter II, part 1000, administered by the Village of Glen Ellyn under a municipality program agreement with the Office of the Illinois Fire Marshal, State of Illinois. 
42.  Delete section 701.1 in its entirety and substitute the following: 
701.1 General. All existing buildings, structures and premises shall be maintained in compliance with Illinois Code for safety to life from fire in buildings and structures, known as the 2009 NFPA 101 Life Safety Code current edition in accordance with the Fire Investigation Act (425 ILCS 25/) and the Administrative Code, title 41, chapter I, part 100, administered by the Office of the Illinois Fire Marshal, State of Illinois. 
43.  Delete section 702 in its entirety. 
44.  Delete section 703 in its entirety. 
45.  Delete section 704 in its entirety. 
(Ord. 5882, 8-23-2010, eff. 10-1-2010) 
4-1-13. - Adoption of Fuel Gas Code. 
(A)  The 2009 ICC International Fuel Gas Code is adopted by reference as the standards and regulations for governing the design and installation of fuel gas equipment and appliances, fuel gas piping and venting systems, and gaseous hydrogen systems and related accessories, as this Code is intended, recommended, maintained and published by the International Code Council except such portions thereof as are deleted, modified, or amended in this chapter. At least one copy of the 2009 ICC International Fuel Gas Code shall be maintained on file in the office of the Village Clerk for inspection and copying as a public record. 
(B)  The provisions of the 2009 ICC International Fuel Gas Code are hereby deleted, modified, and amended as follows: 
1.  Amend section 101.1 to read as follows: 
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the fuel gas code of the Village of Glen Ellyn, hereinafter referred to as "this Code." 
2.  Add new section 101.6 to read as follows: 
101.6 Administration and Enforcement. This Code shall be administered and enforced in accordance with the provisions in chapter 1 of the ICC International Building Code as adopted and amended by the Village of Glen Ellyn. 
3.  Delete section 103, Department of Inspection, in its entirety. 
4.  Delete section 104, Duties and Powers of the Code Official, in its entirety. 
5.  Delete section 105, Approval, in its entirety. 
6.  Delete section 106, Permits, in its entirety. 
7.  Delete section 107, Inspections and Testing, in its entirety. 
8.  Delete section 108, Violations, in its entirety. 
9.  Delete section 109, Means of Appeal, in its entirety. 
10.  Delete section 110, Temporary Equipment, System and Uses, in its entirety. 
11.  Amend section 303.3 item 4 to read as follows: 
4.  A single wall-mounted unvented room heater is installed in a bedroom and such unvented room heater is equipped as specified in section 621.6 and has an input rating not greater than 10,000 Btu/h (2.93 kW). The bedroom shall meet the required volume criteria of section 304.5 and be provided with a carbon monoxide detector that is listed and labeled by an approved testing agency. 
(Ord. 5992, 1-9-2012, eff. 2-1-2012) 
Chapter 2 - ELECTRICAL CODE 

4-2-1. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known as and may be called the Electrical Code of Glen Ellyn. 
(Ord. 3130, 8-26-1985, eff. 10-1-1985) 
4-2-2. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to: 
(A)  Establish regulations for the installation, alteration and use of all electrical equipment within the Village; 
(B)  Adopt the provisions of the 2011 National Electrical Code as the basic regulations for the installation, alteration, and use of electrical equipment within the Village; and 
(C)  Establish certain regulations in addition to those contained in the 2011 National Electrical Code. 
(Ord. 3130, 8-26-1985, eff. 10-1-1985; Ord. 6030, 5-14-2012, eff. 6-1-2012) 
4-2-3. - Administration and enforcement. 
The Electrical Code shall be administered and enforced in accordance with chapter 1, "Building Code", of this Title and in accordance with the provisions of the ICC International Building Code, chapter 1, part 2 as adopted and amended by the Village of Glen Ellyn, and as follows: 
(A)  Permit documents: The documents required to be submitted with the building permit application for electrical work on commercial projects shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
1.  A layout and riser diagram and specifications of the complete electrical system from the utility provider source to all new and existing transformers, meters, switchgear, and distribution panels; and 
2.  A panel load schedule for each new and existing altered distribution panel that identifies the electrical devices, the calculated load, and the overcurrent protection for each circuit, and the total calculated load and the overcurrent protection device for each panel; and 
3.  A floor plan diagram indicating and specifying new conduit and conductors run to each electrical outlet, fixture or device. 
(B)  Electrical inspection: The electrical inspections required to be completed and approved for all new or existing altered electrical systems and equipment shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
1.  When underground electrical work is completed and before it is concealed by backfill, or beneath or within a concrete slab on grade; and 
2.  When the permanent electrical service to the building or structure has been completed and before an electrical system is energized by the utility provider; and 
3.  When all framework has been erected, and all electrical and mechanical work has been roughed in place, and before any insulation has been installed, and before any wall or ceiling coverings have been placed over the framework or electrical components; and 
4.  When all electrical work has been completed and prior to occupancy in new spaces and prior to utilization of new or altered electrical systems in existing buildings and structures. 
(Ord. 6030, 5-14-2012, eff. 6-1-2012) 
4-2-4. - Adoption of the National Electrical Code. 
The 2011 NFPA National Electrical Code is adopted by reference as the standards and regulations for governing the design, installation, alteration, and use of electrical systems and equipment, as this Code is intended, recommended, maintained and published by the National Fire Protection Association except such portions thereof as are deleted, modified, or amended in this chapter. At least one copy of the 2011 NFPA National Electrical Code shall be maintained on file in the office of the Village Clerk for inspection and copying as a public record. 
(A)  The provisions of the 2011 NFPA National Electrical Code are hereby deleted, modified, and amended as follows: 
1.  Add new section 230.70(A)(4) to read as follows: 
(4)  Service entrance conductors: Service entrance conductors within a building shall not exceed five feet (5') without an exterior over current protection device. 
2.  Amend section 334.1 to read as follows: 
334.1 Scope. This article covers the use, installation and construction specifications of nonmetallic-sheathed cable. Nonmetallic sheathed cable and nonmetallic boxes, raceways and conduits are prohibited for any use exceeding 50 volts within a building except as follows: 
1.  In environments where exposed to serve corrosive influences, or 
2.  Encased in a minimum of two inches of concrete. 
3.  Add new section 310.3 to read as follows: 
310.3 Conductors. All electrical conductors shall be copper and of the capacity to serve the loads connected thereto and shall not be loaded in excess of the current ratings shown in the 2011 National Electrical Code. The minimum size conductor for use in residential wiring systems shall be no. 14 AWG and for commercial wiring systems shall be no. 12 AWG except as permitted by the 2011 National Electrical Code for remote control, low energy power and signal circuits. 
4.  Delete section 230.79(C) in its entirety and substitute the following: 
(C)  One-Family Dwellings. The minimum service capacity approved for a single phase dwelling service shall be a 3-wire, grounded neutral, service rated one hundred (100) amperes, one hundred twenty (120) to two hundred forty (240) volts. Service entrance conductors shall not be rated smaller than one hundred (100) amperes for all conductors. Conduit shall not be less than one and one-fourth inches (11/4"). 
5.  Amend section 210.60(G)(1) to read as follows: 
(1)  At least one receptacle outlet, in addition to those for specific equipment, shall be installed in each basement, in each attached garage for each vehicle bay, and in each detached garage for each vehicle bay, or accessory building with electric power. 
6.  Amend section 410.139 to read as follows: 
410.139 Switches. Snap switches shall comply with 404.14. Luminaires operating at 277 line voltage shall be controlled by snap switches on a system using a voltage of 120 volts or less. 
7.  Amend section 210.8(A)(5) Exception to (5) to read as follows: 
Exception to (5): A dedicated receptacle supplying only a permanently installed fire alarm or burglar alarm system, sump pump, ejector pump, refrigerator appliance, or freezer appliance shall not be required to have ground-fault circuit-interrupter protection. 
8.  Add new section 230.34 to read as follows: 
230.34 Underground electric service shall be provided as follows: 
(a)  Underground electric service lines shall be provided to serve a new building and structure and any existing overhead service lines shall be removed. 
(b)  Underground electric service lines shall be provided to serve an existing building or structure when an addition is constructed that increases the floor area of the existing building or structure by more than 150% and any existing overhead service lines shall be removed. 
(c)  Underground electric service lines shall be provided to serve an existing building or structure when more than 50% of the existing exterior wall and roof area is structurally altered and any existing overhead service lines shall be removed. 
Exception: The Village Board may waive this requirement provided the applicant pays a fee to cover the cost of future placement of the wires underground in a comprehensive manner by the Village. The fee shall be based on an itemized cost estimate prepared by the applicant and approved by the Village Engineer, and shall be paid prior to any permits being issued. 
(Ord. 6030, 5-14-2012, eff. 6-1-2012) 
Chapter 3 - PLUMBING CODE 

4-3-1. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known as and may be called the Plumbing Code of Glen Ellyn. 
(Ord. 6488, 3-20-2017) 
4-3-2. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to: 
(A)  Establish regulations for the proper design, installation and maintenance of plumbing systems within the Village; 
(B)  Adopt the provisions of the Illinois State Plumbing Code of 2014 as the minimum regulations for the installation, alteration and use of plumbing systems within the Village; and 
(C)  Establish certain regulations in addition to those contained in the Illinois State Plumbing Code of 2014. 
(Ord. 6488, 3-20-2017) 
4-3-3. - Permit required. 
(A)  Permit required: No plumbing work shall be undertaken prior to the issuance of a permit by the Building and Zoning Official, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
1.  Work exempt from permit: Exemptions from permit requirements of this Code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this Code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction. Permits shall not be required for the following: 
(a)  The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste or vent pipe, provided; however, that if any concealed trap, drain pipe, water, soil, waste or vent pipe becomes defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace the same with new material, such work shall be considered as new work and a permit shall be obtained and inspection made as required by this Code. 
(b)  The clearing of any stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes, valves or fixtures and the removal and reinstallation of water closets, provided such repairs do not involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of valves, pipes or fixtures. 
(c)  The removal and replacement of residential fixtures by a single-family homeowner, and not requiring the replacement or rearrangement of valves, pipes, fixtures or electrical connections. 
(d)  The removal and replacement of residential portable sump or ejector pumps. 
(B)  Applicant: Permits for plumbing work shall be issued only to licensed plumbers, except that a plumbing permit may be issued to the owner/occupant or lessee/occupant of a single-family residence. Such owner/occupant or lessee/occupant of a single-family residence is authorized only to install, alter or repair the plumbing system of such single-family residence, provided that such plumbing shall comply with all plumbing laws, rules and regulations of this chapter and of the Illinois State Plumbing Code of 2014 and shall be subject to such inspections as may be provided by this chapter and provided further that any such owner/occupant or lessee/occupant shall not employ any person other than an Illinois licensed plumber to assist him in such work. 
(C)  Letter of intent: A letter of intent shall be included with all plumbing permit applications. The letter shall be written on the licensed plumber of record's business stationery and shall include the license holder's signature and, if the license holder is incorporated, the license holder's corporate seal. If the license holder is not incorporated, the letter must be notarized. 
(D)  Form of application: The application for a plumbing permit shall be submitted on such form as the Building and Zoning Official may prescribe and shall be accompanied by such information as is required by this chapter or reasonably required by the Building and Zoning Official in the exercise of his judgment for the purpose of determining compliance with the requirements of this chapter. The form of the application shall require the applicant to provide the permanent index number on which the construction or alteration work is to be performed. 
(E)  Plans and specifications: No plumbing permit shall be issued until after plans and specifications showing the proposed plumbing work have been submitted, reviewed and approved by the Building and Zoning Official. If a plumbing permit is denied, the applicant shall submit revised plans and specifications in compliance with this chapter. When it is found necessary to make any change in the plumbing from the plans and specifications on which a permit has been issued, amended plans and specifications shall be submitted to the Building and Zoning Official for approval prior to making any change in the plumbing system. 
(F)  Applications must be signed: All applications for permit to do plumbing work must be signed by the owner/occupant or lessee/occupant of a single-family residence or by the person, firm or corporation who will do the plumbing work. 
(G)  Expiration of permit: A permit under which no work is commenced within 90 days after issuance shall expire by limitation and a new permit shall be secured before work is started. All work commenced shall continue uninterrupted and be completed within 18 months from the date initial work begins. 
(Ord. 6488, 3-20-2017) 
4-3-4. - Permit fees. 
(A)  Plan examination: A plan examination fee shall be paid for all plumbing work if the value of the work exceeds $15,000.00. See subsection 4-1-4(A) of this Title. 
(B)  Permit fee: For new construction, alterations, remodeling, installations, repairs and additions, including the installation of equipment and piping, there shall be a basic fee for the issuance of a building permit. See subsection 4-1-4(A) of this Title. 
(C)  Inspection fee: A plumbing inspection fee for each project that requires a licensed plumber to complete inspections shall be assessed for each permit. See subsection 4-1-4(A) of this Title. The inspection fee shall cover the cost of the initial inspection and one re-inspection. 
(D)  Re-inspection fee: A plumbing re-inspection fee shall be assessed for each re-inspection performed after the first re-inspection of any portion of the work. 
(Ord. 6488, 3-20-2017) 
4-3-5. - Adoption of the Illinois State Plumbing Code of 2014. 
(A)  The Illinois State Plumbing Code of 2014, as promulgated and published by the Illinois Department of Public Health, except such portions thereof as are deleted, modified, or amended in this chapter, is adopted by reference as the standards, specifications, rules and regulations for the installation, alteration, repair, use and maintenance of all plumbing work and plumbing systems within the Village. No less than three copies of the Illinois State Plumbing Code of 2014 shall be maintained on file in the Office of the Village Clerk for inspection and copying as a public record. 
(B)  The provisions of the Illinois State Plumbing Code of 2014 are hereby deleted, modified, and amended as follows: 
1.  Amend section 890.510 a)2) to read as follows: 
2)  Minimum Size: 
i)  All grease interceptors shall be sized based on one hundred (100) percent of the connected fixture(s)' liquid-holding capacity. To determine the liquid holding capacity of the connected fixture(s), the fixture basin length is multiplied by the width then by the height, in inches, then divided by 231, then divided by a 1 minute drain time. When two or more sinks or receptacles are connected to an interceptor the liquid-holding capacity shall be based on the combined volume of all the fixtures served as calculated above in addition to the flow rate of other fixture types as established by the fixture manufacturer or by calculation of drainage fixture units similar to Section 890.1330 b) multiplied by a one minute drain time. For the purpose of sizing a hydro mechanical grease interceptor the resulting units are taken as gallons per minute, and for the purpose of sizing a gravity grease interceptor, as gallons. 
ii)  This Code shall not prohibit the installation of two grease interceptors installed in a parallel system as long as each interceptor is properly sized as required in Section 890.510 a)2)i) for the connected fixture holding capacity. 
2.  Add new section 890.510 a)7) to read as follows: 
7)  Hydro mechanical grease interceptors shall be installed with a flow control fitting as required by the interceptor manufacturer's specifications to achieve the specified flow rate. 
3.  Add new section 890.510 a)8) to read as follows: 
8)  Commercial dishwashers are not required to be connected to a grease interceptor. If a commercial dishwasher is connected to a grease interceptor, either, 
a.  The connected grease interceptor shall not serve other plumbing fixtures and shall be sized for the discharge flow rate of the dishwasher, or 
b.  The minimum size of the grease interceptor serving the dishwasher and all other connected plumbing fixtures shall be 500 gallons. 
4.  Add new section 890.510 a)9) to read as follows: 
9)  All hydro mechanical grease interceptors shall bear a permanently affixed nameplate issued by a testing laboratory acceptable to the authority having jurisdiction which shall serve as the manufacturer's certification that the interceptor has been tested and certified for the specified flow rate. The nameplate shall be permanently marked with the manufacturer's name, the flow rate in gallons per minute, the grease capacity in pounds or the actual retained grease at breakdown, and the inlet and outlet sizes. 
5.  Add new section 890.510 a)10) as follows: 
10)  A control manhole or sampling chamber shall be installed downstream of any grease interceptor. 
6.  Add new section 890.610 d) as follows: 
d)  Plumbing Fixtures. All new and replacement plumbing fixtures installed after the effective date of this ordinance shall bear the WaterSense label (as designated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency WaterSense Program), when such labeled fixtures are available. 
7.  Add new section 890.1320 p) as follows: 
p)  Car Washes, Recycle System: All newly installed or remodeled car wash systems shall be equipped with a water recycling system. 
8.  Add new section 890.1360 a)4) as follows: 
4)  Overhead Plumbing Required. A building drain system wherein the building drain exits the building at a minimum depth below the grade and has no openings flowing by gravity inside the building below the grade of the adjacent street in which the sanitary sewer is located shall be required for all new construction and remodeling of existing structures whenever remodeling constitutes over fifty percent (50%) of the value of the structure prior to the work. 
9.  Add new section 890.1380 a) as follows: 
a)  Building Storm Drains, Connection To System. For all habitable structures and business structures constructed, all building subsoil drain sump pump discharge pipes shall be connected to the storm sewer system wherever there is a storm sewer reasonably available for such connection. This provision is not intended to require that storm sewers be extended to serve each and every lot in addition to providing adequate surface drainage. 
10.  Add new section 890.1910 a) through e) as follows: 
a)  Preliminary Inspection. Before issuing a building permit for plumbing work, the Building and Zoning Official may examine or cause to be examined all buildings, structures and sites for which an application has been filed for a permit to construct, alter or maintain a plumbing system. 
b)  Right of Entry. Within constitutional limits, the Building and Zoning Official, or his authorized representative, shall have the right to enter at any reasonable hour, any building, structure or premises within the Village for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this Code. 
c)  Inspection Required. A plumbing system or any part thereof shall not be enclosed, covered up or used until after such system has been inspected and approved by the plumbing inspector. All plumbing work being performed pursuant to a permit issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to inspection by the Plumbing Inspector upon completion of the following two (2) stages of completion: 
1.  Rough Inspection. When the plumbing is roughed in and before fixtures are set, all plumbing work shall be inspected for compliance with the requirements of this chapter. Plumbing work shall not be closed in, concealed or covered until after it has been inspected and approved by the Plumbing Inspector. 
2.  Final Inspection. Upon completion of the plumbing work and before final approval is given, the Plumbing Inspector shall inspect the plumbing and observe the final tests of the plumbing system to ensure compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
d)  Re-Inspection Required. A re-inspection is mandatory whenever a plumbing system is found not in compliance with this chapter. It is the responsibility of the plumbing permit holder to arrange for re-inspection of the plumbing system by the Plumbing Inspector. 
e)  Owner's Obligation to Notify Building and Zoning Official. It is the responsibility of the holder of the building permit for plumbing work to arrange for inspection or re-inspection of the plumbing work upon completion of the two (2) stages of construction of the plumbing work defined in this section, and to arrange for re-inspection when required by this chapter, with notice to the Building and Zoning Official that the work is ready for inspection at least twenty four (24) hours before such inspection is to be made. No further work shall be performed on the plumbing system until the Building and Zoning Official or his authorized representative has issued a certificate of satisfactory inspection. 
(Ord. 6488, 3-20-2017) 
4-3-6. - Penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than $25.00 nor more than $750.00 for each offense, and each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. 6488, 3-20-2017) 
Chapter 4 - BUILDING INSPECTION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. 6641, § 1, adopted Nov. 12, 2018, amended Ch. 4, §§ 4-4-1-4-4-9, in effect repealing and reenacting said chapter as set out herein. Former Ch. 4 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 1529, adopted June 26, 1967; Ord. 1616, adopted Oct. 28, 1968; Ord. 1920, adopted Feb. 10, 1975; Ord. 2852, adopted Jan. 24, 1983; Ord. 4746, adopted Aug. 9, 1999; Ord. 5154, adopted March 24, 2003; Ord. 5762, adopted May 26, 2009; Ord. 5796, adopted Sept. 28, 2009; and Ord. 5996, adopted Jan. 30, 2012. 

4-4-1. - Building and Zoning Official. 
(A)  Appointment: The Building and Zoning Official, a division head under the Community Development Department, shall be appointed by the Community Development Director, subject to approval by the Village Manager. 
(B)  Duties and authority: The Building and Zoning Official shall perform the following duties, together with such other duties as may be assigned to him from time to time, have the duties and authorities as specified in this section and in other sections of the Village Code, and as specified for the Building and Zoning Official in the amended and adopted codes regulating zoning and construction within the Village. 
The Building and Zoning Official shall have the authority to assign the occupancy classification of any building or structure, examine and approve all plans for the construction or alteration of buildings prior to the issuance of building permits, inspect for code compliance, enforce all Village code provisions relating to buildings and zoning, and enforce code regulations prescribed by any federal, state, county, or local governmental agency with jurisdiction when such authority is granted to the Building and Zoning Official by the governmental agency. 
(C)  Zoning compliance: The Building and Zoning Official shall have the duty and authority to approve or reject a Business Registration and Certificate of Zoning Occupancy Application after complete and accurate information has been submitted as required in zoning code section 10-10-6. The Building and Zoning Official shall have the duty and authority to issue a Certificate of Zoning Occupancy after a zoning occupancy inspection has been completed and approved, as required in this section and in zoning code section 10-10-7. 
(D)  Power of entry: The Building and Zoning Official, or his authorized representative, shall have the power to enter, at any reasonable hour, any building or premises where a building permit application or a Business Registration and Certificate of Zoning Occupancy Application has been received or where alterations, repairs or construction is proceeding for the purpose of making the inspections required by this chapter. 
(Ord. 6641, 11-12-2018; Ord. 6674, 2-25-2019) 
4-4-2. - Inspections required. 
The Building and Zoning Official, or his duly authorized representative, shall make, or cause to make, the following inspections to confirm compliance with all applicable regulations in the Village Code. 
(A)  Construction inspections: All construction work completed under a building permit shall be periodically inspected to confirm compliance with applicable building and fire codes. The building permit applicant or property owner shall request the required inspections listed on the building permit and provide access and the means to complete the inspections and shall not cover or conceal the work or continue the work until the required inspections are completed and approved. The Building and Zoning Official shall inspect all buildings and structures being erected or altered as frequently as may be necessary to confirm compliance with approved plans and the Village's codes that regulate construction. 
(B)  Fire prevention inspections: 
1.  The Building and Zoning Official, or his duly authorized representative, shall make an annual fire prevention inspection of all churches, public assembly units, schools, theaters, business buildings, multiple use buildings consisting of business and dwelling units, common areas within multi-family residential buildings and other occupiable buildings and structures to confirm fire and life safety code compliance. 
Exception: Detached single- and two-family dwellings and single-family attached dwellings (townhouses) and their accessory structures, and individual dwelling units in multi-family buildings and their accessory structures, shall not be subject to annual fire prevention inspections. 
2.  It shall be the duty of the owner, agent, lessee, occupant or person in charge of, or in control of, a building or structure to permit the Building and Zoning Official, or his duly authorized agent, to make an annual fire prevention inspection at any reasonable time, upon demand duly made. 
3.  A fee for the annual fire prevention inspection of each building shall be paid to the Village and shall be based on the Schedule of Fees and Deposits in section 4-1-4 of this title. Each part of a building occupied by a different business shall be considered as a separate building. See section 4-1-4 of this title. 
4.  Any owner of a building failing to pay the annual fire prevention inspection fee within 30 days of receipt of the bill shall pay double the amount of the fee billed, up to 60 days, with an additional $5.00 per day after 60 days until paid but not more than $500.00. 
(C)  Zoning occupancy inspections: 
1.  It shall be the duty of either the owner, agent, lessee or occupant of a building or structure to file with the Building and Zoning Official an application for a Business Registration and Certificate of Zoning Occupancy in accordance with zoning code section 10-10-7. Such application shall be submitted to the Village when one or more of the following events occur: 
(a)  Change of ownership of the building, business or structure, 
(b)  Change of occupancy, 
(c)  Change of business name, 
(d)  Change of business address, or 
(e)  New business 
2.  A fee shall be paid to the Village for the registration of each business in accordance with the schedule of fees and deposits in section 4-1-4 of this title. 
3.  Following receipt of Business Registration and Certificate of Zoning Occupancy Application and, prior to the establishment of a new use, or a change of use, or a change of occupancy, a zoning occupancy inspection shall be completed by the Building and Zoning Official, or an authorized representative. 
4.  It shall be the duty of the owner, agent, lessee, occupant or person in charge of, or in control of, a building to permit the Building and Zoning Official, or his duly authorized representative, to make a zoning occupancy inspection at any reasonable time, upon demand duly made. 
5.  The Building Registration and Certificate of Zoning Occupancy Application shall include the name, title, home address, email address and telephone number of the property owner and the person to be notified in the event of a fire, accident or other emergency in or to the building, and any other information requested by the Building and Zoning Official to ensure the building occupancy and use complies with all applicable regulations. Further, the police department shall be furnished with such information as it may require to implement the protection provided for the building occupants and the property. 
(D)  Business license and permit inspections: Upon the Village's receipt of an application for a business license or permit, the Building and Zoning Official shall perform the applicable inspections required by Title 3 and Chapter 5 of Title 7 of this Code. 
(E)  Elevators and conveying system inspections: 
1.  Inspection required: Every elevator, dumbwaiter, escalator or other conveyance now in operation or which may hereinafter be installed, together with the hoistway and all equipment thereof, shall be inspected under and by the authority of the Building and Zoning Official annually and in no case shall any new equipment be placed in operation until an inspection of the same has been made. It shall be the duty of every owner, agent, lessee or occupant of any building wherein any such equipment is installed, and of the person in charge or control of any such equipment to permit the making of a test and inspection of such elevator, dumbwaiter, escalator or other conveyance, and all devices used in connection therewith upon demand being made by the Building and Zoning Official. 
2.  Order to stop operation: Whenever the Building and Zoning Official finds any elevator, dumbwaiter, escalator or other conveyance in an unsafe condition, he shall prepare a statement of all the facts relating to the condition of such equipment. It shall then be the duty of the Building and Zoning Official to order the operation of such equipment to be stopped and to remain inoperative until it has been placed in a safe condition and it shall be unlawful for any agent, owner, lessee or occupant of any building wherein any such equipment is located, to permit or allow the same to be used after the receipt of a notice from the Building and Zoning Official, which notice is in writing, that such equipment is in an unsafe condition and until it has been restored to a safe and proper condition as required by the provisions of this Code. 
3.  Inspection fee: A fee shall be paid to the Village for the annual inspection or required periodic testing of each elevator, dumbwaiter, escalator, or other conveyance as required by the Office of the State Fire Marshal. See section 4-1-4 of this title. 
(Ord. 6641, 11-12-2018) 
4-4-3. - Notices and orders. 
When the inspection made by the Building and Zoning Official, or his duly authorized representative, shows that a building, structure or occupancy fails to comply with the provisions of the applicable village code which regulates construction, as adopted and amended by Glen Ellyn ordinance, in any respect, it shall be the duty of the Building and Zoning Official to notify the owner, agent, lessee or occupant, and to specify wherein such building, structure or occupancy fails to comply with the requirements of the code and order the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation. 
Thereupon, it shall become the duty of such owner, agent, lessee or occupant to promptly make whatever changes or alterations are required to comply with the provisions of all applicable codes. 
(Ord. 6641, 11-12-2018) 
Chapter 5 - SIGN CODE 

4-5-1. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known and cited as the Glen Ellyn Sign Code. 
(Ord. 6215, 2-10-2014) 
4-5-2. - Statement of purpose. 
It is hereby determined that the primary purpose of signage is to help people find what they need without difficulty or confusion. Thus, while not restricting freedom of expression, regulations must be established for preventing an overload of graphic messages in the environment. The purpose of signs is subordinate to the structures and land use functions they reference. Signs are to be considered accessory components of an overall composition of architectural elements, not as freestanding or dominant architectural elements by themselves. There should not be a proliferation of off premises signs as it can obscure the legitimate efforts of local business establishments to reasonably identify the location and nature of their businesses. 
This chapter establishes standards and regulations for the erection, display, safety and maintenance of signs which are intended to allow a person to observe or ignore graphic messages, according to that person's own purpose, as well as to encourage the general attractiveness of the community and to protect property values. These standards and regulations are intended to meet the following objectives: 
(A)  Effective communication: A reasonable, orderly and effective display of signs is to be promoted by authorizing the use of signs which: 
1.  Are legible in the context in which they are viewed; 
2.  Are appropriate to the functions to which they pertain; 
3.  Clearly and efficiently identify and classify the goods, services, facilities, activities and locations made available to the community by businesses, community service organizations and other enterprises; and 
4.  Eliminate or reduce the "canceling out" effect created by the inappropriate placement of signs in proximity to one another. 
(B)  Public welfare: The public health, safety and welfare is to be preserved, protected and promoted through sign regulations which: 
1.  Recognize that signs are a necessary means of visual communication for the convenience of the general public taken as a whole, as opposed to the convenience of any individual person; 
2.  Minimize the blighting influences posed by visual clutter, decay and neglect; 
3.  Reduce distractions, obstructions, and hazards to pedestrian and automobile traffic caused by the indiscriminate placement and use of signs and to protect pedestrians and motorists from injury and property damage caused by, or which may be fully or partially attributable to, cluttered, distracting or illegible signage; 
4.  Prohibit the placement of signs which obstruct vision or access in a manner which creates dangerous conditions; 
5.  Protect the physical and mental well-being of the general public by encouraging a sense of aesthetic appreciation for the Village's visual environment and ensuring that signs harmonize with their surroundings and are consistent with the character of their community context; 
6.  Promote the use of graphics which are aesthetically pleasing, of appropriate scale, and integrated with surrounding buildings and landscaping, in order to meet the community's expressed desire for quality development; 
7.  Protect the value of the Village's architectural resources, by ensuring that the integrity of the architectural elements and character of buildings and sites to which signs principally relate is maintained; 
8.  Assure that public benefits derived from expenditures of public funds for the improvement and beautification of streets in accordance with the downtown, Roosevelt Road and historic Stacy's Corners streetscape plans, and other public structures and spaces, are protected by exercising reasonable controls over the character and design of graphic structures; 
9.  Preserve the value of private property by assuring the compatibility of signs with surrounding land uses; 
10.  Promote economic development by encouraging a more attractive economic and business climate within the commercial areas of the Village; 
11.  Further the objectives of the comprehensive plan and downtown strategic plan; 
12.  Protect the general public from damage and injury caused by the faulty and uncontrolled construction and use of signs within the Village; and 
13.  Respect the rights of nearby property owners. 
(Ord. 6215, 2-10-2014) 
4-5-3. - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise expressly stated or the context clearly indicates a different sense, the terms set forth below shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have the meanings indicated herein. In the event a conflict arises concerning terms not defined in this section, the following sources shall be consulted and the definition found in the sources listed in order of priority to be consulted shall be deemed correct: 
(A) Glen Ellyn Zoning Ordinance 3617-Z, as amended. 
(B) Webster's Collegiate Dictionary, most recent edition. 
ABANDONED SIGN: A sign located on property which becomes vacant, or any sign which pertains to a use or activity which is no longer available on the premises where the sign is displayed. 
ANIMATED SIGN: Any sign which includes action or motion. For the purposes of this chapter, this term does not refer to flashing, changing or indexing signs, which are separately identified. 
ATTENTION GETTING DEVICE: A sign or other device designed to attract attention. Examples of such signs and devices include searchlights, beacon lights, lighting bands and any pennant, flag, banner, propeller, spinner, streamer, whirligig, inflatable device, balloon or similar device/ornamentation designed for the purposes of attracting attention or for promotion or advertising. 
AWNING: An architectural projection, which provides weather protection, identity or decoration which is supported by the building to which it is attached and composed of a lightweight rigid or retractable skeleton structure over which another cover is attached which may be made of fabric or other materials. 
AWNING AREA: The total surface area of an awning including any side panels and valances. 
AWNING SIGN: Individual letters, words or symbols painted or otherwise permanently affixed to an awning surface. 
BANNER SIGN: A temporary sign composed of cloth, canvas or other lightweight material either enclosed or not enclosed in a rigid frame. 
BARE BULB ILLUMINATION: Exposed or uncovered lighting elements, for example, light bulbs without a cover. 
BILLBOARD: See definition of Off Premises Sign. 

BREEZEWAY SIGN
BREEZEWAY SIGN: A sign attached to the underside of a breezeway or arcade in a shopping center which identifies the establishments located therein. 
BUILDING SIGNAGE: Permanent, non-exempt sign affixed to the exterior surface of a building to serve the establishment contained within the building that the building signage is affixed to. Wall signs, awning signs, and marquee signs are considered building signs. Building signage does not include prohibited signs or temporary signs. 
COMMON PROGRAM SIGN: A uniform flag or projecting banner associated with a program or initiative sponsored or facilitated by a governmental entity, community service organization or educational, religious or charitable organization. 
COMMUNITY SERVICE ORGANIZATION: A not for profit entity or corporation whose principal purpose is to provide services, financial assistance or personnel which benefit the residents of the Village of Glen Ellyn. 
COPY: The wording or symbols on a sign surface, either in permanent or changing letter form. 
DEVELOPMENT: An area of land sharing common elements such as access drives, parking and stormwater facilities and constructed as a unified site. 
DOUBLE SIDED SIGN: A sign with two distinct faces, each designed to be viewed from separate directions. 
DRIVE-THROUGH CANOPY INFORMATIONAL SIGNAGE: Signs placed on the canopy of drive-through establishments intended to guide traffic and provide instructional information to motorists such as "Open", "Closed" and "Clearance" and including no advertisements. 
ELECTRONIC IDENTIFICATION SIGN: An electronic sign constituting the main establishment identification signage which may include, the name or other generally recognizable symbol or logo of an establishment, not including electronic message boards. 
ESTABLISHMENT: An individual business, institution or activity that occupies a portion of a building and has its own exterior public entrance accessible from ground level. 
ESTABLISHMENT FRONTAGE: The linear length of the principal building frontage of an establishment oriented toward the front property line. 
EXTERNAL ILLUMINATION: Illumination of a sign that is affected by an artificial source of light not contained within the sign itself, but not including silhouette lighting. 
FESTOON LIGHTING: A group of two or more bulbs hung or strung on a building or structure, which are not shaded or hooded to prevent direct rays of light from being visible. 
FLASHING SIGN: Any sign, exclusive of "message boards (electronic)" on which illumination intermittently flashes off and on in whole or in part, or which includes the illusion of intermittent or flashing light by means of animation, or an externally mounted intermittent light source. 
FREESTANDING SIGN: A sign erected on a freestanding frame, mast or pole or supported by the ground and not attached to any building, including, but not limited to, "monument signs" and "pole or pylon signs". 
GAS STATION CANOPY: A roofed structure supported by posts or columns with no exterior walls and serves as a sheltered area above gas dispensing pumps. 
GAS STATION PUMP SIGNAGE: Signs located on an individual gas pump associated with a gas station use provided the combined size of all signage located at each vehicle position of each gas pump does not exceed 12 square feet. 
ILLUMINATED SIGN: Any sign which emanates or receives light. Light may be transmitted internally through the sign face, be illuminated externally, or illuminated by indirect light. 
INDEXING SIGN: A sign that has a series of triangular vertical sections that turn or stop, designed to show three messages in the same area. 
INDIVIDUAL LETTER WALL SIGN: Any sign made of individual letters that is mounted directly on the face of a building. 
INTERNAL ILLUMINATION: A light source that is concealed or contained within the sign and becomes visible in darkness through a translucent surface. 
LOT FRONTAGE: The combined length of the front and any corner side yard property lines. 
MARQUEE AREA: The total surface area of a marquee excluding the top and bottom surfaces. 

MARQUEE SIGN
MARQUEE SIGN: A permanent roof like structure containing signage and projecting from a building that provides protection from the elements. Also known as a canopy sign. 
MENU BOARD: A permanent sign which functions to list items or show pictures of items for sale at a drive-through and which is intended to be visible by motorists placing orders from their vehicles. 
MESSAGE BOARD (ELECTRONIC): A sign such as an electronic or electronically controlled time, temperature or date sign, message center or reader board, where different copy changes are shown at timed intervals as regulated in section 4-5-15 of this chapter. 
MESSAGE BOARD (MANUAL CHANGING): A sign on which copy is changed manually in the field, i.e., reader boards with changeable letters or changeable pictorial images. 
MONUMENT SIGN: A sign for which the base/supports are 100 percent (on all sides) in contact with the ground and the width of the base is no less than 66 percent of the width of the sign face. 
MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING SIGN: A sign identifying a multi-family building, other than a senior facility, consisting of three or more dwelling units including apartments and condominiums, which may contain the name and contact information of the management company and associated information. 
MULTI-TENANT SIGN: A sign that serves as a common or collective sign for buildings with two or more ground floor establishments located on the same lot or in the development which may contain the name of the development and/or information about one or more of the establishments located therein. 
MUNICIPAL SIGN: Sign of a duly constituted municipality, as defined in the Illinois municipal code. 
MURAL: Artwork painted directly on an exterior building wall that contains no identification, description, illustration or device which directs attention to or provides information about a product, service, or business. A Mural is not a sign. 

NAMEPLATE
NAMEPLATE: A small wall mounted nonelectronic sign identifying a business or occupant located on the premises on which the sign is located. If any premises includes more than one business or occupant, nameplate refers to all the businesses or occupants identified as well as the name of the building and directional information. 
NEON SIGN: A sign in which an inert gaseous chemical element is contained in a glass tube and which may be bent to form letters, symbols or other shapes. 
NONCOMMERCIAL SPEECH SIGN: A sign whose primary purpose is not to direct attention to a business, development, institution, good, product, or service located on the premises or for sale and which is typically of political, religious or ideological nature. 
NONCONFORMING SIGN (LEGAL): Any sign which was lawfully erected and maintained prior to enactment of this chapter and which fails to conform to all applicable regulations and restrictions of this chapter. 
NONRESIDENTIAL ESTABLISHMENT SIGN: A sign identifying an establishment other than a residential establishment such as a business, institutional, private recreational, office, or service establishment or any associated products, facilities or services located on the site. 
OFF PREMISES SIGN: Outdoor sign which advertises goods, products or services not sold or provided on the premises on which the sign is located. 
OFFICE COMPLEX: A continuous area of land and any office buildings or structures thereon, under single ownership or operated under a single entity with more than one firm or business. 
OFFICE COMPLEX DIRECTORY SIGN: A sign identifying the offices or other businesses located in an office complex. 
ORDER CONFIRMATION SIGN: A sign displaying items, prices and total cost of a single transaction or purchase made at a drive-through facility. 
OWNER: A person recorded as such on official records. 
PARAPET OR PARAPET WALL: A wall like barrier at the edge of a roof that extends above the roof surface and which may be an extension of the exterior building wall or a continuation of a vertical feature beneath the roof. 
PARK SIGN: A sign identifying a public park or any public recreational facilities located thereon. 
POLE OR PYLON SIGN: A freestanding sign that is permanently supported in a fixed location by a mast or pole that has a width that is 66 percent or less of the width of the sign face and which is not supported by a building or end piers. 
POLITICAL CAMPAIGN SIGN: A sign referring to a candidate or issue subject to public election. 
PORTABLE SIGN: A sign which is not intended to be permanently attached to a structure or to the ground, but can be moved or is intended to be moved from one location to another. 
PRIVATE PARKING LOT SIGN: A sign located in a private parking lot intended to regulate traffic or parking and which may denote time limits or other legal responsibilities. Such signs may include, but not be limited to, towing and no trespass signs. 

PROJECTING SIGN
PROJECTING SIGN: Any sign other than a wall, awning, marquee or breezeway sign which is suspended from or supported by a building or wall and not in the same plane as the wall. 
PUBLIC REGULATION SIGN: Any notice or warning sign required by a valid and applicable federal, state or local law, regulation or resolution or used by a public body for the control of traffic, parking, legal notice, information or direction required by such bodies, but not including establishment identification signs. 
REAL ESTATE SIGN: A sign indicating the sale, lease or rental of the parcel, structure or establishment on which the sign is located. 
RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT SIGN: A sign identifying a single-family detached, single-family attached or senior residential development. 
ROOF SIGN: A signed erected on or extending above the roof or parapet of any building or structure. 
SIGHT TRIANGLE: A triangle formed by extending the lot lines at a street intersection 30 feet in each direction and connecting the extended lines using a straight path. 
SIGN: Any identification, description, illustration or device illuminated or nonilluminated which directs attention to or provides information about a product, service, place, activity, person, institution, business or solicitation, including any permanently installed or situated merchandise or any emblem, banner, pennant, placard or temporary sign designed to advertise, identify or convey information. An object in the shape of a product is considered a sign. 
SIGN AREA: The total area within a continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of characters, lettering, illustrations, ornamentations, or other figures of the sign, together with any material, or color used as an integral part of the display or to differentiate the sign from the background. Where a base or frame is used as an integral part of the sign structure such elements shall not be included in the sign area unless lettering or graphics are located thereon. More information about how to calculate sign area can be found in section 4-5-13 of this chapter. 
SIGN FACE: The entire area of the sign on which copy could be placed. 
SIGN INCORPORATING MOVEMENT: Any turning, rotating, swinging or other motion or simulated action of a sign or signpost. 
SIGN STRUCTURE: Any structure which supports, has supports or is capable of supporting a sign including decorative cover. 

SILHOUETTE 
ILLUMINATED
SIGN
SILHOUETTE ILLUMINATED SIGN: A sign that is illuminated by casting or reflecting light behind the sign so as to create a silhouette or halo around the outer perimeter of the sign. Sometimes referred to as a "halo" sign. 
SPECIAL EVENT SIGN: A temporary sign authorized by section 4-5-7 of this chapter to promote an event, sale or other special activity. 
TEMPORARY SIGN: A sign which is not permanently affixed such as real estate and construction signs, banner signs, and other similar devices, and other signs of a temporary nature, as regulated in sections 4-5-6 and 4-5-7 of this chapter. 
TRAFFIC DIRECTIONAL SIGN: A sign which directs traffic movement into or within a site. 
UNLAWFUL SIGN: A sign which violates this chapter. 
VIDEO DISPLAY SIGN: An electronic sign that displays motion or pictorial images and which may include the presentation of pictorials or graphics displayed in a progression of frames which give the illusion of motion, including, but not limited to, the illusion of moving objects, moving patterns or bands of light, or expanding or contracting shapes. 
WALL SIGN: A sign attached or erected against, or painted directly on, the wall of a building with the sign face in a parallel plane to the plane of the building. 
WINDOW SIGN: A sign installed on, inside or near a window for purpose of viewing from outside the building. 
(Ord. 6215, 2-10-2014; Ord. 6656, 12-10-2018) 
4-5-4. - General standards and design criteria. 
All signs shall be constructed and maintained in conformance with the following general provisions: 
(A)  Corner lots: Signs located within the 30-foot sight triangle must be constructed and maintained in such a manner that clearance is maintained from three feet to eight feet from ground level. 
(B)  Electrical requirements: All signs in which electrical wiring and connection are required shall conform to the applicable provisions of the Electrical Code adopted by the Village of Glen Ellyn. Conductors for all illuminated signs shall be enclosed in rigid conduit or enclosed in poles or raceways and be controlled with an external disconnect located at the sign. In no case shall the wiring be exposed to the view of the public. 
(C)  Framework: All signs shall be designed so that all framework for the lateral support of the sign, other than the supporting base, poles or end piers of a freestanding sign, shall be contained within or behind the face of the sign or within the structure of the building to which it is attached, in such a manner as to not be visible from public view. 
(D)  Glass requirements: All glass forming a part of any sign shall be designed to resist a 90-mile per hour three-second gust wind speed and shall have safety glazing where subject to impact loads or placed in a hazardous location in accordance with the standards and regulations in the Building Code adopted by the Village. 
(E)  Illumination: Signs may be externally illuminated, internally illuminated, silhouette illuminated or otherwise illuminated unless expressly stated otherwise in this chapter. The illumination of signs shall comply with the following regulations: 
1.  Externally illuminated: Signs in the CR and any residential zoning districts shall only be externally illuminated. 
2.  Restrictions: Illumination shall not be used for decorative, advertising or attention getting purposes, except that incidental lighting may be provided to aid in the identification of the address and the entrance location. This requirement applies to all signs including awning and marquee signs. 
3.  Brightness limitation: In no instance shall the lighting intensity of any sign, whether resulting from internal illumination or external illumination, exceed the following: 
(a)  Fifty foot-candles measured perpendicular to the face of the sign from a distance equal to the narrowest dimension of the sign; or 
(b)  One foot-candle on the adjoining residential property lot line closest to the sign, measured three feet above the surface of the ground. 
4.  Constant: Illumination shall be constant in intensity and color and shall not consist of blinking, flashing, animated or scintillating lights including externally illuminated signs which shall be illuminated only with steady and stationary light sources. Time and temperature signs are considered electronic message boards and shall not be considered flashing signs. 
5.  Nonglaring: Whenever an external artificial light source is used to illuminate a sign, the illumination source shall be located, shielded, and directed so as not to be directly visible from any public street and shall be so designed, located, shielded and directed so as to illuminate only the sign face and to prevent the casting of glare or direct light upon adjacent property or streets. 
6.  No traffic hazards: Neither the direct nor reflected light from light sources shall create a traffic hazard for, or confuse operators of motor vehicles, or in any way interfere with the driver's view of approaching, merging or intersecting traffic. 
7.  Luminaries: Marquee sign luminaries shall be the cut off type with horizontally mounted flat lenses that do not extend below the marquee ceiling. Prismatic and drop lenses are prohibited. 
8.  Projecting light fixtures: Gooseneck reflectors or arms projecting from the sign surface mounted with lights for the purpose of illuminating the sign shall be permitted for wall and freestanding signs, except that fixtures shall not project more than two feet over the public right-of-way and a minimum clearance of seven feet six inches must be maintained beneath the fixture. 
(F)  Letters to be secured: All letters, figures, characters or representations which are attached or superimposed on any sign shall be safely and securely built or attached to the sign structure. 
(G)  Obstruction to ventilation: No sign shall be constructed or maintained so as to obstruct any window surface required for ventilation by an applicable code of the Village of Glen Ellyn. 
(H)  Obstructions to doors, windows or fire escapes: No sign shall be constructed or maintained so as to obstruct or obscure the visibility of any fire escape, required exit, or window or door opening used as a means of egress. No sign shall be attached to a standpipe or fire escape. 
(I)  Sign in or over the right-of-way: No sign, except a: 
1.  Public regulation sign; 
2.  Municipal sign; 
3.  Awning sign; 
4.  Marquee sign; 
5.  Projecting sign; 
6.  Light pole banners approved by the Village; 
7.  Common program sign; or 
8.  Special event sign as authorized in this chapter; 
shall be placed on or extend into or over any public right-of-way or municipal property. Awnings, marquee signs and projecting signs are permitted to project no closer than two feet to the curb line. The Village may, without prior notice, remove any sign unlawfully placed on public right-of-way. 
(J)  Sign projection: 
1.  Wall signs shall not extend more than 12 inches from the wall or structural members to which they are attached or extend beyond the top or ends of the surface of the wall to which they are attached. 
2.  Projecting signs may extend no farther than four feet from the building wall. 
(K)  Sign to not obstruct vision: No sign shall be installed or constructed which obstructs vision or access in a manner that creates a dangerous condition. 
(L)  Sign to not constitute traffic hazards: In order to obtain and secure traffic safety, no sign shall be erected or maintained in such a manner as to be likely to interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal or device, or interfere with, mislead, confuse traffic or detract from the effectiveness of any traffic control device as determined by the chief of police. Accordingly, no sign shall make use of the words "stop", "go", "look", "slow", "danger", or other similar word, phrase, symbol or character, or employ any red, yellow, orange, green or other colored lamp in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic. 
(M)  Compliance with Building Code: Any "sign" as defined in this chapter, shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the standards and regulations in the Building Code adopted by the Village. 
(N)  Wind pressure and dead load requirements: All permanent signs and the attached mounting shall be capable of withstanding a 90-mile per hour three-second gust wind speed and of receiving dead loads based on the actual weight of the structure. 
(O)  Fire resistance: All permanent signs shall be constructed of fire resistant materials. 
(P)  Minimum clearance: A minimum seven foot six inch vertical clearance must be maintained between any sign and walkway, except as otherwise permitted in section 4-5-6 of this chapter for common program signs where a minimum clearance of seven feet must be maintained beneath the sign support structure. 
(Q)  Maintenance required: The owner of a sign and the owner of the premises on which such sign is located shall be jointly and severally responsible to maintain the sign including its illumination sources, at all times in compliance with all applicable codes and ordinances in a safe and secure condition, in a neat and orderly condition and in good working order, and to prevent the development of any rust, fading, corrosion, rotting or other deterioration in the physical appearance or safety of such sign. Signs constructed from wood shall be maintained to prevent wood rot or delamination of wood plies. Rotted or delaminated wood signs shall be removed or replaced. The premises around freestanding signs shall be kept clean and free of all rubbish and weeds. No signs or sign structure shall have any nails, tacks, wires or sharp metal edges protruding therefrom. 
(R)  Freestanding signs: 
1.  Material: Freestanding signs shall be constructed of noncombustible or limited combustible materials, according to the Building Codes adopted by the Village. 
2.  Structural requirements: Freestanding signs shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the standards established by the Building Codes adopted by the Village. 
3.  Location: Freestanding signs located on property adjacent to the Roosevelt Road right-of-way must maintain a minimum setback of ten feet from the lot line adjacent to Roosevelt Road and five feet from all other lot lines. All other freestanding signs must maintain a minimum setback of five feet from each property line. 
4.  Sign spacing: No freestanding sign shall be located closer than 30 feet to any other freestanding sign unless the Community Development Director determines such spacing to be impossible or impractical. 
5.  Number: A maximum of one freestanding establishment sign shall be permitted per property or development, except as otherwise expressly permitted herein for multi-tenant signs. 
6.  Base height: The base of a monument sign shall not be greater than five feet in height. 
7.  Support material: The material of the support structure shall match the primary material of the front building facade. 
8.  Landscaping: A landscape area equal to two square feet for each square foot of signage is required around the base of all freestanding signs. The landscaped area shall contain living landscape material consisting of shrubs, perennial ground cover plants or a combination of both. Nonconforming freestanding signs that are required to be modified to be compliant with the Sign Code shall provide the required amount of landscaping. 
(S)  Noncommercial speech: Any sign that can be displayed under the provisions of this chapter may contain a noncommercial message. 
(T)  General safety: Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no sign shall be constructed or maintained in any area or in any manner so as to create a nuisance or a threat to the public safety and welfare as determined by the Community Development Director. 
(Ord. 6215, 2-10-2014; Ord. 6656, 12-10-2018; Ord. 6674, 2-25-2019) 
4-5-5. - Prohibited signs. 
The following signs are specifically prohibited: 
(A)  Abandoned sign in accordance with section 4-5-17 of this chapter. 
(B)  Attention getting devices, except for balloon displays, special event signs, public regulation signs and municipal signs expressly authorized by sections 4-5-6 and 4-5-7 of this chapter. 
(C)  Bare bulb illumination (except as permitted in subsection E of this section). 
(D)  Electronic identification signs. 
(E)  Festoon lighting (except in the C5A and C5B zoning districts in accordance with the following): 
1.  All such lights shall be white in color, except as otherwise allowed in association with permitted holiday decorations. 
2.  Such festoon lighting shall not blink, flash or otherwise change in illumination intensity. 
3.  A minimum clearance of seven feet six inches shall be maintained between ground level and any festoon lighting. 
4.  Such festoon lighting shall be maintained and operated in good working order. 
5.  Such festoon lighting shall not be strung across vehicular access drives, between buildings or in any location where it is the opinion of the fire chief that such lights may interfere with emergency operations. 
6.  Bare bulbs shall be kept a safe distance away from and shall not come in contact with any combustible material. 
7.  All festoon lighting shall conform with the applicable provisions of the Building Code. 
(F)  Indexing sign. 
(G)  Neon tube lighting or light emitting diode (LED) lighting outlining or illuminating the features of a building or structure including, but not limited to, windows. 
(H)  Neon, LED, and lighted window signs of any type are prohibited in the C5A and C5B zoning districts with the exception of window signs that contain only the word "Open" and no other wording, logos, pictures, graphics, or any other form of advertising, provided they are no larger than three square feet. 
(I)  Off premises sign or billboard sign, except for municipal signs, and special event signs authorized pursuant to sections 4-5-6 and 4-5-7 of this chapter. 
(J)  Pole or pylon sign with the exception of municipal signs and private traffic directional signs authorized by section 4-5-6 of this chapter. 
(K)  Portable sign, except on private property in the C5A and C5B zoning districts, pursuant to subsection 4-5-6(W) of this chapter or when authorized by the Village Manager in conjunction with construction, public notification or enforcement activities. 
(L)  Roof sign, including all types of inflatable balloons and other temporary signs. 
(M)  Signs attached to a tree, utility pole, light pole or light standard whether on public or private property, except as approved by the Village on village owned light poles or standards. 
(N)  Signs incorporating movement such as flashing signs, rotating signs, moving signs, animated signs, signs with moving lights, searchlights, or any other sign creating the illusion of movement with the exception of public regulation and municipal signs and electronic message boards expressly authorized herein. 
(O)  Signs painted directly on a roof or fence. 
(P)  Sign which contains words, statements or pictures of obscene, indecent or immoral characters and which offends public morals or decency of the Glen Ellyn community. 
(Q)  Vehicle and trailer signs. Any vehicle or trailer parked on private commercial property containing any advertising, lettering, graphics, or any other writing or illustration that advertises a business, product or service that is for sale and parked so as to be visible from any adjacent roadway. Provided however that during regular business hours, any vehicle or trailer necessary for the operation or servicing of a business on a given property and which contains advertising for the associated business, may be parked on the subject property provided that the vehicle or trailer is parked within a standard marked or striped parking space and is licensed, insured and operable and is not parked in the front yard if parking is available elsewhere on the site. Signs placed on parked vehicles for the primary purpose of attracting attention to an occupant's presence within a building or products or services that are for sale and signs resting on, or attached to, vehicles or trailers used as a means to circumvent the provisions of this chapter are prohibited. This section shall not apply to food trucks permitted by the Zoning Code. 

SIGN CAST
ONTO SIDEWALK
(R)  Any sign which by reason of size, location, content, color or type of illumination which is determined to be a traffic hazard as defined in section 4-5-4 of this chapter. 
(S)  Any sign which is located on or which extends over the public right-of-way except as expressly permitted by subsections 4-5-4(I) and (J) of this chapter. 
(T)  Any lighted sign cast onto a public or private sidewalk, street, building or other object. 
(U)  Any sign not expressly permitted by this chapter is prohibited. 
(Ord. 6215, 2-10-2014; amd. Ord. 6303, 3-9-2015; Ord. 6656, 12-10-2018) 
4-5-6. - Exempt signs. 
The following signs shall be exempt from the requirement to obtain a sign permit and pay fees (unless expressly stated otherwise below or a building permit is required for associated electrical or structural work), but shall be subject to the other provisions of this chapter, including sections 4-5-4 and 4-5-5 of this chapter. Exempt signs shall not be included for purpose of calculating the total allowable number and size of signs on a premises. No exempt sign shall exceed the maximum sign height permitted in the district it is located. 
(A)  Address sign: Address sign not over three square feet in area. 
(B)  Automatic teller machine (ATM) identification signage: An establishment identification sign located on an ATM machine provided that the size of such sign does not exceed a total of four square feet. 
(C)  Awning valance sign : Lettering and logos located on the valance of an awning provided the valance does not exceed eight inches in height and no lettering or logos exceed six inches in height. 
(D)  Balloon displays : Outdoor balloon displays in the C2 Community Commercial District, C3 Service Commercial District, and the C5A and C5B central business zoning districts provided that they comply with the following: 
1.  Such displays shall be limited to two bunches of no more than six) balloons per bunch for each business location. 
2.  The size of each balloon shall not exceed 24 inches in diameter. 
3.  Balloon displays shall only be displayed outside of the first floor of a building. 
4.  A minimum five foot wide clear area along all sidewalks must be maintained free from any balloon obstructions. 
5.  Balloons may not be attached to structures, street furniture, utility poles or signs in the public right-of-way. 
6.  Balloons shall not be placed in a location which obstructs the vision of pedestrians or motorists, restricts access or creates a dangerous condition. 
(E)  Breezeway sign: One sign located under the breezeway of a shopping center is permitted for each establishment in the shopping center. Establishments located in a corner unit may have two breezeway signs with one sign located under the breezeway of each exterior building elevation. Breezeway signs shall not exceed four square feet each. 
(F)  Common program sign: Upon written approval of the Village Manager or his or her designee, establishments in the C5A and C5B zoning districts shall be permitted to display a maximum of one flag or projecting banner sign that recognizes the establishment as participating in a program or initiative sponsored or facilitated by a governmental entity, community service organization or educational, religious or charitable organization provided that all such flags or banners throughout the C5A and C5B districts have a uniform design, size, colors and attachment/bracket system. Such signs may extend a maximum of 18 inches over the public right-of-way and must be removed upon conclusion of the program or initiative that they are associated with. A minimum clearance of seven feet must be maintained beneath any sign support structures and a maximum sign area of four square feet shall be permitted for the flag or banner. 
(G)  Decorations: Decorations customarily displayed on a national, local or religious holiday, provided they are displayed for a period of not more than 60 days. 
(H)  Door sign: Sign affixed to a door which identifies the name or address of the establishment and not exceeding two square feet. 
(I)  Drive-through canopy informational signage: Drive-through canopy informational signage. 
(J)  Flags: The official flags of any nation, political subdivision, religious, charitable, public or nonprofit organization. A corporate flag can be flown only in conjunction with the flag of the United States of America. 
(K)  Food trucks: Signage on permitted food trucks as defined by the Zoning Code. 
(L)  Garage sale: One sign not to exceed six square feet is permitted to advertise a private garage or yard sale. The sign must be located on private property and can be displayed only on the days of the sale. A garage sale sign shall not be illuminated. 
(M)  Gas station canopy signage : Signs located on a gas station canopy associated with a gas station use provided the signage complies with the following: 
1.  No more than one sign is permitted on the gas station canopy facing the front lot line. Corner properties may have one additional sign on the gas station canopy facing the corner side lot line. 
2.  Each sign shall be limited to no more than 14 square feet. 
3.  Signage shall not extend above, below, or to the sides of the fascia of the pump canopy. 
(N)  Gas station pump signage : Signs located on an individual gas pump associated with a gas station use provided the combined size of all signage located at each vehicle position of each gas pump does not exceed 12 square feet. 
(O)  Light pole banners: Shopping centers comprised of six and one-half acres or more and motor vehicle dealerships shall be permitted to install banners on no more than 50 percent of the light poles on their property. A maximum of two styles of banners shall be permitted with no more than one banner per pole and the banners shall be secured to the pole(s) at both the top and bottom. Each banner shall have an area of no more than 18 square feet and a minimum clearance of 12 feet shall be maintained between the banners and ground level. Light pole banner signs shall only be displayed on privately owned light standards and shall not extend over public property. 
(P)  Historic plaque: Commemorative plaque located on a historic structure officially designated as such by the Village or other nonprofit or community service organization. 
(Q)  Memorial sign: Memorial sign or tablet indicating the name of a building and/or date of construction when cut into any masonry surface or otherwise made an integral part of the structure whether made of bronze, aluminum or other noncombustible material. 
(R)  Menu boards: Drive-through businesses shall be permitted to display no more than three menu boards the area of which shall not exceed 60 square feet each. To the extent possible, menu boards shall be oriented so that the sign face is not visible from the public right-of-way or any adjacent residential property. A sign permit is required for a menu board. 
(S)  Miscellaneous information: Informational or instructional signage not including any business names, logos, emblems or other advertisements where the height of the lettering does not exceed four inches. 
(T)  Municipal signs: Municipal signs. 
(U)  Murals : Murals shall be exempt from the number and size requirements of a sign of a particular district. Murals shall be subject to exterior appearance review by staff and shall require Village Board approval prior to work commencing for said mural. 
(V)  Nameplate: Nameplates that do not exceed two square feet in area and that are directly fastened to a building, including signage for home occupations as defined in the Zoning Code. Where more than one business is located in a building such information must be consolidated on one common nameplate. The total square footage permitted for the common nameplate sign may be increased an additional two square feet for each additional business above one located in the building, provided that the total area of the nameplate sign does not exceed six square feet. 
(W)  Noncommercial speech: Noncommercial speech signs are only permitted on private property and may be placed on a property only with the approval of the property owner. The total area of noncommercial speech signage on a property shall not exceed 32 square feet. Corner lots may have two such signs, with one sign directed toward each street frontage. Noncommercial speech signs shall not be illuminated. 
(X)  Not visible: A sign that is not visible from a public right-of-way or neighboring residential property. 
(Y)  Open window sign : The total area of a sign indicating an establishment is open for business shall not exceed three square feet and shall be limited one sign per establishment. Open signs shall only be located on the inside of a window of an establishment and shall not be placed on the exterior of the building. No advertising of any kind is permitted in an open sign. Open signs shall be static and shall not flash, blink, or contain any type of motion or animation. 
(Z)  Order confirmation sign: The total area of any advertising on an order confirmation sign shall not exceed two square feet. 
(AA)  Political campaign signs : The total area of political campaign signs, announcing candidates seeking office or political issues, shall not exceed a total of 32 square feet for each property. Corner lots may have two such signs, with one sign directed toward each street frontage. Political campaign signs are only permitted on private property and may be placed on a property only with the approval of the property owner. Political campaign signs shall not be illuminated. Political campaign signs located in nonresidential districts shall be removed from a property no later than one week following the date of an election. 
(BB)  Portable sign: One portable sign may be located on a private sidewalk for ground floor establishments in the C5A and C5B zoning districts and shopping centers in the C3 zoning district comprised of six and one-half acres or more provided that a five foot area is maintained on the sidewalk free of any obstructions. Permission may be granted by a property owner to allow businesses located above or below a ground floor establishment to also use the sign. Portable signs are only permitted to be displayed when the associated business or businesses are open and shall not exceed six square feet in area and four feet in height. Portable signs are not allowed in the public right-of-way and shall not be illuminated. 
(CC)  Private parking lot sign: Private parking lot sign not exceeding six square feet in area per sign. Private parking lot signs shall not be illuminated. 
(DD)  Private warning signs: Such signs shall be no more than six square feet in area each, shall be limited to the number necessary to accomplish the intended purpose, and shall be illuminated only as required to accomplish such purpose. Such signs may include, but not be limited to, towing and no trespass signs. 
(EE)  Public regulation signs: Public regulation signs. 
(FF)  Railroad sign: Warnings at railroad crossings. 
(GG)  Real estate sign: Real estate signs must be located entirely within the property to which the sign applies and must be removed within seven days after the sale, rental or lease has been accomplished. Real estate signs shall not be illuminated. 
1.  Detached single-family, attached single-family and two-family properties may have one real estate sign with an area not exceeding six square feet. 
2.  Multi-family and nonresidential properties may have one sign with an area not exceeding 32 square feet, except that corner lots may have a maximum of two with one sign directed toward each street frontage. 
(HH)  Religious symbol: Religious symbol or commemorative plaque located on a building or property. 
(II)  Scoreboard: Scoreboard for athletic fields, provided that no more than 25 percent of the area is used for advertising and any electronic portion thereof complies with the provisions for message boards set forth in section 4-5-15 of this chapter. 
(JJ)  Special event sign: In accordance with the provisions set forth in section 4-5-7 of this chapter. 
(KK)  Temporary construction signs: One sign per construction project is permitted identifying the names of the architects, engineers, contractors and other firms or individuals involved in the project. A temporary construction sign shall not exceed 32 square feet. Corner lots may have two such signs, with one sign directed toward each street frontage. Temporary construction signs must be located on the same site as the associated construction project, and removed prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, whether temporary or final. Temporary construction signs shall not be illuminated. 
(LL)  Temporary developer's sign: One sign advertising future construction on a site shall be permitted. A temporary developer's sign shall not exceed 32 square feet. Corner lots may have two such signs, with one sign directed toward each street frontage. Temporary developer's signs must be located on the same site as the associated construction project, and removed prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, whether temporary or final. Temporary developer's signs shall not be illuminated. 
(MM)  Temporary fundraising sign: One temporary sign advertising a fundraiser shall be permitted on a property. A temporary fundraising sign shall not exceed 32 square feet. Corner lots may have two such signs, with one sign directed toward each street frontage. Temporary fundraising signs may be located on a property for no more than 45 consecutive days and shall be removed within seven days of the conclusion of the associated fundraiser. Temporary fundraising signs shall not be illuminated. 
(NN)  Temporary hiring signs: Temporary signs indicating that a business or other entity is hiring personnel. Such signs shall not exceed six square feet in area and must be located on the same premises as the business or entity doing the hiring. Temporary hiring signs shall not be illuminated. 
(OO)  Traffic directional sign: No more than two signs shall be displayed at each entrance or exit and no more than five such signs shall be displayed on the interior of the lot. Each sign shall not exceed four square feet in area and four feet in height. In commercially zoned districts, no more than 25 percent of each sign shall be used to advertise any business, product or service, and such signs shall contain no advertisement in residential districts. The use of standard traffic signalization (stop, yield, etc.) is not limited by this chapter. 
(PP)  Vendor carts: Signage located on vendor carts with an approved license from the Village. 
(QQ)  Window display: Merchandise, pictures or models of products or services incorporated in a window display. 
(RR)  Window sign: Sign located on the interior or exterior of a window in the CR, CC, C2, C3, C4, C5 and C6 zoning districts; provided that not more than 50 percent of the total window area or an individual windowpane is covered. 
(Ord. 6215, 2-10-2014; amd. Ord. 6221, 3-10-2014; Ord. 6301, 2-23-2015; Ord. 6303, 3-9-2015; Ord. 6656, 12-10-2018) 
4-5-7. - Special event signs. 
No special event sign shall be installed outdoors except under the conditions identified below. Special event signs shall be exempt from the requirement to obtain a permit and pay fees (except for banner signs or unless a building permit is required for associated electrical or structural work), but shall be subject to the other provisions of this chapter, including sections 4-5-4 and 4-5-5 of this chapter. No special event sign identified below shall exceed the maximum sign height permitted in the district it is located. 
(A)  Commercial event banner sign: An on premises banner sign advertising or directing attention to a special product, promotion, or other commercial event may be located only in commercial districts with the issuance of a sign permit in accordance with the following standards: 
1.  Application for approval shall be made by the owner or tenant of property; 
2.  Signs shall not exceed 32 square feet in area; 
3.  There shall not be more than one banner sign per lot, except that on a corner lot two signs, one directed toward each street, shall be allowed; 
4.  The banner sign shall be affixed at each corner in such a manner so as not to allow wind activation; 
5.  Banner signs may be displayed for a maximum period of 14 days; 
6.  No entity may display a banner sign more than three times a calendar year; with the exception of new businesses which are permitted to display one additional banner sign advertising a grand opening; 
7.  Banner signs may not be located on or over the public right-of-way; 
8.  Signage must be located on the site of the event and on property owned or controlled by the business, organization or institution hosting the event. 
(B)  Special event sign; private property: Special event signs, banner signs and displays for special events sponsored by governmental entities, community service organizations and educational, religious and charitable institutions are allowed in accordance with the following standards: 
1.  The sign must be located on property owned or controlled by the organization or institution; 
2.  Such signs may be displayed for a maximum period commencing 14 days prior to, and ending three days after, the scheduled event; 
3.  Banner signs shall be affixed at each corner in such a manner so as not to allow wind activation; 
4.  Signs shall not exceed 32 square feet in area; 
5.  There shall not be more than one sign per lot, except that on a corner lot two signs, one directed toward each street, shall be allowed; 
6.  No entity may display a temporary banner sign more than three times a year; except for religious institutions who shall be permitted to display such signage in conjunction with all religious holidays and events; 
7.  Signage advertising or providing direction to special events of governmental entities, community service organizations and educational, religious and charitable institutions may only be placed on private property with the permission of the property owner; and 
8.  Such signs may not be located on or extend over a public right-of-way. 
(C)  Special event sign; rights-of-way: Special event directional signs, whether for governmental entities, educational, religious and charitable institutions, or community service organizations are allowed only upon prior written approval of the Village Manager or his or her designee, in accordance with the following standards: 
1.  The sign may extend on, into or over the public right-of-way or easement on the basis of need, impact on pedestrian and vehicular traffic and impact on surrounding property; 
2.  Such signs are limited to a total of ten signs for the event; 
3.  Each sign shall not exceed a maximum height of three feet and a maximum surface area of six square feet per sign; 
4.  No special event directional sign may be displayed for more than one day immediately preceding the event, and the sign must be removed immediately after the conclusion of the event; and 
5.  A minimum five-foot wide open area along all sidewalks must be maintained free from any obstructions. 
(Ord. 6215, 2-10-2014) 
4-5-8. - Sign schedule (CR and Residential Zoning Districts). 
The following schedule establishes the type and number of signs permitted in the CR, RE, RO, R1, R2, R2B, R3, R4 and R5 zoning district along with the maximum permitted area and height: 
Sign Type Maximum Number Maximum Area Maximum Height CR and residential districts 1 (A) Nonresidential establishment signs 2 :   1. Freestanding sign 1 freestanding sign per property 30 square feet 8 feet   2. Wall sign 1 wall sign for each principal building open to the public 1 square foot per linear foot of establishment frontage per sign not to exceed 100 square feet per sign No maximum height (B) Multi-family dwelling sign:   1. Awning sign 1 sign per development 5 square feet Permitted on first floor only   2. Freestanding sign 3 5 feet   3. Wall sign 15 feet (C) Park signs:   1. Freestanding sign 3 1 freestanding sign per property 30 square feet 5 feet   2. Wall sign 1 wall sign for each principal building open to the public 1 square foot per linear foot of establishment frontage per sign not to exceed 100 square feet per sign No maximum height (D) Residential development freestanding sign 1 sign permitted for developments with 20 or more units 30 square feet 5 feet  
Notes: 
1.  Internal and silhouette illumination prohibited. 
2.  Not including home occupation signs which are governed by the Zoning Code. 
3.  See subsection 4-5-4(R) of this chapter for additional freestanding sign regulations. 
(Ord. 6215, 2-10-2014) 
4-5-9. - Sign schedule (C2 Zoning District). 
The following schedule establishes the type and number of signs permitted in the C2 zoning district along with the maximum permitted area and height: 
Sign Type Maximum Number Maximum Area Maximum Height C2 zoning district (A) Nonresidential establishment signs (single-tenant building not part of a larger development) 1 :   1. Awning sign 2 signs per establishment, not exceeding 1 freestanding sign 
  
Corner properties may have 3 signs, not exceeding 1 freestanding sign and 2 additional signs, 1 each on the front and corner side building elevations 1 square foot per linear foot of establishment frontage per sign not to exceed 25% of the area of any 1 awning 2 Permitted on first floor only, minimum 7'6" clearance   2. Freestanding sign 3 50 square feet 10 feet   3. Project sign 6 square feet per sign 15 feet and below any second floor windows   4. Wall sign 1 square foot per linear foot of establishment frontage per sign not to exceed 100 square feet No maximum height   5. Secondary wall sign 4 signs for establishments with 15,000 or more square feet 0.25 square feet per linear foot of establishment frontage for each sign, not to exceed 20 square feet each No maximum height (B) Nonresidential establishment signs (establishments in multi-tenant buildings or located in the same development as other establishments):   1 Awning sign 1 sign per establishment, corner units may have 2 signs, 1 each on the front and corner side building elevations 1 square foot per linear foot of establishment frontage per sign not to exceed 25% of the area of any 1 awning 2 Permitted on first floor only, minimum 7'6" clearance   2 Projecting sign 6 square feet per sign 15 feet   3. Wall sign 1 square foot per linear foot of establishment frontage per sign not to exceed 100 square feet No maximum height   4. Secondary wall sign 4 signs for establishments with 15,000 or more square feet 0.25 square feet per linear foot of establishment frontage for each sign, not to exceed 20 square feet each No maximum height (C) Multi-tenant sign - freestanding:   1. Properties with less than 300 feet of lot frontage 3 1 sign 50 square feet 10 feet   2. Properties with between 300 feet and 600 feet of lot frontage 3 1 sign 65 square feet 10 feet   3. Properties with 600 feet or more of lot frontage 3 2 signs 65 square feet, second sign shall not exceed 50 square feet 10 feet (D) Park signs 4   1. Freestanding sign 3 1 freestanding sign per property and 1 projecting or wall sign for each principal building open to the public 50 square feet 10 feet   2. Projecting sign 6 square feet 15 feet   3. Wall sign 1 square foot per linear foot of establishment frontage not to exceed 100 square feet 15 feet  
Notes: 
1.  Total combined sign area shall not exceed 120 square feet for an interior lot and 150 square feet for a corner lot. 
2.  The total combined area of all letters and symbols on all of an establishment's awnings shall be considered the sign area. 
3.  See subsection 4-5-4(R) of this chapter for additional freestanding sign regulations. 
4.  Only external illumination permitted. 
(Ord. 6215, 2-10-2014) 
4-5-10. - Sign schedule (C3, C4 and C6 Zoning Districts). 
The following schedule establishes the type and number of signs permitted in the C3, C4 and C6 zoning districts along with the maximum permitted area and height: 
Sign Type Maximum Number Maximum Area Maximum Height C3, C4 and C6 zoning districts: (A) Nonresidential establishment signs (single-tenant building not part of a larger development) 1 :   1. Awning sign 2 signs per establishment, not exceeding 1 freestanding sign 
  
Corner properties and through lots may have 3 signs, including 1 freestanding sign and 2 additional signs, 1 each on the front and corner side building elevations 1 square foot per linear foot of establishment frontage per sign not to exceed 30% of the area of any 1 awning 2 Permitted on first floor only, minimum 7'6" clearance   2. Freestanding sign 3 50 square feet 15 feet   3. Wall sign 1 square foot per linear foot of establishment frontage for each sign No maximum height   4. Secondary wall sign 4 signs for establishments with 15,000 or more square feet 0.25 square feet per linear foot of establishment frontage for each sign, not to exceed 20 square feet each No maximum height (B) Nonresidential establishment signs (establishments in multi-tenant buildings or located in the same development as other establishments):   1. Awning sign 1 sign per establishment, corner units may have 2 signs, 1 each on the front and corner side building elevations 1 square foot per linear foot establishment frontage per sign not to exceed 30% of the area of any 1 awning 2 Permitted on first floor only, minimum 7'6" clearance   2. Wall sign 1 square foot per linear foot of establishment frontage for each sign No maximum height   3. Secondary wall sign 4 signs for establishments with 15,000 or more square feet 0.25 square feet per linear foot of establishment frontage for each sign, not to exceed 20 square feet each No maximum height (C) Multi-tenant sign - freestanding:   1. Properties with less than 300 feet of lot frontage 1 sign 3 65 square feet 15 feet   2. Properties with between 300 feet and 600 feet of lot frontage 1 sign 3 80 square feet 15 feet   3. Properties with 600 feet or more of lot frontage 2 signs 3, 4 First sign 100 square feet, second sign 65 square feet 15 feet (D) Office complex sign 5 :   1. Freestanding sign 3 1 freestanding sign per complex 50 square feet 15 feet   2. Wall sign 1 wall sign per complex 1 square foot per linear foot of lot frontage not to exceed 100 square feet No maximum height (E) Residential development freestanding sign 3 1 sign is permitted for developments with 20 or more dwelling units 30 square feet 5 feet  
Notes: 
1.  Total combined area of all signs shall not exceed 120 square feet for an interior lot and 150 square feet for a corner lot. 
2.  The total combined area of all letters and symbols on all of an establishment's awnings shall be considered the sign area. 
3.  See subsection 4-5-4(R) of this chapter for additional freestanding sign regulations. 
4.  A minimum of 200 feet must be maintained between each sign. 
5.  Permitted in C4 district only. 
(Ord. 6215, 2-10-2014; Ord. 6656, 12-10-2018) 
4-5-11. - Sign schedule (C5A and C5B Zoning Districts). 
The following schedule establishes the type and number of signs permitted in the C5A and C5B zoning districts along with the maximum permitted area and height: 
Sign Type Maximum Number Maximum Area Maximum Height C5A and C5B zoning districts: (A) Nonresidential establishment sign (single-tenant building not part of larger development) 1   1. Awning sign 1 sign per establishment 
  
Corner properties may have 2 signs, 1 each on the front and corner side building elevations 
  
Establishments with building walls parallel or nearly parallel to the Illinois Prairie Path or Union Pacific railroad may have 1 building sign along said building wall in addition to the allowable number of building signs in Section 4-5-11(A) 1 through 4. 1 square foot per linear foot of establishment frontage per sign not to exceed 25% of the area of any 1 awning 2 Permitted on first floor only, minimum 7'6" clearance   2. Freestanding sign 3, 4 35 square feet 8 feet   3. Marquee sign 1 square foot per linear foot of establishment frontage per sign not to exceed 50% of marquee area Permitted on first floor only, minimum 7'6" clearance   4. Wall sign 1 square foot per linear foot of establishment frontage per sign not to exceed 60 square feet C5A: 15 feet and below any second floor windows 
  
C5B: No maximum height   5. Projecting sign 6 1 sign per establishment 6 square feet 7 15 feet and below any second floor windows (B) Nonresidential establishment sign (establishments in multi-tenant buildings or located in the same development as other establishments)   1. Awning sign 1 sign per establishment 
  
Corner properties, may have 2 signs, one each on the front and corner side building elevations 
  
Establishments with building walls parallel or nearly parallel to the Illinois Prairie Path or Union Pacific railroad may have 1 building sign along said building wall in addition to the allowable number of building signs in Section 4-5-11(A) 1 through 4. 1 square foot per linear foot of establishment frontage per sign not to exceed 25% of the area of any one awning 2 Permitted on first floor only, minimum 7'6" clearance   2. Marquee sign 1 square foot per linear foot of establishment frontage per sign not to exceed 50% of marquee area Permitted on first floor only, minimum 7'6" clearance   3. Wall sign 1 square foot per linear foot of establishment frontage per sign not to exceed 60 square feet C5A: 15 feet and below any second floor windows 
  
C5B: No maximum height   4. Projecting sign 6 1 sign per establishment 6 square feet 7 15 feet and below any second floor windows (C) Multi-tenant sign - freestanding 3 1 sign 4 35 square feet 8 feet (D) Residential development identification sign , 5   1. Freestanding sign 4 1 sign is permitted for development with 20 or more dwelling units 35 square feet 8 feet   2. Wall sign 35 square feet C5A: 15 feet 
  
C5B: No maximum height (C) Park sign - Freestanding 5 1 per property 35 square feet 8 feet  
Notes: 
1.  Total combined sign area shall not exceed 60 square feet for an interior lot and 75 square feet for a corner lot or lot with a building wall parallel or nearly parallel to the Illinois Prairie Path or Union Pacific Railroad. 
2.  The total combined area of all letters and symbols on all of an establishment's awnings shall be considered the sign area. 
3.  Permitted in C5B district only 
4.  See Section 4-5-4(R) for additional freestanding sign regulations; only one freestanding sign permitted per property or development. 
5.  Internal and silhouette illumination is prohibited for park signs and residential identification sign in the C5A and C5B districts. 
6.  Shall not be internally illuminated. 
7.  The area of a projecting sign shall be included in the maximum area of building signage permitted for the establishment. 
(Ord. 6215, 2-10-2014; Ord. 6656, 12-10-2018) 
4-5-12. - Sign schedule (I1 Light Industrial Zoning District). 
The following schedule establishes the type and number of signs permitted in the I1 light industrial zoning district along with the maximum permitted area and height: 
Sign Type Maximum Number Maximum Area Maximum Height I1 zoning district: (A) Nonresidential establishment signs (single-tenant building not part of a larger development) 1 :   1. Freestanding sign 2 1 per property 30 square feet 10 feet   2. Wall sign 1 per property; corner properties may have 2 signs, 1 each on the front and corner side building elevations 1 square foot per linear foot of establishment frontage per sign not to exceed 100 square feet per sign No maximum height (B) Nonresidential establishment wall sign (establishments in multi-tenant buildings or located in the same development as other establishments) 1 per property; corner properties may have 2 signs, 1 each on the front and corner side building elevations 1 square foot per linear foot of establishment frontage per sign not to exceed 100 square feet per sign No maximum height (C) Multi-tenant sign 2 1 freestanding sign 50 square feet 10 feet  
Notes: 
1.  Total combined area of all signs shall not exceed 120 square feet for an interior lot and 150 square feet for a corner lot. 
2.  See subsection 4-5-4(R) of this chapter for additional freestanding sign regulations. 
(Ord. 6215, 2-10-2014) 
4-5-13. - Sign area and height computations. 
(A)  Sign area: The area of a sign shall be computed in accordance with the following: 
1.  The area of a sign shall be measured by computing the area of the smallest polygon that can encompass all words, letters, figures, emblems, and other elements of the sign (see subsections (A)6.(a) and (A)6.(e) of this section). 
2.  Any material or color used as an integral part of the display or to differentiate the sign from the surface on which it is placed shall be included in calculating the area of the sign (see subsections (A)6.(b), (A)6.(c), (A)6.(d) and (A)6.(f) of this section). 
3.  The supporting structure or bracing of a sign shall be omitted in measuring the area of the sign, unless such structure or bracing is made part of the message or face of the sign (see subsections (A)6.(c), (A)6.(d) and (A)6.(f) of this section). 
4.  Only one side of a double faced sign shall be used in calculating the area of the sign provided that both faces are the same dimension, parallel to each other, and supported by the same structure. 
5.  When different elements of a sign are separated by a distance equal to or greater than half of the maximum height of the tallest element of the sign, such elements shall be considered separate signs (see subsection (A)6.(g) of this section). 
6.  Examples: 
(a) Individual letters/elements mounted on a building: (b) Wall sign with contrasting background on building or box sign: (c) Freestanding sign: (d) Individual letters mounted on brick or other background: (e) Sign area of awning: (f) Sign area of multi-tenant sign: (g) Spacing between different sign elements:    
(B)  Sign height: The height of a sign shall be the distance measured from grade level vertically to the highest point of the sign structure. Where a freestanding sign is located on uneven ground the height shall be the average height of the two extreme ends of the sign measured from grade (see subsection (B)1.(c) of this section). 
1.  Examples: 
(a) Freestanding sign supported by end piers: (b) Monument sign: (c) Freestanding sign on uneven ground:  
(Ord. 6215, 2-10-2014) 
4-5-14. - Bonus provisions to increase sign area. 
The maximum permitted sign area set forth in sections 4-5-8 to 4-5-12 of this chapter may be increased by a specified percentage for compliance with the design criteria listed below. The percentage increase shall be based on the original maximum sign area allowed. If more than one criterion is met, then bonuses may be granted cumulatively. 
(A)  Individual letters: Ten percent bonus for any wall sign which consists of individual letters mounted directly on the building surface. For the purposes of this chapter, letters mounted on a raceway are not considered individual letter signs. 
(B)  Setback: One percent cumulative bonus for any wall sign for every ten feet the building is set back above and beyond the required building setback. 
(Ord. 6215, 2-10-2014) 
4-5-15. - Message boards. 
Message boards (manual changing or electronic) shall be allowed subject to the following regulations, in addition to all other applicable regulations in this chapter: 
(A)  Message boards shall be erected only by attachment to a freestanding sign. Only one message board per property is allowed. Manually changing message boards are allowed in all zoning districts. Electric message boards shall only be permitted as expressly identified herein below. 
(B)  The area of a message board shall be included in the allowable area of identification signage for the establishment or property. The maximum area of a message board shall not exceed 18 square feet, unless operated by a governmental body. 
(C)  Messages must be static, the use of video displays, animation, or flashing, scrolling or blinking characters is prohibited. 
(D)  All message boards are subject to the illumination standards in subsection 4-5-4(E) of this chapter. 
(E)  Message board text and graphics must be located on a black or "paper white" background. 
(F)  A message board displaying time, temperature or date is allowed only in commercial districts, with the exception of the C5A and C5B districts. The message shall update in intervals of no less than five seconds. 
(G)  An electronically variable message board sign, other than a time, temperature and date sign is allowed for governmental bodies and for property in the CC, CR, C3, C4 and C6 districts subject to the following regulations: 
1.  The sign shall be equipped with photosensitive equipment which automatically adjusts the brightness and contrast of the sign in direct relation to the ambient outdoor illumination. 
2.  In locations where an electronic message board is visible to an adjacent residential use, the message board may operate only between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. and shall be turned off when not in operation. 
3.  The message displayed on such sign may be changed no more than once every 15 seconds. 
4.  The face of an electronically variable message board shall be oriented away from any adjacent residential properties to the extent possible and shall not cause illumination in excess of 0.05 foot-candle at any residential property line adjoining or across the street from the electronically variable message board. 
5.  Messages must change instantaneously and shall not fade out or dissolve. 
6.  Single messages shall not be divided between two or more screens. 
7.  The Village shall have the right to utilize any electronic message board during emergency situations to provide instructions and information to the public. Examples of such emergency situations may include, but not be limited to, natural disasters and Amber Alerts. 
(Ord. 6215, 2-10-2014) 
4-5-16. - CC Community College Special Sign District. 
In accordance with subsection 4-5-17(G)1.(c) of this chapter, the CC community college zoning district is hereby designated as a special sign district. The permitted type, number, height and area of signage in this district shall be in accordance with a comprehensive sign plan approved by the Village. Signage in this district shall otherwise comply with all other provisions in this chapter. 
(Ord. 6215, 2-10-2014) 
4-5-17. - Sign Code administration. 
This chapter shall be administered in accordance with the following provisions: 
(A)  Type, size, location and number of signs: Permitted sign types and the maximum surface area, maximum height, location and number of such signs are established for zoning districts as they are defined in the Zoning Code, and delineated on the zoning district map published annually by the Village. Each sign type permitted shall meet all the applicable standards in this chapter. 
(B)  Sign permit required: Unless otherwise exempted from this chapter, no sign shall be erected, altered or relocated without a permit being issued by the Building and Zoning Official. When an electrical permit is required, it shall be obtained at the same time as the sign permit. 
1.  Permit exceptions: No permit shall be required for repainting, cleaning and other normal maintenance or repair of a sign, or for changing copy on a sign specifically designed for the use of changeable copy. 
2.  Permit application: Application for a permit shall be made to the Building and Zoning Official on the forms provided by the Village and shall include the following information: 
(a)  Permit fees: Every applicant shall pay the applicable permit fee set forth in this Code. 
(b)  Identity: Name, address, e-mail address and telephone number of applicant, person, firm, corporation or association submitting the application and the owner of the property if the property is not owned by the applicant. 
(c)  Proof of ownership: Proof of ownership in the form of a deed or title insurance policy for the property on which the sign is to be placed. 
(d)  Location: Location of the building, structure or parcel of property to which, or upon which, the sign is to be attached or erected. 
(e)  Sign plan: A plan showing the location of the proposed sign(s) and any other existing signs on the property in relation to nearby buildings, structures, access drives and parking spaces with the setback of the sign from any adjacent rights-of-way identified. 
(f)  Structural drawings: Unless waived by the Building and Zoning Official, two copies of plans and specifications showing the method of construction, location and support. These plans must be sealed by a registered architect, structural engineer or registered professional engineer. 
(g)  Sign elevation: An elevation or sketch showing sign faces, exposed surfaces and proposed message thereof accurately represented in scale as to size, proportion, dimensions of letters and features, color and with the total square footage of the sign noted thereon. 
(h)  Building elevation: If the sign is to be placed on a building or other structure, an elevation or photo rendering drawn to scale shall be submitted showing the sign thereon. 
(i)  Owner's consent: If the sign is proposed to be placed on property not owned by the applicant, written consent of the owner(s) of the building, structure or land on which the sign is to be erected. 
(j)  Indemnification: The owner of the sign for any and all signage projecting over the public right-of-way shall indemnify and hold the Village harmless from any damage, cause of action or claim to be caused by the improper construction or maintenance of the sign. 
(k)  Removal upon abandonment: A statement that the sign owners agree to remove the sign at their own expense in the event the sign is abandoned as defined in subsection (E) of this section. 
(l)  Other information: Such other information as may be reasonably required by the Building and Zoning Official to show full compliance with this and all other ordinances of the Village. 
(C)  Issuance of permit: It shall be the duty of the Building and Zoning Official or his or her designee, upon the filing of an application for a permit to examine such plans and specifications, and determine whether or not the proposed structure is in compliance with all requirements of this chapter and all other provisions of this Code, in which event a permit shall be issued. If the work authorized under the permit has not been initiated within six months and completed within 12 months after the date of issuance, the permit shall become null and void. 
(D)  Removal of unsafe or unlawful sign: If the Building and Zoning Official shall find that any sign is unsafe, insecure or a menace to the public, or has been constructed, erected or maintained in violation of the provisions of this section, written notice shall be given to the property owner, sign owner or permittee thereof. If the property owner, sign owner or permittee fails to remove or alter the structure so as to comply with the standards herein set forth within 15 days after such notice, the Building and Zoning Official may cause the sign to be removed or repaired to place the sign in a safe condition pursuant to the corporate powers granted by the Illinois Municipal Code as amended. The Village may remove any sign illegally placed in the public right-of-way without prior notice. 
(E)  Removal of abandoned sign: 
1.  Nonconforming sign: If the Building and Zoning Official finds that a nonconforming sign is abandoned, the official shall give written notice to the permittee or owner to remove the sign. If the permittee or owner fails to remove or bring such sign and sign structure into conformance with this chapter within 30 days after such notice, the Building and Zoning Official may initiate judicial process to cause the sign to be removed, and the owner shall be subject to the general penalty provisions of this Code. 
2.  Conforming sign: If the Building and Zoning Official finds that a conforming sign is abandoned, the official shall give written notice to the permittee or owner thereof. If the permittee or owner fails to cover the sign face with an opaque single color material or remove the sign face within 30 days after such requirement notice, the Building and Zoning Official may initiate judicial process to cause the sign to be removed, and the owner shall be subject to the general penalty provisions of this Code. 
(F)  Enforcement official: 
1.  The Community Development Director is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all of the provisions of this chapter. Upon presentation of proper credentials, the Community Development Director, or a duly authorized representative, may enter, at reasonable times, any building, structure or premises in the Village to perform any duty imposed by this chapter. 
2.  Where there is any ambiguity or dispute concerning the interpretation of this chapter, the interpretation of the Community Development Director shall prevail, subject to appeal as provided herein. 
(G)  Sign variation request: 
1.  Manner of requesting: 
(a)  Any person seeking a variation from this chapter shall file an application with the Community Development Director who shall, in a timely manner, place the request on an agenda for the Plan Commission to consider at a public hearing. The Plan Commission shall act in an advisory capacity and make a recommendation on the request to the Village Board of Trustees. Upon receiving a recommendation from the Plan Commission, the request shall be scheduled for consideration by the Village Board in a timely manner. The Village Board shall then approve, approve with conditions or deny the application. 
(b)  An application for variation must be filed with the Director of Community Development on the forms provided by the Village and shall contain at least the following: 
(1)  Application fee: Every applicant shall pay the applicable application fee for a sign variation request set forth in this Code. 
(2)  Sign variation application: A completed sign variation application, including information about how the request complies with the standards for granting approval of a sign variation set forth in subsection (G)3. of this section. 
(3)  Identity: Name, address, e-mail address and telephone number of applicant, person, firm, corporation or association proposing to install the sign and the owner of the property if the property is not owned by the applicant. 
(4)  Proof of ownership: Proof of ownership in the form of a deed or title insurance policy for the property on which the sign is proposed. 
(5)  Legal description: A current legal description of the property. 
(6)  Location: Location of the building, structure or parcel of property to which, or upon which, the sign is to be attached or erected. 
(7)  Sign plan: A dimensioned plan showing the location of the proposed sign(s) and all other existing signage on the property in relation to nearby buildings, structures, drive aisles and parking spaces with the setback of the sign(s) from any adjacent rights-of-way identified. 
(8)  Sign elevation: An elevation or sketch showing sign faces, exposed surfaces and proposed message thereof accurately represented in scale as to size, proportion, dimensions of letters and features, color and with the total square footage of the sign noted thereon measured from ground level. 
(9)  Building elevation: If the sign is to be placed on a building or other structure, an elevation or photo rendering drawn to scale shall be submitted showing the sign thereon and indicating the height of the sign. 
(10)  Owner's consent: If the sign is proposed to be placed on property not owned by the applicant, written consent of the owner(s) of the building, structure or land on which the sign is proposed granting the applicant the right to file the variation request. 
(11)  Design information: A description of the proposed kind, color and texture of materials, including cut sheets, pictures or samples as may be deemed appropriate by the Community Development Director. 
(12)  Landscape plan: A landscape plan shall be provided if a freestanding sign is proposed. 
(13)  Other information: Such other information as may be reasonably required by the Community Development Director. 
(c)  Any entity which, by reason of unique circumstances relating to a geographic area larger than 25 acres which requires regulations beyond the application and scope of the specific provisions in this chapter, may be deemed a special sign district and may apply to the Village Board for approval of a comprehensive sign plan. Said plan shall include all proposed signs for which the entity seeks approval, the sections of this chapter for which any variations are requested and a statement of the need for the signage and its relation to the district. 
2.  Hearing: The Plan Commission will conduct a public hearing at a regularly scheduled meeting to consider the request. Said hearing shall be duly advertised in a newspaper with a general circulation within the municipality not less than 15 nor more than 30 days before the hearing. 
3.  Evidence and findings: The applicant or his or her representative is required to attend the hearing and present the case. 
(a)  The Plan Commission shall conduct an evidentiary hearing and shall not recommend approval of the request unless the commission makes positive findings based on the evidence presented that all of the following standards have been met: 
(1)  The request complies with the statement of purpose found in section 4-5-2 of this chapter; and 
(2)  The plight of the owner is based on unique circumstances due to an unusual physical limitation, such as an irregular lot shape, substantial lot depth, unusual geographic location, exceptional topographic feature, or other condition, that is peculiar to the subject property or establishment and the conditions upon which the request is based are not generally applicable to other property within the same zoning district; and 
(3)  The variation, if granted, would have no adverse impact on property values in the surrounding area or be injurious to other property or improvements in the neighborhood in which the property is located; and 
(4)  The variation, if granted, would have no adverse impact on the existing or desired character of the surrounding area; and 
(5)  The variation, if granted, would not endanger the public health, safety or welfare. 
(b)  For the purpose of supplementing the above standards, the Plan Commission, in making its findings and recommendation may also take into consideration the extent to which the evidence establishes or fails to establish the following facts favorably to the applicant: 
(1)  That the purpose of the variation is not based exclusively upon a desire to make more money out of the property. 
(2)  That the alleged difficulty or particular hardship has not been created by any person presently having an interest in the property or by the applicant. 
(3)  That the variation is the minimum variation necessary. 
(4)  That the property in question cannot yield a reasonable return if permitted to be used only under the conditions allowed by the regulations governing the district in which it is located. 
(c)  A showing that the granting of the requested variation would be more profitable to the applicant or that the sign would be more valuable if the requested variation granted is not grounds for granting approval of a variation. 
4.  Conditions and restrictions: The Plan Commission may recommend and the Village Board may require such conditions and restrictions upon the premises benefited by a sign variation as may be necessary in their opinion to comply with the standards set forth in this section, to reduce or minimize any injurious effects of such sign variation upon other property in the neighborhood, to implement the general purpose and intent of this chapter or to bring the existing or proposed signs on the property into compliance or closer into compliance with this chapter and the Village's appearance review guidelines. 
5.  Ordinance: All variations shall be granted only by the adoption and approval of an ordinance. Violation of any condition or limitation set forth in an approved ordinance shall be a violation of this chapter and shall constitute grounds for revocation of the variance. 
6.  Sign variation: The granting of a sign variation shall not authorize construction or maintenance of any sign, but shall merely authorize the preparation, filing and processing of a sign permit application. 
(H)  Appeals: 
1.  Notice of appeals: Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Community Development Director may appeal to the Village Board of Trustees by a written notice to the Village Manager. Such appeal must be filed within ten working days of the action being appealed. 
2.  Stay pending appeal: The Community Development Director shall take no further action on the matter pending the Village Board's decision, except for unsafe signs which present an immediate and serious danger to the public. 
3.  Appeals promptly heard: The appeal shall be heard by the Village Board in a timely manner, and that body may affirm, reverse or modify the action of the Building and Zoning Official. 
(I)  Legal nonconforming signs: 
1.  Defined: Signs legally existing at the time of the enactment of this chapter and not conforming to its provisions shall be regarded as legal nonconforming signs. 
2.  Statement of policy: It is not the intent of this chapter to encourage the survival of legal nonconforming signs but rather to bring such signs into conformance with the provisions of this chapter. Legal nonconforming signs are permitted to continue, subject to the following provisions. 
3.  Restrictions on legal nonconforming signs: Legal nonconforming signs shall not be: 
(a)  Reestablished if the sign has been abandoned for a period of 30 consecutive days. 
(b)  Expanded, enlarged, re-erected, replaced or, except for changing signs, altered in copy (including the replacement of the sign face). 
(c)  Reconstructed after damage or destruction to an extent equal to or more than 50 percent of the sign's original value, as determined by the Community Development Director. 
(d)  Moved in whole or part to another location unless the sign is made to conform to all regulations in this chapter. 
(e)  Structurally altered so as to prolong the life of the sign. 
4.  Monument signs: Any monument sign that does not conform to this chapter shall not be required to be brought into compliance upon replacement of the sign face if the only nonconformity is the height of the base. 
5.  Construction of new building: In the event of the construction of a new building, any building addition that increases the gross floor area of an existing building by 25 percent or more, or any exterior remodeling, renovation or rehabilitation of a building that triggers the requirement for exterior appearance review, shall require all nonconforming signs on the premises to be brought into conformance with the provisions of this chapter. 
6.  Maintenance: 
(a)  Normal repair and maintenance shall be allowed. 
(b)  Immediately upon the removal of a sign, the wall, structure or other appurtenances previously used to support the sign shall be repaired so as to return the building, structure or site to the condition it was in prior to installation of the sign. Specifically, any remaining holes in a wall must be repaired in kind, no wires shall be left exposed and the ground around a removed freestanding sign shall be graded and planted with grass or other landscaping. 
(J)  Penalties and interpretation: 
1.  Penalties: Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the general penalty provision set forth in title 1, chapter 4 of this Code for each violation, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues; and 
2.  Interpretation: Should any regulation in this chapter be in conflict with provisions of any other lawfully adopted rule, regulation or ordinance, the more restrictive provision shall prevail. 
(K)  Severability: If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is held to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, then all remaining parts, which are severable from the invalid parts, shall be valid and remain in effect. 
(Ord. 6215, 2-10-2014; Ord. 6519, 7-24-2017; Ord. 6674, 2-25-2019) 
Chapter 6 - SWIMMING POOLS 
(Repealed by Ordinance 5214, December 15, 2003, effective March 1, 2004) 
Chapter 7 - STORMWATER AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS 

4-7-1. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known and cited as the Stormwater and Floodplain Regulations of the Village of Glen Ellyn. 
(Ord. 6145, 6-24-2013) 
4-7-2. - Adoption of the DuPage Countywide Stormwater and Floodplain Ordinance, as last amended by the DuPage County Board on April 23, 2013. 
(A)  In order to assure that the provisions of existing ordinances of the Municipality and those which may be adopted in the future are consistent with and at least as stringent as the DuPage County stormwater management plan and the DuPage Countywide Stormwater and Floodplain Ordinance (hereafter referred to as countywide stormwater ordinance), the corporate authorities do hereby adopt the countywide stormwater ordinance, which is attached hereto and made a part of the ordinance codified herein as appendix A. These provisions are not adopted by reference, but, rather, are adopted as a specific and integral part of the ordinance codified herein. The provisions adopted by this section shall be in full force and effect and shall supersede any other ordinances of the municipality with which they are inconsistent or which are less stringent than the terms of the ordinance codified herein. 
(B)  The provisions of the DuPage Countywide Stormwater and Floodplain Ordinance, as last amended by the DuPage County board on April 23, 2013, are hereby modified and amended as follows: 
1.  Amend section 15-20 by adding the following: 
15-20.C. Development plans on site. Approved plans for grading work shall be maintained at the site throughout the grading work. 
15-20.D. Final construction inspection. When all grading has been completed, and when the installation of all drainage and other required structures have been completed but at least five working days prior to filing an application for occupancy permit, the permittee shall notify the Planning and Development Department, giving five days' notice, in order to obtain a final inspection thereof. 
15-20.E. Certification of compliance. At the time of the request for inspection the permittee shall file a final grading (occupancy) plan meeting the requirements set forth in the Village of Glen Ellyn final grading (occupancy) plan guidelines. This plan shall contain a statement from the developer's professional engineer, who must be registered in the State of Illinois, certifying that the final grading has been completed and complies with the approved site development/engineering plans. In addition for parcels within 250 feet of a regulatory flood plain or a stormwater runoff storage facility a Federal Emergency Management Agency elevation certificate shall be submitted with the certificate of compliance. 
15-20.F. All silt fencing shall be in place before the issuance of a building permit. 
2.  Amend section 15-30.A.2. and A.3. to read as follows: 
15-30.A.2. The development does not add 1,500 square feet or more of net new impervious area compared to the pre-development conditions, and 
15-30.A.3. Does not include 1,500 square feet or more of land disturbing activities. 
3.  Add section 15-30.C. as follows: 
15-30.C. Each application for a site development certification shall be made by the owner of property or his authorized agent to the Building Official on a form provided for that purpose. Said application shall be accompanied by a review and inspection fee and such other supporting documentation with any attendant fees that may be required herein. 
4.  Amend section 15-40.D. to read as follows: 
(a)  Amend section 15-40.D.1. to read as follows: 
15-40.D.1. Development security in accordance with section 15-54.B. is required for all developments which disturb more than 1,500 square feet of area, or which include construction of a stormwater facility (article IX), or more than 200 feet of storm sewer, or a post construction best management practice (article VIII) designed to serve more than 1,500 square feet of net new impervious area. 
(b)  Amend section 15-40.D.2. to read as follows: 
15-40.D.2. Erosion and sediment control security in accordance with section 15-54.C. is required for any development disturbing more than 1,500 square feet, or which disturbs the bed and banks of a channel draining more than 100-acres, or when an erosion and sediment control plan is required because of impact to wetlands or buffers or flood plain. 
5.  Add section 15-47.E. as follows: 
15-47.E. Plans, specifications and reports for all site developments shall be retained either by file in original form or on microfilm by the department of Community Development, Building Division. 
6.  Add new section 15-66 to read as follows: 
The required VCBMP volume for all projects with a net impervious increase of more than 300 square feet but less than 2,500 square feet shall be calculated as the product of the net new impervious area draining toward the adjoining properties and the rainfall depth generated from a one and one-quarter inch rainfall event. No abstractions are taken on the rainfall depth. 
7.  Add new section 15-67 to read as follows: 
Those developments which are located in or directly tributary to a local depressional area as defined on the Village's depressional area map, which have a net new impervious area of greater than 300 square feet, shall provide compensatory storage volume for the increased volume of runoff generated from the site that is tributary to the depressional area. The required compensatory volume shall be based on a 100 year 24-hour storm event. 
8.  Amend section 15-72.E. by adding the following: 
1.  Inlet and outlet structures for storage facilities should be designed to promote sedimentation and avoid short-circuiting. 
2.  Wet bottom storage facilities shall: 
a.  Be at least three feet deep, excluding near shore banks and safety ledge. If fish habitat is to be provided they shall be at least ten feet deep over 25 percent of the bottom area to prevent winter freeze out. 
b.  Have side slopes at and above the normal pool elevation not steeper than five to one (horizontal to vertical) or four to one for side slopes which are planted with deep rooted vegetation. Aquatic vegetation shall be established around the shoreline of a wet basin to provide protection from shoreline erosion. 
c.  Have a permanent pool volume at normal depth equal to the runoff volume from its watershed for the two-year, 24-hour five event for a 24-hour duration storm with a 50 percent probability of occurrence in any one year as specified by Illinois state water survey bulletin 70 northeast sectional rainfall. 
3.  Dry bottom storage facilities shall: 
a.  Have a maximum depth of storm water storage not exceeding four feet unless the existing natural ground contours and other conditions lend to a greater storage depth being approved by the Village. 
9.  Amend section 15-80.H. to read as follows: 
The flood protection elevation (FPE) is the BFE plus two feet of freeboard for residential structures and the BFE plus one foot for non-residential structures. 
10.  Amend section 15-97.C. to read as follows: 
Development in the Village of Glen Ellyn, a waiver community, shall participate in the Village's detention variance fee program where a variance to the site runoff storage requirements of section 15-72 is granted. Payment into a site runoff storage variance fee program shall be made prior to the issuance of a stormwater management certification as a condition of the variance. 
a.  Payment of a site runoff storage variance fee for the varied storage shall be made to the Village and is determined by applying the first applicable criteria as follows: 
1.  A fee calculated by multiplying the per acre-foot cost of the closest off-site storage facility times one and one-half times the varied storage where: 
a.  A design concept plan for the facility has been approved by the Village Board containing an estimate of the per acre-foot cost of constructing the storage and including operation and maintenance costs; and 
b.  A formula has been developed to determine that any investment in the facility shall be at least equal to the cost of planning, acquiring the lands, constructing, operating, and maintaining the facility; and 
c.  The facility is located in the same watershed planning area as the variance. 
2.  A fee calculated by multiplying $106,000.00 times one and one-half times the varied storage. 
b.  Funds collected shall be accounted for in a separate stormwater account. Funds shall be used to enhance existing runoff storage facilities and related components, construct off-site facilities and related components, provide maintenance of stormwater facilities, or undertake other development that provides a watershed benefit. 
c.  All accounting records shall be made available to the DuPage County stormwater committee upon request. 
11.  Amend section 15-98.C. to read as follows: 
Developments in the Village of Glen Ellyn, a waiver community, required to provide post construction best management practices (PCBMPs) in section 15-63 may elect to participate in the Village's BMPs fee-in-lieu program where: 
a.  PCBMPs fee-in-lieu payment shall be made to the Village and is determined by applying the criteria as follows: 
1.  The adopted fee schedule, attached to this ordinance as schedule B and by this reference incorporated into this ordinance, that identifies reasonable and rational cost to construct and maintain similar PCBMPs for those areas of the development that remain without effective water quality treatment. 
b.  Funds collected shall be accounted for in watershed planning area accounts. Funds shall be used in the same watershed planning areas as collected solely to design, construct, and maintain water quality improvements. Funds may not be used to fulfill obligations required by the ordinance. 
c.  All accounting records shall be made available to the DuPage County Stormwater Committee upon request. 
d.  All PCBMP fee-in-lieu payments are refunded to the person who paid the fee, or to that person's successor in interest, whenever the Village fails to encumber the fees collected within ten years of the date on which such fees are collected. 
e.  Refunds will be made provided that the person who paid the fee, or that person's successor in interest, files a petition with the Village within one year from the date on which such fees are required to be encumbered. 
(Ord. 6145, 6-24-2013) 
Chapter 8 - TREE PRESERVATION 

4-8-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to enhance the private property portion of the community forest by assuring the preservation and protection of protected trees. Title 8, chapter 4, "Forestry Management", of this Code is applicable to the public property portion of the community forest. These chapters complement each other to enhance the total community forest in Glen Ellyn. It is the stated public policy of the Village to add to the tree population within the Village, where possible, and to maintain, to the greatest extent possible, existing trees within the Village. The planting of additional trees, preservation of existing trees, and proper maintenance of trees in the Village will improve the quality of life in Glen Ellyn. 
(Ord. 5961, 9-26-2011) 
4-8-2. - Definitions. 
As used within this chapter and title 8, chapter 4 of this Code, the following terms shall have the meaning set forth in this section: 
ARBORICULTURAL SPECIFICATIONS MANUAL: A manual prepared and updated by the Village forester and incorporated into an ordinance passed and amended from time to time by the Village Board, which more specifically carries out the enforcement provisions and intent of this Code and contains regulations and standards for the preservation, planting, maintenance, and removal of trees, shrubs, and other plants upon Village property and regulated trees on private property. 
COMMUNITY FOREST: The entire tree population in the Village of Glen Ellyn, including trees on private and public property. 
COMPREHENSIVE FORESTRY MANAGEMENT PROGRAM: The five year plan for the improvement of the Village of Glen Ellyn community forest and approved by the Village Board. 
CRITICAL ROOT ZONE: The area inscribed by an imaginary line on the ground beneath a tree having its center point at the center of the trunk of the tree and having a radius equal to one foot for every inch of dbh but not less than six feet from the trunk of the tree. 
CROWN: Parts of a tree above the trunk including leaves, branches, and scaffolds. 
DEVELOPMENT: All new planned unit developments and subdivisions in the Village of Glen Ellyn. Any manmade change to improved or unimproved property including, but not limited to, the construction, addition, alteration, or replacement of buildings or structures, excavation, fill, grading, paving, underground irrigation, or utility work on the property that exceeds 300 square feet of disturbed site area except the following: 
(A)  Replacement pavement in the same footprint as existing pavement, 
(B)  Decks supported on individual spaced concrete piers, 
(C)  Fences supported on spaced posts, 
(D)  Replacement detached garages in the same footprint as the existing garage with no more than an additional 20 percent of garage area, or 
(E)  Grading on private property that disturbs less than 1,500 square feet of site area. 
DIAMETER BREAST HEIGHT (Hereinafter Called dbh): The diameter of the trunk of the tree measured in inches at a point four and one-half feet above ground line. This point of measurement is used for established and mature trees. 
DRIP LINE: A line drawn on the ground surface directly beneath and perpendicular to the maximum radius of the crown of an existing tree but not less than six feet from the trunk, whichever is greater. 
LANDSCAPE: Any shrubs, flowers, grass, or ground covers. 
LOT: A zoning lot as defined in the Glen Ellyn zoning and subdivision code. 
PUBLIC NUISANCE: Any tree, shrub, or other plant, or breeding place which harbors infectious insects or diseases which reasonably may be expected to injure or harm other trees or which could cause a safety hazard affecting the general public. 
PUBLIC TREE REMOVAL OR WORK PERMIT: The permit required by this Code issued in order to remove or do any work on any public tree within the corporate limits of the Village or a Village Parkway. 
REGULATED PUBLIC UTILITY: Any utility certified by the Illinois Commerce Commission to provide service to any customer within the corporate limits of the Village of Glen Ellyn or any other entity with a franchise issued by the Village or any other entity which has the right to extend pipes, wires, cables or lines on public property within the Village. The effect of this chapter with regard to any public utility is intended to be the maximum regulation permitted by law or under the terms of a franchise or similar agreement. 
REMOVE OR REMOVAL: The causing or accomplishing of the actual physical removal of a tree or the effective removal through damaging, poisoning, or other direct or indirect action resulting in, or likely to result in, the death of a tree. 
SCAFFOLDS: Primary structural branches of the crown. 
TREE: Any self-supporting, woody plant with its root system, growing upon the earth usually with one trunk or a multistemmed trunk system supporting a definitely formed crown, achieving a minimum of at least eight feet in height. 
TREE, ADJACENT PROPERTY: Any tree with a four inch dbh or greater on an adjoining private property and located within 15 feet of the lot line. These trees are protected trees unless the owner of the tree designates them as nonprotected. 
TREE, BORDER: Any tree, the trunk of which lies at least one-fourth on Village owned property and three-fourths on private property, determined as the distance of the diameter measured at right angles to the public right-of-way, determined by the Village forester. These trees are protected trees unless the Village forester designates them as nonprotected. 
TREE, IMPACTED: Any tree shown on a tree preservation plan, that would otherwise be a protected tree, that will be adversely affected by construction. This tree is not a removed tree or a protected tree. 
TREE PRESERVATION PLAN: A written plan having text and/or graphic illustrations indicating the methods which are to be used to preserve a public tree, significant tree, adjacent property tree, impacted tree, or protected tree during construction and shall include a tree survey, application, plan submittal checklist, and action plan. The document shall be coordinated with and, if possible, made a part of a site grading plan or drainage plan. 
TREE, PRIVATE: Any tree on privately owned property within the Village. 
TREE, PROTECTED: Any tree in the Village shown on a tree preservation plan as being retained after development with a ten inch dbh or greater, or a multibranch tree which has an aggregate diameter of 16 inches dbh or greater. 
TREE, PUBLIC: Any tree or border tree on public property or within a public right-of-way in the Village. These trees are protected trees unless the Village forester or his/her designee designates them as nonprotected. 
TREE, REMOVED: Any tree shown on a tree preservation plan that would otherwise be a protected tree, as being removed after development. 
TREE, REPLACEMENT: A nursery grown certified tree properly balled and burlapped and satisfying the standards established for nursery stock and installation thereof set forth by the American Association of Nurserymen. 
TREE, SIGNIFICANT: All hickory, oak, or walnut species in the Village measuring five inches dbh or greater. These trees are protected trees unless the owner of the tree designates them as nonprotected. 
TREE SURVEY: A graphic display of all protected, border, public, significant, impacted, removed, and adjacent property trees including their location, condition, species and size. All existing trees that are required to be shown on the tree survey must be identified by number. The survey shall show the location of protective fencing and other protective measures to be placed on the lot. The survey shall also show the location of any tree, which would otherwise be a protected tree, which was removed in the prior one year period. 
TREES, SHRUBS, AND OTHER PLANTS: All vegetation, woody or otherwise, except lawn and flowers less than 24 inches high. 
(Ord. 5961, 9-26-2011) 
4-8-3. - General regulations; private property involving development. 
(A)  Tree preservation plan required: Development on private property shall require the filing of a tree preservation plan along with other permit application materials required by this section upon application for a building permit. 
Trees which the owner designates on the plan as being susceptible to potential damage due to their location or condition may be designated as impacted trees. After the initial tree protection fencing or other protective methods have been put in place these impacted trees shall not be subject to additional regulation provided the required tree fencing or other protective methods are maintained. The Village forester, or his/her designee, may suggest that trees on the property not shown as impacted or protected trees should be shown as being in those categories, but the final decision shall rest with the applicant. 
All work to preserve protected, adjacent, significant, and impacted trees shall be according to the "Arboricultural Specifications Manual". The tree survey shall be drawn to a scale not less than one inch to 20 feet so that the location of each tree required to be shown on the plan can be identified. The tree preservation plan shall include the following: 
1.  A "tree survey" as defined above. The Village forester, or his/her designee, may exclude the tree survey requirement on those portions of the site which he/she determines will not be affected by the development activity. The survey may be prepared by a registered land surveyor or certified arborist or may be prepared by or under the direction of the owner if it accurately reflects all required tree information. The Village forester or his/her designee shall, if requested, assist without charge in the identification and size of tree species on those properties that do not require an ISA certified arborist review and approval. 
2.  The name and contact information of the parties responsible for the construction, erection, and maintenance of temporary fencing or other physical barrier around protected trees. 
3.  The location, shape, and spatial arrangement of all existing and proposed buildings, walls, improvements, and structures and the excavation limits required to construct proposed improvements. 
4.  The location, shape and spatial arrangement of all permanent driveways and parking areas and temporary material storage sites and accessways. 
5.  All existing or new utility services including water, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, gas, electric, telephone, and cable TV. 
6.  The Village forester, or his/her designee, may expand or partially retract the critical root zone depending on the tree species and site specific situations so as to improve the chances that trees will not be damaged during construction and to permit construction to take place. In such cases, the Village forester, or his/her designee, may request additional precautions in order to preserve the health of trees. 
7.  Existing and proposed grading of the development area showing elevations with contour lines at one foot intervals if a grading plan is required by some other provision of this Code. 
8.  A tree preservation plan for a new home shall be reviewed and approved by a certified arborist for the purpose of evaluating the protective measures proposed on the plan. 
(B)  Building permit required: No building permit shall be issued for development until the tree preservation plan has been approved by the Village Board (for planned unit developments or subdivisions) or the Village forester or his/her designee. In reviewing the tree preservation plan, the Village forester, or his/her designee, can offer advice and suggest modifications which will better protect existing trees, but the tree preservation plan shall be approved if it otherwise is in conformity with Village ordinances. The Village shall process the tree preservation plan in no more time than shall be needed to process a building permit unless the application does not fulfill the requirements of this chapter. Appeals regarding the tree preservation plan or a decision of the Village forester shall be first submitted to the Public Works Director. A subsequent appeal shall be submitted to the Village Manager. The following steps shall be followed to assure conformance to the approved tree preservation plan and the tree protection requirements in the "Arboricultural Specifications Manual" prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
1.  Tree preservation fencing must be installed and inspected for all protected, significant, impacted, border, public, and adjacent property trees prior to the issuance of a building permit. Tree preservation measures must be installed per the approved tree preservation plan and remain in place during the entire construction period. Fencing shall not be removed or relocated unless authorized in writing. 
2.  For a new principal structure an approved tree preservation plan shall be posted on the building site within five feet of the front property line before a building permit is issued and shall remain in place throughout the entirety of the construction of the project. This sign must be posted as shown in the "Arboricultural Specifications Manual". The permit applicant shall be responsible for notifying all other contractors working on the property of the tree preservation plan. 
3.  The applicant shall notify all adjacent property owners of the proposed construction project and that a tree preservation plan has been prepared and is available for review at the Community Development Department of the Village of Glen Ellyn. A copy of such notification along with a list of addresses it was delivered to must be submitted to the Community Development Department prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
(C)  Precautions during construction: During construction, all reasonable steps necessary to prevent the destruction or damaging of protected trees shall be taken, including, but not limited to, the following: 
1.  No construction activity, movement, and/or placement of equipment or material or spoils storage shall be permitted within the critical root zone of any protected tree or significant tree on the tree preservation plan unless shown on the approved tree preservation plan. No excess soil, additional fill, liquids, or construction debris shall be placed within the critical root zone of any protected tree or significant tree. 
2.  Per the "Arboricultural Specifications Manual", appropriate protective fencing shall be installed and maintained for the protection of protected, adjacent property, significant, and impacted trees. 
3.  No attachments, fences, or wires, other than those approved for bracing, guying, or wrapping, shall be attached to protected trees or significant trees during the construction period. 
4.  Branch pruning, root feeding, and root pruning of protected trees, significant trees, and adjacent property trees directly affected by construction shall be conducted by the property owner if suggested by the Village forester, or his/her designee, and must be completed following the "Arboricultural Specifications Manual". On-site inspections must be scheduled with the Village forester or his/her designee to ensure this requirement is met. 
5.  Unless otherwise shown on the approved tree preservation plan, no soil is to be added to or removed from within the critical root zone of any protected, significant, or adjacent property tree that is to remain, unless shown on the approved tree preservation plan. 
6.  Regulated public utilities, to the extent permitted by law, shall be responsible for adhering to said tree preservation plan during installation of necessary utility service lines. A property owner or contractor shall not be responsible for damages caused by the action of a public utility unless that person directed the location and manner of work of the utility. 
(D)  Fee schedule for tree preservation plan review : 
1.  Plan review fee for single-family lots. For projects where more than one of the projects listed below occurs, the higher fee shall apply. 
Unit cost for each: 
a.  Garage/pool/other: ..... $250.00 
b.  Addition: ..... 250.00 
c.  Demolition/new house: ..... 330.00 
d.  New house: ..... 330.00 
e.  Site improvements/grading/landscaping: ..... 250.00 
f.  Work in public right-of-way: ..... 330.00 
2.  Plan review fee for subdivisions, special use projects, and planned unit developments or lots with any use other than single-family residences: 
a.  Cost to review documents submitted in compliance with tree preservation ordinance: ..... $100.00 per hour by consultant. 
3.  Fees for additional field inspections and violations: 
a.  Field inspection responding to complaint (verified violation): ..... $100.00 
b.  Tree fence violation: ..... 100.00 
(E)  Work must be according to approved tree preservation plan: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or a corporation to fail to abide by the terms of any tree preservation plan pursuant to which a building permit has been issued, including all regulated public utilities. 
(F)  Stop work order authorized for noncompliance with tree preservation plan: If the Village forester, or his/her designee, or a Building Inspector observes the precautions specified in the tree preservation plan were not undertaken before construction commenced or not maintained during construction, a stop work order may be issued. The stop work order shall remain in place until the permittee complies with the approved tree preservation plan and/or corrects the issues stated in the stop work order. 
(G)  Amendment to tree preservation plan and removal of protected trees: An application can be made to the Village forester to amend a tree preservation plan. No amendment shall be permitted where the provisions of the approved plan have not been followed. An application shall be approved where changed facts and circumstances not within the control of the applicant create an undue hardship in complying with the plan. Where a protected tree has been damaged such that its removal is required, the forester shall approve its removal after adequately documenting any violations of this chapter which have caused or contributed to the removal of a protected tree. 
(H)  Tree contractor registration: Any person, firm, or corporation which is employed to prune or remove any public tree, protected tree, or significant tree shall be required to register with the public works department. There shall be no charge for registration, but the registration form shall include information regarding at least the name, address and telephone number of the contractor, and the number of years the contractor has been in business. Registration forms will be filed on or before May 1 of each year and shall be annually updated if listed information should change. A registered contractor shall report to the Village any tree removed within seven days after the removal. This report shall contain the address of the lot from which the tree was removed, the reason for removal, the species, and dbh. 
(Ord. 5961, 9-26-2011; Ord. 6075, 9-24-2012; Ord. 6603, 5-29-2018; Ord. 6674, 2-25-2019) 
4-8-4. - Interference with the Village forester. 
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to unreasonably hinder, prevent, delay, or interfere with the Village forester, Building and Zoning Official, or their agents while engaged in the execution or enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. 5961, 9-26-2011) 
4-8-5. - Violation and penalty. 
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or who fails to comply with any notice issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, upon being found guilty of violation, shall be subject to a minimum fine of $250.00 and a maximum fine of not to exceed $750.00, depending on severity of violation, for each separate offense. Each day during which any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall occur or continue shall be a separate offense. 
In addition to the issuance of a fine, the Village may also request the court, upon a determination that any provision of this chapter has been violated, to enjoin the person, through an affirmative or mandatory injunction, to cease a violation of this chapter or to require the actions mandated within this chapter to be performed. 
(Ord. 5961, 9-26-2011) 
TITLE 5 - FIRE REGULATIONS 
Chapter 1 - FIRE DEPARTMENT 

5-1-1. - Volunteer company. 
The Glen Ellyn Volunteer Fire Company, an independent, nonprofit corporation, shall perform the services of a Municipal Fire Department. 
(1965 Code § 15.03) 
5-1-2. - Chief of the Fire Department. 
The Chief of the Fire Department shall be an executive officer of the Village, appointed by the Village Administrator, subject to the approval of the Village Board. 
(Ord. 4458, 1-13-1997) 
5-1-3. - Duties of Chief. 
The Chief of the Fire Department shall be responsible for the care of the apparatus and the conduct of the members. He shall keep such records and make such reports pertaining to the activities of his department as may be required by the Village President and the Board of Trustees. 
(1965 Code § 15.03) 
5-1-4. - Command. 
The Chief of the Fire Department, and in his absence the Assistant Chief, shall be in charge of all members of the department and all apparatus, and all firemen shall observe the orders of the Chief or Assistant Chief while on duty. 
(1965 Code § 15.03) 
5-1-5. - Functions. 
It shall be the function of the Fire Department, and the duty of the members thereof, to prevent and extinguish accidental or destructive fires occurring in the Village, and to enforce all code provisions relating to fire hazards. 
(1965 Code § 15.03) 
5-1-6. - Investigation of fires. 
It shall be the duty of the Chief of the Fire Department to investigate the cause of any accidental or destructive fire occurring within the Village; and if there is any reason to suspect a criminal act, or violation of a code provision in connection therewith, he shall report the same to the Village attorney. 
(1965 Code § 15.03) 
5-1-7. - Custody of property. 
The members of the Fire Department shall have charge of all property removed by them from the scene of a fire to avoid loss or damage, and shall be responsible therefor until the same is delivered to the owner or his agent. 
(1965 Code § 15.03) 
5-1-8. - Duty of spectators. 
Spectators at fires shall observe the orders of the members of the Fire Department on duty with respect to keeping away from the scene, or the handling or interference with the apparatus of the department. 
(1965 Code § 15.03) 
5-1-9. - Authority of Chief. 
The Chief and Assistant Chief of the Fire Department shall have the power and authority to arrest any person, at or near the scene of an accidental or destructive fire, for any interference with the Fire Department in the performance of its duties or for the violation of any law or Village Code provision. 
(1965 Code § 15.03) 
5-1-10. - Cash contribution. 
The developer of every project that involves the creation of a new dwelling unit or new congregate housing unit for the elderly within the Village corporate limits, or as part of an annexation agreement, shall pay a cash contribution for each additional unit to benefit the cost incurred to provide fire protection and emergency services for the new unit. See subsection 4-1-4(A) of this Code. 
(Ord. 6304, 3-9-2015) 
Chapter 2 - FIRE CODE 

5-2-1. - Adoption of the Fire Code. 
(A)  The 2009 ICC International Fire Code is adopted by reference as the standards and regulations for governing the safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life and property in the occupancy of buildings and premises as this Code is intended, recommended, maintained and published by the International Code Council except such portions thereof that are deleted, modified, or amended in this chapter. At least one copy of the 2009 ICC International Fire Code shall be maintained on file in the office of the Village Clerk for inspection and copying as a public record. 
(B)  The provisions of the 2009 ICC International Fire Code are hereby deleted, modified and amended as follows: 
1.  Delete section 101.1 in its entirety and substitute the following: 
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the fire code of the Village of Glen Ellyn hereinafter referred to as "this Code". 
2.  Amend section 102.5 to add the following: 
3.  Fire protection systems and equipment provisions: All such provisions shall apply where specifically prescribed in this Code for one- and two-family dwellings and townhouses. 
3.  Amend section 102.7 to add the following at the end of the paragraph: 
Exception: Wherever reference to the International Plumbing Code is made, substitute the Plumbing Code, Department of Public Health, State of Illinois. 
4.  Amend section 103 heading to read as follows: 
SECTION 103 FIRE DEPARTMENT 
5.  Delete section 103.1 in its entirety and substitute the following: 
103.1 General. The Fire Department is established within the jurisdiction under the direction of the fire code official. The function of the Fire Department shall be the implementation, administration and enforcement of the provisions of this Code in accordance with title 5 Fire Regulations, chapter 1 Fire Department, in the Glen Ellyn Village Code. 
6.  Delete sections 104.10 and 104.10.1 in their entirety and substitute the following: 
104.10 Fire Investigations. The Fire Official shall investigate, or cause to be investigated, every fire or explosion occurring within his jurisdiction that is of a suspicious nature or which involves the loss of life or serious injury or causes destruction or damage to property. Such investigation shall be initiated immediately upon the occurrence of such fire or explosion; and if it appears that such an occurrence is of a suspicious nature, the Fire Official shall immediately take charge of the physical evidence and, in order to preserve physical evidence relating to the cause or origin of such fire or explosion, the Fire Official shall take means to prevent access by any person to the structure or premises until such evidence has been properly processed. The Fire Official shall notify those persons designated by law to pursue investigations into such matters and shall further cooperate with the authorities in collection of evidence and prosecution of the case and shall pursue the investigation to its conclusion. 
7.  Add a new section 104.12 to read as follows: 
104.12 Fire Prevention Inspections. The Fire Official shall inspect all existing structures and premises, except single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings and individual dwelling units within multi-family buildings, for the purpose of ascertaining and causing to be corrected any conditions liable to cause fire, contribute to the spread of fire, interfere with fire-fighting operations or endanger life or any violation of the provisions or intent of this Code or any other ordinance affecting fire safety. 
8.  Delete section 108.1 in its entirety and substitute the following: 
108.1 Board Of Appeals Established. The structure, responsibilities and procedures of the building board of appeals is established in title 2 Boards and Commissions, chapter 7 Building Board of Appeals, in the Glen Ellyn Village Code. 
9.  Delete section 108.3 in its entirety and substitute the following: 
108.3 Qualifications. The board of appeals shall consist of members who are qualified by experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to hazards of fire, explosion, hazardous conditions or fire protection systems. 
10.  Delete section 109.3 in its entirety and substitute the following: 
109.3 Violation Penalties. Any person who violates a provision of this Code shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than $50.00 nor more than $750.00 unless a fine for the violation of this Code is listed in the Village Code of Glen Ellyn, Illinois, then the more stringent shall apply. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. 
11.  Delete section 111.4 in its entirety and substitute the following: 
111.4 Failure to Comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of not less than $50.00 dollars or more than $750.00 dollars. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. 
12.  Amend section 202 to replace the definition of the fire code official with the following: 
Fire Code Official. The fire Chief, the building and zoning official or other designated authority charged with the administration and enforcement of the Code, or a duly authorized representative, under the direction and with the approval of the director of planning & development or the Village manager. 
13.  Amend section 202 to add the definition of hard cost to read as follows: 
HARD COST . The cost of all labor, materials, overhead and profit to complete remodeling of an existing building. Remodeling work includes, but is not limited to, improvements and alterations to foundations, walls, roofs, floors, ceilings, stairs, doors, windows, and electrical, mechanical, plumbing systems and fixtures and equipment. 
For purpose of determining hard cost, remodeling work does not include the following: 
1.  Interior or exterior non-structural demolition work or removal of existing improvements, fixtures or equipment. 
2.  Work to install a fire sprinkler system or increase the size of the water service to a building as required to serve a fire sprinkler system. 
3.  Work to install a fire alarm and detection system. 
4.  Installation of interior floor, wall and ceiling finishes such as paint, wallcoverings, paneling or tile over wallboard, or carpet, wood or tile flooring over a subfloor. 
5.  Cabinets and casework, countertops, shelving units, or door, window, base and ceiling trim. 
6.  Furniture, appliances, decorative fixtures, window treatments or business sales, display or service fixtures and equipment. 
14.  Amend section 202 to add the definition of market value as follows: 
Market Value. The dollar value of a building or structure, excluding land value, calculated to be three times the current assessed value established by the township assessor at 33.3% of the market value. 
15.  Delete sections 307.1 and 307.1.1 in their entirety and substitute the following: 
307.1 General. The regulations on open burning and fires are established in title 7 Health And Sanitation, chapter 7 Air Pollution, in the Glen Ellyn Village Code. 
16.  Delete sections 307.2 and 307.2.1 in their entirety. 
17.  Delete section 307.3 in its entirety. 
18.  Delete section 307.4 in its entirety and substitute the following: 
307.4 Portable Outdoor Fireplaces. Portable outdoor fireplaces shall be used in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions and shall not be operated within 10 feet (3048 mm) of a structure or combustible material. 
19.  Delete sections 307.4.1, 307.4.2 and 307.4.3 in their entirety. 
20.  Delete section 307.5 in its entirety and substitute the following: 
307.5 Attendance. The use of portable outdoor fireplaces shall be constantly attended until the fire is extinguished. A minimum of one portable fire extinguisher complying with section 906 with a minimum 4-A rating or other approved on-site fire-extinguishing equipment, such as dirt, sand, water barrel, garden hose or water truck, shall be available for immediate utilization. 
21.  Delete section 308.1.4 in its entirety and substitute the following: 
308.1.4 Open-Flame Cooking Devices. Charcoal burners, LP-gas grills, and other open-flame cooking devices shall not be operated on combustible balconies or decks or within 5 feet horizontally or 5 feet vertically below combustible construction. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Where buildings, balconies and decks are protected by an automatic sprinkler system. 
2.  LP gas cooking devices having LP-gas container with a water capacity not greater than 21/2 pounds [nominal 1 pound (0.454 kg) LP-gas capacity]. 
3.  Where combustible surfaces are protected and covered with a non combustible material approved by the building official. 
22.  Amend section 903.2 to read as follows: 
903.2 Where Required. Approved automatic sprinkler systems in new buildings and structures in use group A, B, E, M, R, F, H, I and S and in one and two family dwellings and townhouses shall be provided throughout the building or structure and in the locations described in sections 903.2.11 and 903.2.12. 
23.  Add a new section 903.4.2.1 as follows: 
903.4.2.1 Alarms in Dwelling Units. In one and two family dwellings and townhouses a six inch water flow bell shall be installed on the interior return air plenum of the forced air furnace, or other approved location, to serve every living space and a 10 inch water flow bell or horn/strobe notification device shall be installed on the exterior front of the building in an approved location visible from the street. 
24.  Amend section 905.3.1 to read as follows and retain all exceptions: 
905.3.1 Height. Class III standpipe systems shall be installed throughout buildings where the floor level of the highest story is located more than 30 feet (9144 mm), or two stories, above the lowest level of Fire Department access, or where the floor level of the lowest story is located more than 30 feet (9144 mm), or two stories, below the highest level of Fire Department vehicle access or where any portion of the floor area is more than 200 feet (61 m) of travel distance from the nearest point of Fire Department vehicle access. 
25.  Delete section 907.2.7 exception 2 in its entirety and substitute the following: 
2.  Manual fire alarm boxes are not required at the public entrance where the building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with section 903.3.1.1 and the occupant notification appliances will automatically activate throughout the notification zones upon sprinkler water flow. 
26.  Delete section 907.5.3 in its entirety and substitute the following: 
907.5.3 Automatic Smoke Detection. Where an automatic smoke detection system is required it shall utilize smoke detectors unless ambient conditions prohibit such an installation. In spaces where smoke detectors cannot be utilized due to ambient conditions and in common corridors and rooms exceeding 100 square feet, approved automatic heat detectors shall be required. 
27.  Add new section 907.7.5.2 to read as follows: 
907.7.5.2 Village Of Glen Ellyn Municipal Fire Panel. All fire alarm systems in buildings serving occupancy group A or group E shall be directly connected to the Village of Glen Ellyn municipal fire panel. 
28.  Amend section 4603.4 to read as follows: 
4603.4 Sprinkler Systems. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided in existing buildings in accordance with sections 4603.4.1 through 4603.4.5. 
29.  Add new section 4603.4.3 to read as follows: 
4603.4.3 Additions To Existing Buildings And Structures. 
1.  In buildings of use group A, B, E, M, R, F, H, I, or S, an approved automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout the addition if the gross floor area of the addition exceeds 2,500 square feet, or throughout the addition and the existing building if the combined gross floor area of the addition and the existing building exceeds 5,000 square feet. 
2.  In buildings of use group A, B, E, M, R, F, H, I, or S, and in one and two family dwellings and townhouses, an approved automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout the addition and throughout the existing building or if the gross floor area of the addition exceeds 150% of the gross floor area of the existing building. 
30.  Add new section 4603.4.4 to read as follows: 
4603.4.4 Alterations To Existing Buildings And Structures. 
1.  In buildings of use group A, B, E, M, R, F, H, I, or S, an approved automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout the existing building and any addition if the structurally altered existing exterior wall and roof gross square foot area exceeds 50% of the total existing exterior wall and roof gross square foot area. 
2.  In one and two family dwellings and townhouses, an approved automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout the existing building and any addition if the structurally altered existing exterior wall and roof gross square foot area exceeds 75% of the total existing exterior wall and roof gross square foot area. 
31.  Amend section 4603.4.5 to read as follows: 
4603.4.5 Remodeling In Existing Buildings and Structures. 
1.  In buildings of all occupancy groups, except group U and one and two family dwellings and townhouses, an approved automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout the remodeled interior area if the hard cost of all remodeling work exceeds $1,000,000 or 25% of the market value of the building or structure. 
2.  In one and two family dwellings and townhouses, an approved automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout the remodeled interior area of the existing building if the hard cost of all remodeling work exceeds $300,000. 
32.  Delete section 4603.5 in its entirety and substitute the following: 
4603.5 Standpipes. Standpipes shall be provided in all existing buildings and structures in use group A, B, E, M, R, F, H, I or S and installed in accordance with section 905 where any one of the following conditions exist: 
1.  The existing building is enlarged to exceed two stories or where any portion of the floor area exceeds two hundred feet (200') from the nearest Fire Department access. 
2.  The existing building is enlarged and the gross floor area of the addition exceeds 150% of the gross floor area of the existing building or structure. 
3.  The existing building is altered and the structurally altered exterior wall and roof gross area exceeds 75% of the existing total exterior wall and roof gross area. 
4.  The existing building is remodeled and the hard cost of the remodeled area exceeds $1,000,000 or 25% of the market value of the building or structure. 
33.  Delete section 4603.6 in its entirety and substitute the following: 
4603.6 Fire Alarm Systems. An approved fire alarm system shall be installed in existing buildings and structures in accordance with sections 4603.6.1 through 4603.6.8 and provide occupant notification in accordance with section 907.6 unless other requirements are provided by other sections of this Code. 
Exception: Occupancies with an existing, previously approved fire alarm system. 
34.  Add new section 4603.6.8 to read as follows: 
603.6.8 Group A, B, E, M, R, F, H, I And S. An approved fire alarm system installed in accordance with the provisions of this Code and NFPA 72 shall be provided under any one of the following conditions: 
1.  The existing building is enlarged or the gross floor area is increased and the hard cost of the construction work exceeds $15,000. 
2.  The existing building is altered and the hard cost of the construction work to structurally alter the exterior wall and roof exceeds $15,000. 
3.  The existing building is remodeled and the hard cost of the interior construction work exceeds $15,000. 
(Ord. 5893, 10-25-2010, eff. 12-1-2010; Ord. 5918, 1-24-2011; Ord. 6603, 5-29-2018) 
5-2-2. - Adoption of the Life Safety Code. 
(A)  The 2009 NFPA 101 Life Safety Code is adopted by reference as the standards and regulations for governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire, escape from buildings and fire protective building features and systems as this Code is intended, recommended, maintained and published by the National Fire Protection Association except such portions thereof that are deleted, modified, or amended in this chapter. At least one copy of the 2009 NFPA 101 Life Safety Code shall be maintained on file in the office of the Village Clerk for inspection and copying as a public record. 
(B)  The provisions of the 2009 NFPA 101 Life Safety Code are hereby deleted, modified and amended as follows: 
1.  Amend section 2.2 to read as follows: 
2.2 NFPA Publications. National Fire Protection Association, 1 Batterymarch Park, Quincy, MA 02169-7471. NFPA 101, Life Safety Code, 2000 edition, as amended by the State of Illinois in the administrative code, title 41, chapter I, part 100, section 100.7(b). 
2.  Delete chapter 24 one and two family dwellings in its entirety. 
(Ord. 5883, 8-23-2010, eff. 10-1-2010) 
Chapter 3 - FIRE DEPARTMENT SERVICE FEE 

5-3-1. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, definitions of certain terms shall be as listed below: 
COMMERCIAL ACCOUNTS: All Village services accounts for mixed use properties, and all other accounts that are not residential, multi-family residential, or government, except those properties that are located within, and are provided fire protection services by, the Glenbard Fire Protection District. 
GOVERNMENTAL ACCOUNTS: All Village services accounts for governments established under the United States Federal government or State of Illinois, including, but not limited to, School District facilities, Park District facilities, library, and U.S. Post Office, except those that are located within, and are provided fire protection services by, the Glenbard Fire Protection District. 
MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ACCOUNTS: All Village services accounts for condominium or residential units (owner occupied or rental) within buildings that have more than one residential dwelling, except for: a) attached townhomes that are individually metered for water service; and b) mixed use properties; and c) are properties located within, and are provided fire protection services by, the Glenbard Fire Protection District. 
RESIDENTIAL ACCOUNTS: All Village services accounts for detached single-family homes, and attached townhomes that are individually metered for water service, except those that are located within, and are provided fire protection services by, the Glenbard Fire Protection District. 
(Ord. 6224, 3-10-2014) 
5-3-2. - Fees. 
Effective October 1, 2017, or as soon as practical thereafter the Fire Department service fees shall be as follows: 
(A)  Fire service fee: 
Residential, per month ..... $7.50 
Multi-family residential, per unit per month ..... 3.00 
Government ..... No charge 
Commercial under 20,000 sq. ft., per month ..... 8.00 
Commercial 20,000 to 40,000 sq. ft., per month ..... 20.00 
Commercial over 40,000 sq. ft., per month ..... 40.00 
The fire service fee imposed or assessed shall be used by the Village for the exclusive purpose of supporting the operations or capital needs of the Glen Ellyn Volunteer Fire Company. 
(B)  Fire service fee - Capital: 
Residential, per month ..... $7.50 
Multi-family residential, per unit per month ..... 3.00 
Government ..... No charge 
Commercial under 20,000 sq. ft., per month ..... 8.00 
Commercial 20,000 to 40,000 sq. ft., per month ..... 20.00 
Commercial over 40,000 sq. ft., per month ..... 40.00 
The capital fire service fee imposed or assessed shall be used by the Village for the exclusive purpose of supporting the capital needs of the Glen Ellyn Volunteer Fire Company. 
(Ord. 6495, 4-10-2017) 
5-3-3. - Billing period. 
Fees are billed in arrears based on the water service dates. 
(Ord. 6205, 12-9-2013) 
5-3-4. - Proration. 
If fire services are prorated for a month due to account changes, the proration will be based on four weeks. 
(Ord. 6205, 12-9-2013) 
5-3-5. - Penalties. 
The Fire Department service fee is subject to penalties as described in section 7-11-16 of this Code. 
(Ord. 6205, 12-9-2013) 
TITLE 6 - POLICE REGULATIONS 
Chapter 1 - POLICE DEPARTMENT 

6-1-1. - Creation. 
There is hereby created a Police Department, an executive department of the Village, consisting of the Police Chief, two Deputy Chiefs of Police and such number of Sergeants and Police Officers as may be provided by the Board of Trustees. 
(Ord. 5558, 3-26-2007) 
6-1-2. - Appointment. 
The Police Chief shall be appointed by the Village Manager, subject to the approval of the Board of Trustees. The Deputy Chief of Police shall be appointed and may be removed by the Police Chief, subject to the approval of the Village Manager. 
(Ord. 4667, 12-14-1998) 
6-1-3. - Police Chief. 
The Police Chief shall direct the Police work of the Village, assign duties to the members of the department, and be responsible for the enforcement and maintenance of law and order. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 15.02) 
6-1-4. - Duties. 
It shall be the duty of all members of the Police Department to enforce all provisions of this Code, state and federal laws, preserve order, prevent infractions of such laws, and arrest violations thereof. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 15.02) 
6-1-5. - Witness fees. 
Every member of the Police Department shall appear as a witness whenever it is necessary in a prosecution for violation of any code provision or state or federal law. No member of the department shall receive a witness fee in any action or suit in which the Village is a party; and any fees paid for such services shall be turned over to the Police Chief, who shall deposit the same with the Finance Director. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 15.02; amd. Ord. 2615, 12-8-1980; Ord. 6108, 1-14-2013) 
6-1-6. - Department rules. 
There is hereby adopted the "Glen Ellyn Police Department Rules" for the members of the Police Department, and such rules are hereby incorporated as a part of this code as if fully set out at length herein. 
(Ord. 2372, 6-26-1978) 
Chapter 2 - GENERAL OFFENSES 

6-2-1. - Offenses against property. 
6-2-1.1. - Public and private. 
(A)  Destruction: No person shall willfully, maliciously, wantonly, negligently or otherwise injure, deface, destroy or remove any real property, or improvements thereto, or movable or personal property belonging to the Village or any person in the Village. 
(B)  Advertising: No person shall fasten in any way any show card, poster or other advertising device upon public or private property unless legally authorized to do so. 
(C)  Obstructions on public ways: No person shall place or erect upon any public way or passageway to any building an obstruction of any type unless duly authorized or required for the purpose of safeguarding the public. 
(D)  Theft on public grounds: No person shall move, disturb or take any earth, stone or other material from any public street, alley, park or other public ground. 
(E)  Discrimination prohibited: No person shall solicit for sale, rent or purchase any property by making representations that such property has been, or is about to be, reduced in value by reason of the race, religion, national origin or gender orientation of a person who has moved, or may move, into the vicinity of that property. 
(F)  Theft: A person commits theft when he knowingly: 
1.  Obtains or exerts unauthorized control over property of the owner; or 
2.  Obtains by deception, control over property of the owner; or 
3.  Obtains by threat, control over property of the owner; or 
4.  Obtains control over stolen property knowing the property to have been stolen or under such circumstances as would reasonably induce him to believe that the property was stolen, and 
(a)  Intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or benefit of the property or services; or 
(b)  Knowingly uses, conceals or abandons the property in such a manner as to deprive the owner permanently of such use or benefit; or 
(c)  Uses, conceals or abandons the property knowing such use, concealment or abandonment probably will deprive the owner permanently of such use or benefit. 
(G)  Theft of lost or mislaid property: A person who obtains control over lost or mislaid property commits theft when he: 
1.  Knows or learns the identity of the owner or knows, or is aware of, or learns of a reasonable method of identifying the owner; and 
2.  Fails to take reasonable measures to restore the property to the owner; and 
3.  Intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or benefit of the property. 
(H)  Theft of labor or services or use of property: A person commits theft when he obtains the temporary use of property, labor or services of another which are available only for hire, by means of threat or deception or knowing that such use is without the consent of the person providing the property, labor or services. 
(I)  Definitions: The definitions established in the criminal code of 19611 shall be used in interpreting subsections (F), (G) and (H) of this section. 
(1965 Code § 12.01; Ord. 3255, 10-14-1986; Ord. 5751, 4-27-2009) 
6-2-1.2. - Trespass to Village property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon land of the Village or any building on such land, after receiving, immediately prior to such entry, notice from the Village or its representative that such entry is forbidden, or remains upon such land or in such building after receiving notice from the Village or its representative to depart, and who thereby interferes with another person's lawful use or enjoyment of such building or land. 
A person has received notice from the Village or its representative if he has been notified personally, either orally or in writing, or if a printed or written notice forbidding such entry to him or a group of which he is a part, has been conspicuously posted or exhibited at the main entrance to such land or the forbidden part thereof. 
(Ord. 1866, 6-24-1974) 
6-2-1.3. - Trespass upon private property. 
(A)  Trespasses prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to commit a trespass within this Municipality upon private property. 
(B)  Specifically enumerated trespasses; suppression: Without constituting any limitation upon the provisions of section 6-2-1.1 of this chapter, any of the following acts by any person, firm or corporation shall be deemed included among those which constitute trespasses, in violation of the provisions of said section 6-2-1.1 of this chapter, and appropriate action may be taken hereunder at any time to prevent or suppress any violation of this section, including: 
1.  An entry upon the premises, or any part thereof, of another in violation of a notice posted or exhibited at the main entrance to said premises or at any point or approach or entry or in violation of any notice, warning or protest given orally by any owner or occupant thereof; or 
2.  The pursuit of a course of conduct or action incidental to the making of an entry upon the land of a notice posted or exhibited at the main entrance to said premises or at any point of approach or entry, or in violation of any notice, warning or protest given orally or in writing by any owner or occupant thereof; or 
3.  A failure or refusal to depart from the premises of another after being requested to leave by any owner or occupant. 
(Ord. 2199, 5-23-1977) 
6-2-1.4. - Trespass upon private property with an abandoned structure. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to commit a trespass within this Municipality into an abandoned structure or upon private property which contains an abandoned structure. An "abandoned structure" shall be defined as any building, structure, or uncompleted or abandoned building within the territory of the Municipality which has been in this condition for a period of at least 30 days and upon which a "No Trespassing - Abandoned Structure" notice has been posted or exhibited at the main entrance to said premises or at any point or approach or entry to said premises. 
(B)  A violation would also occur if entry was made in violation of any notice, warning, or protest given orally by any owner or occupant thereof or by any person charged with the security of the premises. The provisions of this section shall not be a limitation upon the Village to take any action permitted by law, including, but not limited to, those pursuant to section 6-2-1.3 of this chapter. 
(C)  Each trespass shall constitute an offense punishable by a fine of not less than $500.00 for the first offense and $750.00 for each offense thereafter. Each instance in which a trespass occurs shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. 4592, 5-11-1998; Ord. 4623, 8-10-1998) 
6-2-2. - Offenses against public peace. 
6-2-2.1. - Assault. 
Any person commits an assault when, without lawful authority, he engages in conduct which places another in reasonable apprehension of receiving a battery. 
No person shall assault another with a lethal weapon, instrument or thing with intent to inflict upon the person of another any bodily injury, where no considerable provocation appears, or where the circumstances of the assault show malice. 
(1965 Code § 12.02; 1975 Code) 
6-2-2.2. - Disorderly conduct. 
A person commits disorderly conduct when he knowingly: 
(A)  Does any act in such unreasonable manner as to alarm or disturb another and to provoke a breach of the peace; or 
(B)  With intent to annoy another, makes a telephone call, whether or not conversation thereby ensues; or 
(C)  Transmits in any manner to the Fire Department of the Village a false alarm of fire, knowing, at the time of such transmission, that there is no reasonable ground for believing such fire exists; or 
(D)  Transmits in any manner to another a false alarm to the effect that a bomb or other explosive of any nature is concealed in such place that its explosion would endanger human life, knowing, at the time of such transmission, that there is no reasonable ground for believing that such bomb or explosive is concealed in such place; or 
(E)  Transmits in any manner to any peace officer, public officer or public employee a report to the effect that an offense has been committed, knowing, at the time of such transmission, that there is no reasonable ground for believing that such an offense has been committed. 
(F)  Enters upon the property of another and for a lewd or unlawful purpose deliberately looks into a dwelling on the property through any window or other opening in it. 
(G)  Is in an intoxicated condition in or on any street, alley or other public place in the Village. 
(1975 Code; Ord. 1519, 4-24-1967; Ord. 2288, 12-12-1977) 
6-2-2.3. - Disturbing lawful assemblages. 
No person shall disquiet or disturb any congregation or assembly for religious worship, or any other lawful assemblage or gathering, by making a noise or by lewd or indecent behavior or profane discourse within the place of assemblage, or so near the same as to disturb the order or solemnity of the meeting. 
(1965 Code § 12.04) 
6-2-2.4. - Fighting. 
No person shall fight another person except in boxing exhibitions duly authorized and licensed by law. 
(1965 Code § 12.05) 
6-2-2.5. - Unnecessary noises. 
(A)  Disturbing the peace: No person shall make, continue or cause to be made or continued, any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise, or any noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others; nor permit any building or premises owned by him, or in his possession or control, to be used or rented for any use which will disturb or destroy the peace of the neighborhood. 
(B)  Sound advertising from aircraft: 
1.  No person shall operate, or cause to be operated, any aircraft for any purpose in or over the Village with sound amplifying equipment in operation. 
2.  No person shall operate, or cause to be operated, any aircraft for commercial sound advertising purposes in or over the Village. 
3.  "Sound amplifying equipment", as used herein, shall mean any machine or device for the amplification of music, human voice, or any other noise or sound, except that it shall not be construed as including warning devices on authorized emergency aircraft or any horns or other warning devices used only for traffic safety purposes. 
(1965 Code § 12.06; Ord. 1481, 8-8-1966) 
6-2-2.6. - Disruptive public conduct. 
(A)  Loitering: All persons are prohibited from loitering in places, at times, or in a manner that warrants alarm for the safety of persons or property or otherwise disrupts the reasonable peace and enjoyment of bystanders in the vicinity. Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether such alarm is warranted is the fact that the actor takes flight upon the appearance of a peace officer, refuses to identify himself, or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or any object. Unless flight by the actor or other circumstances make it impracticable, a peace officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm which would otherwise be warranted by requesting the person to identify himself or herself and explain the person's presence and conduct. No persons shall be convicted of an offense under this section if the peace officer did not comply with the preceding sentence or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person was true and, if believed by the peace officer at the time, would have dispelled the alarm. 
(B)  Begging: All persons are prohibited from aggressive panhandling, panhandling after sunset and before sunrise, or physically approaching others to panhandle in public areas. For the purposes of this subsection, the following definitions shall apply: 
AGGRESSIVE PANHANDLING: To panhandle in a manner that would intimidate a reasonable person into giving money or goods. 
INTIMIDATE: To engage in conduct which would make a reasonable person fearful or feel compelled. 
PANHANDLING: To ask for money or goods whether by words, signs, bodily gestures, or other means. 
(C)  Obstructing: All persons are prohibited from intentionally obstructing pedestrian or vehicular traffic on sidewalks, roads, or other public or private property used for passage by walking, standing, sitting, lying, or placing an object in such a manner as to block passage by another person or a vehicle of any kind or to require another person or driver of a vehicle of any kind to take evasive action to avoid physical contact. Bicycles, baby carriages or strollers, and grocery carts are among the vehicles covered by this section. Acts authorized as an exercise of one's constitutional right to picket or to legally protest shall not constitute obstruction of pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(D)  Loitering for the purpose of engaging in drug related activity: All persons are prohibited from loitering in or near any thoroughfare, place open to the public, or near any public or private place with the intent to solicit, entice, induce, or procure another to exchange, buy, sell, or use illegal drugs or drug paraphernalia. 
(E)  Loitering for the purpose of engaging in prostitution: All persons are prohibited from remaining, wandering, or loitering in a public place with the intent to solicit or procure sexual activity for hire. 
(F)  Public benches: In order to make public benches owned by any public body available for use by multiple citizens, all persons are prohibited from occupying a space on a public bench for more than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive minutes without having during that period vacated the use of that bench for a period of at least fifteen (15) consecutive minutes. 
(Ord. 5695, 8-25-2008) 
6-2-2.7. - Battery. 
Any person commits battery when he intentionally or knowingly causes bodily harm to another; or, makes physical contact of an insulting or provoking nature to another. 
(Ord. 6169, 9-23-2013) 
6-2-3. - Offenses against public safety. 
6-2-3.1. - Advertisement by sample. 
No person shall distribute, cast, throw or place, or cause to be distributed, cast, thrown or placed, in, upon or along any of the streets, alleys or public places of the Village, or upon the porches or yards of private residences therein, or within any dwelling or building in the Village, any samples of merchandise or medicinal preparations for the purpose of advertising or making known, in a general or promiscuous manner, any business, occupation, preparation, medical treatment, medicine, or any merchandise whatsoever. 
(1965 Code § 12.08) 
6-2-3.2. - Articles on windows. 
No person shall place any movable article on any window ledge or other place abutting a street, alley or other public place in such a manner that the same is in danger of or can fall onto the street, alley or other public place from a height greater than four feet. 
(1965 Code § 12.09) 
6-2-3.3. - Ball playing. 
No person shall throw, kick or knock any ball, or play ball in any other manner, upon any public street, alley or sidewalk. 
(1965 Code § 12.10) 
6-2-3.4. - Explosives. 
(A)  Storage: No person shall keep or store any dynamite, nitroglycerin, TNT, gunpowder or guncotton in any quantities, except for medical or laboratory purposes, and for such purposes no more than five (5) pounds shall be stored in any one building or premises. 
(B)  Rules of State Fire Marshal: All explosives kept or stored in the Village shall be kept or stored in accordance with the rules enforced by the state fire marshal with respect to the same. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 12.12) 
6-2-3.5. - Fireworks. 
(A)  Use prohibited: No person shall cast, throw, light or fire any squib, cracker, torpedo, grenade, gun, revolver, pistol or cartridge, or other combustible firecrackers or fireworks of any kind. 
(B)  Sale and display prohibited: No person shall exhibit, or have in his possession with intent to give away, sell or offer for sale, fireworks of any kind. 
1.  The prohibition of this section shall not apply to the sale, storage or use of railroad torpedoes or other signaling device or the use of flashlight composition by photographers or dealers in photographic supplies. 
2.  This prohibition shall not apply to prevent any public demonstration or display of fireworks of any kind conducted under proper Police supervision after application made, and permit issued, by the Police Chief for such demonstration. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 12.15) 
6-2-3.6. - Hitchhiking. 
No person shall hitchhike, "thumb rides" or go upon the public streets and highways for the purpose of soliciting free transportation. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 12.16) 
6-2-3.7. - Interference with Police Department. 
(A)  Resisting officer: No person shall resist any Police Officer or any person duly empowered with Police authority while in the discharge, or apparent discharge, of his duty, or in any way interfere with or hinder him in the discharge of his duty. 
(B)  Assisting in escape: No person shall offer or endeavor to assist any person in the custody of a Police Officer, or a person duly empowered with Police authority, to escape, or to attempt to escape, from such custody. 
(C)  Impersonating an officer: No person other than an official Police Officer shall wear or carry the uniform, apparel badge, identification card, or any other insignia of office like, or similar to, or a colorable imitation of, that adopted and worn or carried by the Police Officers of the Village. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 12.17) 
6-2-3.8. - Intoxicating liquors. 
(A)  Manufacture: No person shall manufacture any intoxicating liquors on any premises owned or controlled by him for sale or gift. 
(B)  Accepting orders: No person, other than a licensed retailer, shall solicit or take any order or orders for the purchase of intoxicating liquors. 
(C)  Handling: No person shall carry on or about his person, or engage or employ any other person to so carry, any intoxicating liquor for the purpose of selling, bartering, exchanging, giving away, or illegally delivering the same. 
(D)  Search and seizure: Any officer having personal knowledge or reasonable information that intoxicating liquors are being kept in any place, in violation of the law, upon issuing of a search warrant by the court, shall search such suspected place; and if such officer finds intoxicating liquor upon the premises, he shall seize the same, together with the vessels in which it is contained, all implements, furniture, fixtures and vehicles used in connection with illegally keeping, bargaining, selling, exchanging, giving away or carrying the same, and shall arrest any person or persons in charge of such place, or aiding, in any manner, in carrying on the business conducted in such place. 
(E)  Drinking alcoholic liquor in public place: It shall be unlawful for any person to drink alcoholic liquor in or on any street, alley or other public place in the Village or to drink alcoholic liquor in or about any motor vehicle in or on any street, alley or other public place in the Village, except as so licensed by the Village. 
(F)  Transporting alcoholic liquor: It shall be unlawful for any person to transport, carry, possess or have any alcoholic liquor upon his person on any street, alley or other public place within the Village except in an unopened original package or container. 
(G)  Possession of alcoholic liquor in motor vehicle: No person shall transport, carry, possess or have any alcoholic liquor within the passenger area of any motor vehicle, except in the original package and with the seal unbroken. 
(Ord. 1865, 8-24-1974; M.C. 1965, Sec. 12.18; amd. Ord. 2284, 11-14-1977) 
6-2-3.9. - Narcotics; hypnotic drugs. 
(A)  Unlawful possession: No person shall sell, give away, use or possess for any purpose whatever any narcotic drug, except as provided herein. 
(B)  Unlawful association: No person shall establish, contribute to, support, maintain, become an inmate of, or in any way be connected with any building, or part thereof, or place of any description whatever, or permit such building, or part thereof, or place of any description whatever, owned by or under the control of such person, to be used for the manufacture, preparation, sale, storage, smoking or use of any narcotic drug, except as provided herein. 
(C)  Distribution by licensed practitioner: 
1.  Physicians: A licensed physician, dentist or veterinarian shall be permitted to dispense or distribute narcotic drugs to a patient in the course of his professional practice only, and such licensed practitioner shall not be permitted to possess narcotic drugs for any other purpose. 
2.  Pharmacists: A licensed pharmacist shall be permitted to dispense or distribute narcotic drugs to patients under and in pursuance of written prescriptions issued by any licensed physician, dentist or veterinarian, and such licensed pharmacist shall not be permitted to possess narcotic drugs for any other purpose. 
3.  Record of distribution: All instances of professional distribution of narcotic drugs as provided for herein shall be recorded in suitable form, and filed and preserved in a manner so as to be readily accessible for inspection by any law enforcement officers of the Village. 
4.  Refill prohibited: No prescription for narcotic drugs shall be refilled. 
(D)  Possession by patient: No patient shall be permitted to possess narcotic drugs except those distributed or dispensed to him in accordance with a prescription or prescribed medical treatment. 
(E)  Seizure of narcotic drugs: All narcotic drugs in the possession of any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be seized by, confiscated by, and forfeited to the Police Chief, who shall make proper disposition thereof. 
(F)  Seizure of vehicle: Any vehicle from which seized drugs are removed, the vehicle being owned by the person convicted of a violation of this section, shall be seized by, confiscated by, and forfeited to the Police Chief and subsequently sold, at public auction to the highest bidder, in the manner provided by law. 
(G)  Exempted persons: The provisions of this section restricting the possession and control of narcotic drugs shall not apply to common carriers or warehousemen engaged in lawfully transporting or storing such narcotic drugs, or to any employee of such common carrier or warehouseman within the scope of his employment, or to public officers or employees in the performance of official duties requiring possession or control of narcotic drugs, or to persons aiding such officers or employees in the performance of such duties. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 12.19) 
6-2-3.10. - Report of treatment of wounds. 
Every physician or surgeon duly admitted to the practice of medicine or surgery in the state of Illinois, whenever he shall treat any person in the Village for a wound inflicted by a dangerous or deadly weapon of any kind, shall notify the Police Department within one hour of the time when he renders such professional service or is called upon to render the same. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 12.20) 
6-2-3.11. - Scaffolds. 
No person shall place any scaffolds or ladders in such a position that they overhang any street, alley or public way, unless such scaffolding or ladders are firmly and properly constructed and safeguarded, and no person shall place or leave any tools or articles on any scaffolds or ladders in such a manner that the same can fall onto the street, sidewalk or other public way from a height greater than four feet. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 12.21) 
6-2-3.12. - Throwing missiles. 
No person shall throw any stone, snowball or any other missile at any vacant building, tree or public or private property, or at any person in any public or private way. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 12.22) 
6-2-3.13. - Weapons. 
(A)  Definitions: Unless otherwise expressly stated, or the context clearly indicates a different sense, the terms used in this section shall have the meanings defined in or applied to similar terms used in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/24-1 et seq. 
(B)  Unlawful possession of dangerous or deadly weapons: No person shall have in his possession, except when on his land or in his own abode or fixed place of business, any pistol, revolver, stun gun, taser or other firearm or any air gun, BB gun, gas operated gun or spring gun, while such firearm or other gun is loaded; or any slingshot, bow or other device made for the purpose of throwing or projecting any arrow or missile of any kind by any means whatsoever, unless the same is unstrung or enclosed in a case or otherwise made inoperable. 
(C)  Unlawful discharge of a weapon: No person shall fire, discharge or otherwise use any revolver, pistol, shotgun or rifle, or any air gun, BB gun, gas operated gun, spring gun, stun gun, taser, slingshot, bow or any other device made for the purpose of throwing or projecting missiles of any kind by any means whatsoever, within the limits of the Village, except where the use of force which is intended to or likely to cause death or great bodily harm is justified in the manner defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/7-1 et seq. 
(D)  Exception for commercial shooting galleries: The prohibition against the possession of a loaded weapon and the discharge of a weapon set forth hereinabove in subsections (B) and (C) of this section shall not apply to prohibit the possession of a loaded weapon or the discharge of the same within a properly constructed commercial shooting gallery situated within the Village limits, so long as the weapon is fired, discharged or operated in such manner as not to endanger persons or property. 
(E)  Exception for authorized officials: The prohibition against the possession or discharge of a weapon as set forth in subsections (B) and (C) of this section shall not be construed to forbid duly authorized federal, state or local law enforcement officers from carrying, wearing or using such weapons as shall be necessary in the proper discharge of their duties. 
(F)  Display and sale of specified weapons: No person engaged in business shall display or place on exhibition in any show window, or other window facing upon any street, any pistol, revolver or other form of firearm with a barrel less than 18 inches in length or any brass or metal knuckles, or any club loaded with lead or other weight, or any blackjack or billy. 
(G)  Sales to intoxicated persons and minors prohibited: No person shall purchase from or sell, loan or furnish any weapon in which any explosive substance can be used to any person under the influence of alcohol or any narcotic drug, or to any person in a condition of agitation or excitability, or to a person under the age of 18 years. 
(H)  Confiscation and disposition of weapons: Upon conviction of a violation of subsection (B) or (C) of this section, a weapon which was used or possessed by the offender shall be forfeited to and confiscated by the trial court and disposed of by the trial court in the manner set forth in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/24-6(b) of the Illinois criminal code. 
(Ord. 2799, 8-9-1982) 
6-2-3.14. - Smoking in elevators. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke or carry a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or match, or any spark, or flame; or to ignite any fire producing device in any elevator in the Village. 
It shall be the responsibility of the owner or party controlling any elevator in the Village to display a "No Smoking" sign in the elevator. Failure to display a "No Smoking" sign shall be considered a violation of this section. 
Any person violating any provisions of this section shall be fined not less than $25.00 nor more than $500.00 for each offense, and each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. 1941, 4-28-1975) 
6-2-3.15. - Possession and delivery of drug paraphernalia. 
(A)  Definitions: The following words and phrases when used in this ordinance shall, for the purpose of this ordinance, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
CANNABIS: Marijuana, hashish and other substances recited in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/1 et seq., of the "Illinois cannabis control act". 
COCAINE SPOON: A spoon with a bowl so small that the primary use for which it is reasonably adapted or designed is to hold or administer cocaine, and which is so small as to be unsuited for the typical, lawful uses of a spoon. A cocaine spoon may or may not be merchandised on a chain and may or may not be labeled as a "cocaine" spoon or "coke" spoon. 
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE: Any drug or substance recited in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 570/100 et seq., of the "Illinois controlled substance act". 
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA: All equipment, products and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use, or designed for use, in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance in violation of 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/1 et seq., of the cannabis control act and 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 570/100 et seq., of the controlled substance act. It includes, but is not limited to: 
1.  Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of plant or fungi which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived; 
2.  Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing controlled substances; 
3.  Isomerization devices used, intended for use or designed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant or fungi which is a controlled substance; 
4.  Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose and lactose, used, intended for use, or designed for use in cutting controlled substances; 
5.  Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use, or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining, marijuana; 
6.  Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled substances into the human body; 
7.  Objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish oil, or opium and its derivatives into the human body, such as: 
Air driven pipes; 
Bongs; 
Carburetion tubes and devices; Carburetor pipes; 
Chamber pipes; 
Chillums; 
Cocaine spoons and cocaine vials; Electric pipes; 
Ice pipes or chillers; Marijuana or hashish pipes; Roach clips; 
Smoking and carburation masks; Water pipes. 
MARIJUANA OR HASHISH PIPE: A pipe characterized by a bowl which is so small that the primary use for which it is reasonably adapted or designed is the smoking of marijuana or hashish, rather than lawful smoking tobacco, and which may or may not be equipped with a screen. 
PERSON: Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
ROACH CLIPS: Objects used to hold burning material, such as a marijuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand. 
(B)  Possession of drug paraphernalia: It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of this ordinance. Any person who violates this section shall be fined not less than $25.00 nor more than $100.00 for each offense. 
(C)  Manufacture or delivery of drug paraphernalia: It is unlawful for any person to deliver, possess with intent to deliver, or manufacture with intent to deliver, drug paraphernalia, knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that it will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of this ordinance. Any person who violates this section shall be fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $250.00 for each offense. 
(D)  Delivery of drug paraphernalia to a minor: Any person 18 years of age or over who violates subsection (C) of this section by delivering drug paraphernalia to a person under 18 years of age who is at least three years his junior is guilty of a special offense and in violation of this ordinance. Any person who violates this section shall be fined not less than $250.00 nor more than $500.00 for each offense. 
(E)  Interpretation of evidence: In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a court or other authority should consider, in addition to all other logically relevant factors, the following: 
1.  Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning its use; 
2.  Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, under any state or federal law relating to any controlled substance; 
3.  The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct violation of this act; 
4.  The proximity of the object to controlled substances; 
5.  The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object; 
6.  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom he knows, or should reasonably know, intend to use the object to facilitate a violation of this act; the innocence of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, as to a direct violation of this act shall not prevent a finding that the object is intended for use, or designed for use as drug paraphernalia; 
7.  Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its use; 
8.  Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict its use; 
9.  National and local advertising concerning its use; 
10.  The manner in which the object is displayed for sale; 
11.  Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products; 
12.  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the object(s) to the total sales of the business enterprise; 
13.  The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the community; 
14.  Expert testimony concerning its use. 
(F)  Exempted persons: The prohibitions contained in this section shall not apply to licensed medical technicians, technologists, nurses, hospitals, research teaching institutions, clinical laboratories, licensed medical doctors, osteopathic physicians, dentists, chiropodists, veterinarians, pharmacists, or embalmers in the normal lawful course of their respective businesses or professions, nor to common carriers or their employees engaged in the lawful transportation of the foregoing recited items, nor to public officers or employees while engaged in the performance of their official duties, nor to persons suffering from diabetes, asthma, or any other medical condition requiring self-injection. 
(Ord. 2560, 5-12-1980) 
6-2-3.16. - Possession of cannabis. 
(A)  Definitions: The following words and phrases when used in this section shall, for the purposes of this section, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
CANNABIS: Includes marijuana, hashish and other substances which are identified as including any parts of the plant Cannabis sativa, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of such plant; and any compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of such plant, its seeds, or resin, including tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and all other cannabinol derivatives, including its naturally occurring or synthetically produced ingredients, whether produced directly or indirectly by extraction or independently by means of chemical synthesis or by a combination of extraction and chemical synthesis; but shall not include the mature stalks of such plant, fiber produced from such stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of such plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of such mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil or cake, or the sterilized seed of such plant which is incapable of germination. 
PERSON: Any individual, corporation, government or governmental subdivision or agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership or association, or any other entity. 
SUBSEQUENT OFFENSE: An offense under this section, the offender of which, prior to his conviction of the offense, has at any time been convicted under this section or under any laws of the United States or of any state relating to cannabis. 
(B)  Possession of cannabis; violations; punishment: It is unlawful for any person knowingly to possess cannabis. Any person who violates this section with respect to: 
1.  No more than two and five-tenths grams of any substance containing cannabis shall be fined not less than $25.00 upon conviction for the first offense and not less than $50.00 upon conviction for a second or subsequent offense. 
2.  More than two and five-tenths grams but not more than ten grams of any substance containing cannabis shall be fined not less than $35.00 upon conviction for first offense and not less than $75.00 upon conviction for a second or subsequent offense. 
3.  More than ten grams but not more than 30 grams of any substance containing cannabis shall be fined not less than $50.00 upon conviction for first offense and not less than $100.00 for a second or subsequent offense. 
(C)  Persistent abuse of drugs: It shall be prima facie evidence that any person who is less than 18 years of age at the time of a second or subsequent conviction of an offense under this section is a persistent abuser of drugs as defined in section 6-2-5.7 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2719, 12-14-1981) 
6-2-4. - Offenses by children. 
6-2-4.1. - Obtain liquor; identification card. 
Any person to whom the sale, gift or delivery of any alcoholic liquor is prohibited because of age shall not purchase or accept a gift of such alcoholic liquor or have such alcoholic liquor in his possession. 
If a licensee or his agents or employees believes or has reason to believe that a sale or delivery of any alcoholic liquor is prohibited because of the nonage of the prospective recipient, he shall, before making such sale or delivery, demand presentation of some form of positive identification, containing proof of age, issued by a public officer in the performance of his official duties. 
No person shall transfer, alter or deface such an identification card; use the identification card of another; carry or use a false or forged identification card; or obtain an identification card by means of false information. No person shall purchase, accept delivery or have alcoholic liquor in violation of this section. The consumption of alcoholic liquor by any person under 21 years of age is forbidden. 
(1975 Code; amd. Ord. 2741, 3-8-1982) 
6-2-4.2. - False statements. 
No person under the age of 18 years shall make false statements, or furnish, present or exhibit any fictitious or false registration card, identification card or note or other document issued to a person other than the one presenting the same, for the purpose of gaining admission to prohibited places, or for the purpose of procuring the sale, gift or delivery of prohibited articles, including, but not limited to, alcoholic liquor. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 12.24; amd. 1975 Code) 
6-2-4.3. - Procure unlawful services of others. 
No person shall engage or utilize the services of any other person, whether for remuneration or not, to procure for such minor any article which the minor is forbidden by law to purchase. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 12.24; amd. 1975 Code) 
6-2-5. - Offenses involving children. 
6-2-5.1. - Assault on child. 
No person shall assault any child under 16 years of age, or take indecent and improper liberties with the person of such child, or entice, allure or persuade such child into any room, office or any other place for the purpose of taking any immodest, immoral or indecent liberties with such child, or take any such liberties with the person of such child at any place. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 12.25) 
6-2-5.2. - Curfew. 
(A)  It is unlawful for a person less than 17 years of age to be present at or upon any public assembly, building, place, street or highway at the following times unless one of the exceptions listed in subsection (B) of this section applies: 
1.  Between one minute after 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Saturday and Sunday; and 
2.  Between one minute after 11:01 p.m. on Sunday to Thursday, inclusive, and 6:00 a.m. on the following day. 
(B)  This section shall not apply to any person less than 17 years of age who is: 
1.  Accompanied and supervised by a parent, legal guardian or other responsible companion of at least 18 years of age who is approved by the parent or legal guardian; 
2.  Engaged in a business or occupation which the laws of this state authorize a person less than 17 years of age to perform; 
3.  Attending or traveling to or from an official school, religious or civic activity; 
4.  Attending or traveling to or from any assembly activity for which a permit has been lawfully issued; 
5.  Involved in an emergency involving the protection of a person or property from an imminent threat of serious bodily injury or substantial damage; or 
6.  Any activity which involves the exercise of the minor's first amendment rights. 
(C)  Before issuing any citation pursuant to this section, the citing officer shall make a reasonable effort to determine whether the person is involved in any activity specified in subsection (B) of this section. If the officer determines that the person is involved in such an activity, then no citation shall be issued. If the officer reasonably believes that the person is not involved in such activity, then the officer may issue a citation for violation of this section. 
(D)  It is unlawful for any parent, legal guardian or other person to knowingly permit a minor in his custody or control to violate subsection (A) of this section. 
(E)  A person violating this section shall be issued a citation and fined no more than $500.00. 
(Ord. 5276, 7-26-2004) 
6-2-5.3. - Indecent exposure in child's presence. 
No person shall, in the proximity of any child under 16 years of age, indecently expose himself with intent to assault or ravish such child. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 12.28) 
6-2-5.4. - Purchase for minor. 
No person shall procure for any minor any article which the minor is forbidden by law to purchase. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 12.30; amd. Ord. 5352, 4-25-2005) 
6-2-5.5. - Wrongs to children. 
No person having the care, custody, control or confidence of, or influence over, any child shall willfully cause or permit the life of such child to be in danger, or the health of such child to be injured, or the morals of such child to be impaired; or shall willfully cause or permit such child to be placed in such a situation, business or occupation that his life, health or morals shall be endangered; or shall willfully abandon such child, or torture, torment, cruelly punish or willfully or negligently deprive such child of necessary food, clothing or shelter, or in any other manner injure such child unnecessarily. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 12.31; amd. Ord. 5352, 4-25-2005) 
6-2-5.6. - Minor residing away from home. 
(A)  Definitions: The following words and phrases when used in this ordinance shall, for the purposes of this ordinance, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
MINOR: Any person under the age of 18 years. 
RESIDING AWAY FROM HOME: Living with other than the child's parents or guardians, independent or departing the family home with intent to take up residence in such fashion. 
VALID CAUSE: Is declared to be: 
1.  The existence of circumstances within the family home wherein there is a threat to health, safety or welfare of the child in the event of continued residence therein; or 
2.  Where a court has ordered the child to reside elsewhere. 
(B)  Nuisance declared: It is a nuisance for an unemancipated minor to take up residence outside of the family home without the consent of the minor's parents or legal guardian without valid cause. 
(Ord. 2685, 8-24-1981; amd. Ord. 5352, 4-25-2005) 
6-2-5.7. - Persistent use of alcohol or drugs. 
(A)  Definitions: The following words and phrases when used in this ordinance shall, for the purposes of this ordinance, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
CANNABIS: Marijuana, hashish and other substances recited in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/1 et seq., of the Illinois cannabis control act. 
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE: Any drug or substance recited in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 570/100 et seq., of the Illinois controlled substances act. 
MINOR: Any person under the age of 18 years. 
PERSISTENT ALCOHOL OR DRUG ABUSE: The sale or use of alcohol, cannabis or a controlled substance by a minor on more than one occasion and the failure of said minor to successfully complete participation in a drug rehabilitation program. 
(B)  Nuisance declared: Persistent alcohol or drug abuse by a minor is a nuisance within this Municipality. 
(Ord. 2685, 8-24-1981; amd. Ord. 5352, 4-25-2005) 
6-2-5.8. - Rehabilitation of juvenile offenders. 
(A)  Applicability: This ordinance shall apply to the supervision and rehabilitation of any juvenile offender, and any minor charged with violating any statute of the state, or an ordinance of this or any other governmental body. 
(B)  Definitions: The following words and phrases when used in this ordinance shall, for the purposes of this ordinance, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
JUVENILE: Any person under the age of 17 years. 
JUVENILE OFFENDER: Any juvenile who has violated or attempted to violate any statute of the state, or an ordinance of this or any other governmental body. 
JUVENILE OFFICER: Any member of the Police Department of this Municipality, assigned by the Police Chief to investigate matters involving juvenile offenders. 
(C)  Juvenile officer(s); powers and duties: The juvenile officer(s) of this municipality shall be responsible for handling or referring matters involving the supervision and/or rehabilitation of juvenile offenders. To this end the juvenile officer may: 
1.  Place the juvenile offender or minor in the custody of his/her parent(s) or legal guardian without further action; or 
2.  Place the juvenile offender or minor under a program of supervision or rehabilitation, with or without scheduled meetings, with the juvenile officer, another person or an appropriate agency or organization; or 
3.  Refer the matter to the 18th judicial circuit court, DuPage County, Wheaton, Illinois. 
(D)  Disposition of cases: The 18th judicial circuit court, DuPage County, Wheaton, Illinois, may order a disposition of the case of a juvenile offender pursuant to the term, conditions and provisions of this ordinance. 
(E)  Recommendations: The juvenile officer may, as the individual case requires, submit to the court written recommendations pertaining to a program for supervision and/or rehabilitation of a juvenile offender or minor, including whether the juvenile offender or minor should be placed in a foster home during the period of supervision and/or rehabilitation. In the event the juvenile offender or minor is placed in a foster home pursuant to court order, reimbursement shall be made to the foster home in the manner provided by law. A foster home shall be deemed the equivalent of a shelter care facility. 
(F)  Criteria: The juvenile officer may use one or more of the following criteria in developing a program of supervision and/or rehabilitation: 
1.  The period of supervision and/or rehabilitation shall be reasonable under all of the circumstances of the case, but shall not exceed one year. 
2.  In addition to other reasonable conditions relating to the nature of the offense or the rehabilitation of the juvenile offender or minor, require that the juvenile offender or minor: 
(a)  Report to, and appear in person before, the court or such person or social service agency as ordered by the court; 
(b)  Pay a fine and costs; 
(c)  Work, perform compensatory public service, or pursue a course of study or vocational training; 
(d)  Undergo medical or psychiatric treatment or treatment for drug addiction or alcoholism; 
(e)  Attend or reside in a facility established for the instruction or residence of juveniles or minors on probation; 
(f)  Contribute to his own support; 
(g)  Refrain from possessing a firearm or other dangerous weapon; 
(h)  Reside with his or her parents or in a foster home, attend school, attend a nonresidential program for youths; 
(i)  Make restitution or reparation in an amount not to exceed actual loss or damage to property and pecuniary loss. The court shall determine the amount and conditions of payment. 
(G)  Order: Upon receipt of the written recommendations of the juvenile officer, the court may enter such order it deems appropriate. After entering the order, the court may defer further proceedings and the entry of any judgment on the charges against the juvenile offender or minor until the conclusion of the supervision and/or rehabilitation, if the court determines that the juvenile offender or minor has successfully complied with all of the conditions of the order, the court may discharge the juvenile offender or minor and dismiss the charges. Upon the conclusion of the period of supervision and/or rehabilitation, if the court determines that the juvenile has failed to successfully comply with the conditions of the order, the court shall enter a finding of unsatisfactory discharge, and may: 
1.  Terminate the proceedings; or 
2.  Refer the matter to the juvenile court for further proceedings. 
A disposition of supervision is a final order for the purposes of appeal. 
(H)  Petition: During the period of supervision and/or rehabilitation, any interested party may file a petition with the court charging a violation of the provisions of the court order. On receipt of such petition the court shall: 
1.  Reject the petition on its face due to lack of merit and/or substance; or 
2.  Order a summons for the appearance of the juvenile offender or minor; or 
3.  Order a warrant for the arrest of the juvenile offender or minor where there is belief that the juvenile offender or minor will flee the jurisdiction of the court or cause harm to another, or the juvenile offender or minor fails to answer a summons. 
Should the court find a petition charging a violation of the provisions of the court order appears to have merit, it shall conduct a hearing concerning the alleged violation. The interested party submitting the petition shall have the burden of going forward with evidence and proving the violation by a preponderance of the evidence. The evidence shall be presented in open court with the right of confrontation, cross examination and representation by counsel. 
In the event the court determines that the juvenile offender or minor has violated a condition of supervision and/or rehabilitation, the court may: 
1.  Continue the juvenile offender or minor on the existing program of supervision and/or rehabilitation, with or without modifying or enlarging the conditions thereof; or 
2.  Impose any other sentence provided by law. A judgment revoking a program of supervision and/or rehabilitation is a final appealable order. 
(I)  Revocation: Revocation of a program of supervision and/or rehabilitation shall not be based on a failure to comply with the conditions of a court order which imposes financial obligations upon the juvenile offender or minor, unless such failure is due to a willful refusal to pay. 
(J)  Modification to program conditions: The conditions of a program of supervision and/or rehabilitation may be modified by the court on the petition of the juvenile officer, the juvenile offender or minor, or on the court's own motion, after notice to all interested parties and after a hearing. 
(K)  Liability: Neither this Municipality nor any official, employee or agent thereof acting in the course of his official duties shall be liable for any tortious acts of any juvenile offender or minor placed on supervision and/or rehabilitation who is given any public service as a condition of a program of supervision and/or rehabilitation except for willful misconduct or gross negligence on the part of such governmental unit, official or employee. 
(L)  Compensation: No juvenile offender or minor assigned to a public service employment program pursuant to court order shall be considered an employee of this Municipality for any purpose, nor shall this Municipality be obligated to provide any compensation for any purpose, nor shall this Municipality be obligated to provide any compensation to such juvenile offender or minor, his parents or guardian. 
(Ord. 2686, 8-24-1981; amd. Ord. 5352, 4-25-2005) 
6-2-6. - Offenses involving morals. 
6-2-6.1. - Gambling. 
(A)  Participation prohibited: No person shall engage in a game of chance prohibited by the statutes of the state of Illinois or provisions of this code. 
(B)  Possession of materials: No person shall have in his possession any evidence of illegal gambling in the nature of policy or pool tickets, slips, checks or memoranda of any combination or bet, or any policy wheel, dice, implement, apparatus or material of any form of illegal gambling or lottery. 
(C)  Owner of premises: No person, being the owner or person in control of the premises, shall knowingly permit the use or occupancy thereof for gambling. 
(1965 Code § 12.33) 
6-2-6.2. - Lodging accommodations. 
(A)  Registration under fictitious name: No person shall write or cause to be written, or knowingly permit to be written, in any register in any hotel, lodging house, rooming house or other place whatsoever where transients are accommodated, any other or different name or designation than the true name of the person so registered or the name by which such person is generally known. 
(1965 Code § 12.35) 
6-2-6.3. - Obscenity. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit obscenity. 
(A)  Elements of obscenity: A person commits obscenity when, with knowledge of the nature or content thereof, or recklessly failing to exercise reasonable inspection which would have disclosed the nature or content thereof, he: 
1.  Sells, delivers or provides, or offers or agrees to sell, deliver or provide any obscene writing, picture, record or other representation or embodiment of the obscene; or 
2.  Presents or directs an obscene play, dance or other performance or participates directly in that portion thereof which makes it obscene; or 
3.  Publishes, exhibits or otherwise makes available anything obscene; or 
4.  Performs an obscene act or otherwise presents an obscene exhibition of his body for gain; or 
5.  Creates, buys, procures, or possesses obscene matter or material with intent to disseminate it in violation of this Code or of the penal laws or regulations of any other jurisdiction; or 
6.  Advertises or otherwise promotes the sale of material represented or held out by him to be obscene, whether or not it is obscene. 
(B)  Obscene defined: A thing is "obscene" if, considered as a whole, its predominate appeal is to prurient interest, that is, a shameful or morbid interest in nudity, sex or excretion, and if it goes substantially beyond customary limits of candor in description or representation of such matters. A thing is obscene even though the obscenity is latent, as in the case of undeveloped photographs. 
(C)  Interpretation of evidence: Obscenity shall be judged with reference to ordinary adults, except that it shall be judged with reference to children or other specially susceptible audiences if it appears from the character of the material or the circumstances of its dissemination to be specially designed for or directed to such an audience. 
Where circumstances of production, presentation, sale, dissemination, distribution or publicity indicate that material is being commercially exploited for the sake of its prurient appeal, such evidence is probative with respect to the nature of the matter and can justify the conclusion that the matter is utterly without redeeming social importance. 
In any prosecution for an offense under this Code evidence shall be admissible to show: 
1.  The character of the audience for which the material was designed or to which it was directed; 
2.  What the predominant appeal of the material would be for ordinary adults or a special audience, and what effect if any, it would probably have on the behavior of such people; 
3.  The artistic, literary, scientific, educational or other merits of the material, or absence thereof; 
4.  The degree, if any, of public acceptance of the material in this state; 
5.  Appeal to prurient interest, or absence thereof, in advertising or other promotion of the material; 
6.  Purpose of the author, creator, publisher or disseminator. 
(D)  Prima facie evidence: The creation, purchase, procurement or possession of a mold, engraved plate or other embodiment of obscenity specially adapted for reproducing multiple copies, or the possession of more than three copies of obscene material shall be prima facie evidence of an intent to disseminate. 
(E)  Affirmative defenses: It shall be an affirmative defense to obscenity that the dissemination: 
1.  Was not for gain and was made to personal associates other than children under 18 years of age; 
2.  Was to institutions or individuals having scientific or other special justification for possession of such material. 
(Ord. 2200, 5-23-1977) 
6-2-6.4. - Prostitution. 
(A)  Committing: No person shall commit, or offer or agree to commit, a lewd act or an act of prostitution or moral perversion. 
(B)  Securing: No person shall secure, or offer another, for the purpose of committing a lewd act or an act of prostitution or moral perversion. 
(C)  Meretricious display: No person shall make a meretricious display in or near any public place, any place frequented by the public, or any place open to the public view. 
(D)  Transportation: No person shall knowingly transport any person to any place for the purpose of committing a lewd act or an act of prostitution or moral perversion. 
(E)  Permitting: No person shall knowingly receive, or offer or agree to receive, any person into any place or building for the purpose of performing a lewd act or an act of prostitution or moral perversion, or to knowingly permit any person to remain in any place or building for any such purpose. 
(F)  Directing: No person shall direct, or offer to direct, any person to any place or building for the purpose of committing any lewd act or act of prostitution or moral perversion. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 12.37) 
6-2-6.5. - Solicitation of drinks. 
No female person shall frequent or loiter in any tavern, cabaret or nightclub with the purpose of soliciting money to purchase drinks. No proprietor or operator of any such establishment shall allow the presence in such establishment of any woman who violates the provisions of this section. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 12.38) 
6-2-6.6. - Vulgar language. 
No person shall use vulgar, profane or indecent language on any public street or other public place, or in any public dance hall, club, dance, skating rink or place of business open to public patronage. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 12.39) 
6-2-6.7. - Public indecency. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit a public indecency. 
(A)  Any person who performs any of the following acts in a public place commits a public indecency: 
1.  An act of sexual intercourse; or 
2.  An act of deviate sexual conduct; or 
3.  A lewd exposure of the body; or 
4.  A lewd fondling or caressing of the body of another person of either sex; or 
5.  Urinates or defecates in or on a public street, alley, sidewalk, yard, park, building, structure, plaza, public or utility right-of-way, or other public place other than a restroom, or in public view. 
(B)  "Public place" for purposes of this Code means any place where the conduct may reasonably be expected to be viewed by others. 
(Ord. 5533, 12-18-2006) 
6-2-7. - Mob action and civil disobedience. 
6-2-7.1. - Curfew. 
Whenever the Village President determines that an emergency exists, as a result of mob action or other civil disobedience, causing danger of injury to, or damages to, persons or property, he shall have power to impose, by proclamation, any or all of the following regulations necessary to preserve the peace and order of the Village. 
(A)  A curfew upon all or any portion of the Village, thereby requiring all persons in such designated curfew areas to forthwith remove themselves from the public streets, alleys, parks or other public places; provided, however, that physicians, nurses and ambulance operators performing medical services, utility personnel maintaining essential public services, firemen and Village authorized or requested law enforcement officers and personnel may be exempted from such curfew; 
(B)  Order the closing of any business establishments anywhere within the Village for the period of the emergency, such businesses to include, but not be limited to, those selling intoxicating liquors, cereal malt beverages, gasoline or firearms; 
(C)  Designate any public street, thoroughfare or vehicle parking areas closed to motor vehicles and pedestrian traffic; and 
(D)  Call upon regular and auxiliary law enforcement agencies and organizations within or without the Village to assist in preserving and keeping the peace within the Village. 
(Ord. 1586, 4-8-1968) 
6-2-7.2. - Proclamation. 
The proclamation of emergency provided herein shall become effective upon its issuance and dissemination to the public by appropriate news media. 
(Ord. 1586, 4-8-1968) 
6-2-7.3. - Duration. 
Any emergency proclaimed in accordance with the provisions of this section 6-2-7 shall terminate after 48 hours from the issuance thereof, or upon the issuance of a proclamation determining an emergency no longer exists, whichever occurs first; provided, however, that such emergency may be extended for such additional periods of time as determined necessary by the Village President. 
(Ord. 1586, 4-8-1968) 
6-2-7.4. - Police order. 
The Police Chief shall have authority to temporarily close any and all streets, alleys and other public ways in the Village to the public whenever, in his opinion, it is necessary in order to maintain the peace of the community. 
(Ord. 1586, 4-8-1968) 
6-2-8. - Damage to property. 
(A)  Definitions: 
LEGAL GUARDIAN: Shall include a person appointed guardian, or given custody, of a minor by a circuit court of this state or a court of foreign jurisdiction, but does not include a person appointed, or given custody of a minor under the Illinois juvenile act, chapter 37S701-1 et seq., or person given custody for school purposes only known as a "school guardian". 
MINOR: A person who is 11 years of age, but not yet 18 years of age. 
PERSON: Shall include any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization of any kind, including, but not limited to, municipality, school district or library district. 
PROPERTY OF ANOTHER: Any and all real estate, including improvements thereon, and any and all personalty, tangible or intangible, in which the offender has no interest therein. 
(B)  Offenses: No person shall, within the corporate limits of the Village of Glen Ellyn: 
1.  Knowingly damage any property of another person without his consent; or 
2.  Knowingly and willfully by means of fire or explosive, damage any property of another person; or 
3.  Knowingly start a fire on the land of another person without his consent; or 
4.  Knowingly deposit on the land or in a building of another person without his consent any stink bomb or other offensive smelling compound and thereby intend to interfere with the use by another of the land or building. 
(C)  Penalty: Whoever commits any of the heretofore stated acts shall be fined not in excess of $500.00. 
(D)  Restitution by parent or legal guardian of minor offender: The parent or legal guardian of an unemancipated minor defendant who resides with such parent or legal guardian shall be liable for actual damages for the willful or malicious acts of such minor which cause injury to a person or property. However, no recovery under this chapter may exceed $1,000.00 for each person injured or for each occurrence of such willful or malicious acts or malicious acts by the minor causing injury in addition to court costs. 
This chapter shall not affect the recovery of damages in any other cause of action where the liability of the parent or guardian is predicated on a common law basis. 
(E)  Court proceedings: In all court proceedings under subsection (D) of this section the Illinois civil practice act shall apply, and all actions shall be brought on behalf of the Village of Glen Ellyn and through the attorney for the Village and all damages shall be payable to the person or persons who have suffered actual damages. 
(F)  Severability: If any provision of this chapter or application thereof to any person or circumstance shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application and, to this end, the provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable. 
(Ord. 2156, 1-24-1977; Ord. 2670, 6-8-1981) 
6-2-9. - Smoking. 
(A)  Definitions: As used in this section, the below terms shall have the following ascribed meanings: 
BAR: An establishment that is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption by guests on the premises and that derives no more than ten percent of its gross revenue from the sale of food consumed on the premises. "Bar" includes, but is not limited to, taverns, nightclubs, cocktail lounges, adult entertainment facilities, and cabarets. 
EMPLOYEE: A person who is employed by an employer in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profits or a person who volunteers his or her services for a nonprofit entity. 
EMPLOYER: A person, business, partnership, association, or corporation, including a municipal corporation, trust, or nonprofit entity, that employs the services of one or more individual persons. 
ENCLOSED AREA: All space between a floor and a ceiling that is enclosed or partially enclosed with: 1) solid walls or windows, exclusive of doorways, or 2) solid walls with partitions and no windows, exclusive of doorways, that extend from the floor to the ceiling, including, without limitation, lobbies and corridors. 
ENCLOSED OR PARTIALLY ENCLOSED SPORTS ARENA: Any sports pavilion, stadium, gymnasium, health spa, boxing arena, swimming pool, roller rink, ice rink, bowling alley, or other similar place where members of the general public assemble to engage in physical exercise or participate in athletic competitions or recreational activities or to witness sports, cultural, recreational, or other events. 
GAMING EQUIPMENT OR SUPPLIES: Gaming equipment/supplies as defined in the Illinois gaming board rules of the Illinois administrative code. 
GAMING FACILITY: An establishment utilized primarily for the purposes of gaming and where gaming equipment or supplies are operated for the purposes of accruing business revenue. 
HEALTHCARE FACILITY: An office or institution providing care or treatment of diseases, whether physical, mental, or emotional, or other medical, physiological, or psychological conditions, including, but not limited to, hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals, weight control clinics, nursing homes, homes for the aging or chronically ill, laboratories, and offices of surgeons, chiropractors, physical therapists, physicians, dentists, and all specialists within these professions. "Healthcare facility" includes all waiting rooms, hallways, private rooms, semiprivate rooms, and wards within healthcare facilities. 
PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT: Any area under the control of a public or private employer that employees are required to enter, leave, or pass through during the course of employment, including, but not limited to, entrances and exits to places of employment, including a minimum distance of 15 feet from entrances, exits, windows that open, and ventilation intakes that serve an enclosed area where smoking is prohibited; offices and work areas; restrooms; conference and classrooms; break rooms and cafeterias; and other common areas. A private residence or home based business, unless used to provide licensed childcare, foster care, adult care, or other similar social service care on the premises, is not a "place of employment". 
PRIVATE CLUB: A not for profit association that: 1) has been in active and continuous existence for at least three years prior to the effective date of this amendatory act of the 95th general assembly, whether incorporated or not, 2) is the owner, lessee, or occupant of a building or portion thereof used exclusively for club purposes at all times, 3) is operated solely for a recreational, fraternal, social, patriotic, political, benevolent, or athletic purpose, but not for pecuniary gain, and 4) only sells alcoholic beverages incidental to its operation. For purposes of this definition, "private club" means an organization that is managed by a Board of Directors, executive committee, or similar body chosen by the members at an annual meeting, has established bylaws, a constitution, or both to govern its activities, and has been granted an exemption from the payment of federal income tax as a club under 26 USC 501. 
PRIVATE RESIDENCE: The part of a structure used as a dwelling, including, without limitation: a private home, townhouse, condominium, apartment, mobile home, vacation home, cabin, or cottage. For the purposes of this definition, a hotel, motel, inn, resort, lodge, bed and breakfast or other similar public accommodation, hospital, nursing home, or assisted living facility shall not be considered a private residence. 
PUBLIC BENCH: A place for multiple seating constructed of concrete, wood, metal or similar materials placed by or at the direction of the Village in municipal public rights-of-way. The area where smoking shall be prohibited shall be any surface of the bench where an individual is sitting, standing, reclining or resting any part of his or her body. 
PUBLIC PLACE: That portion of any building or vehicle used by and open to the public, regardless of whether the building or vehicle is owned in whole or in part by private persons or entities, the state of Illinois, the Village of Glen Ellyn, or any other public entity and regardless of whether a fee is charged for admission, including a minimum distance of 15 feet from entrances, exits, windows that open, and ventilation intakes that serve an enclosed area where smoking is prohibited. A "public place" does not include a private residence unless the private residence is used to provide licensed childcare, foster care, or other similar social service care on the premises. A "public place" includes, but is not limited to, hospitals, restaurants, retail stores, offices, commercial establishments, elevators, indoor theaters, libraries, museums, concert halls, public conveyances, educational facilities, nursing homes, auditoriums, enclosed or partially enclosed sports arenas, meeting rooms, schools, exhibition halls, convention facilities, polling places, private clubs, gaming facilities, all government owned vehicles and facilities, healthcare facilities or clinics, enclosed shopping centers, retail service establishments, financial institutions, educational facilities, ticket areas, public hearing facilities, public restrooms, waiting areas, lobbies, bars, taverns, bowling alleys, skating rinks, reception areas, and no less than 75 percent of the sleeping quarters within a hotel, motel, resort, inn, lodge, bed and breakfast, or other similar public accommodation that are rented to guests, but excludes private residences. 
RESTAURANT: An eating establishment, including, but not limited to, coffee shops, cafeterias, sandwich stands, and private and public school cafeterias, that gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests, or employees, and a kitchen or catering facility in which food is prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere. "Restaurant" includes a bar area within the restaurant. 
RETAIL TOBACCO STORE: A retail establishment that derives more than 80 percent of its gross revenue from the sale of loose tobacco, plants, or herbs and cigars, cigarettes, pipes, and other smoking devices for burning tobacco and related smoking accessories and in which the sale of other products is merely incidental. "Retail tobacco store" does not include a tobacco department or section of a larger commercial establishment or any establishment with any type of liquor, food, or restaurant license. 
SMOKE OR SMOKING: Carrying, smoking, burning, inhaling, or exhaling any kind of lighted or burning cigarette, cigar, pipe, hookah, weed or other lighted tobacco product or any other lighted smoking equipment in any manner or in any form. 
(B)  Smoking prohibited in public places and places of employment: 
1.  It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any public place, place of employment, or on a public bench within the Village of Glen Ellyn. 
2.  It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any place designated as a "no smoking area", as provided in subsection (D) of this section. 
3.  It shall be unlawful for an employer to knowingly permit smoking in any enclosed area in any place of employment. 
4.  It shall be unlawful for an employer, owner, occupant or lessee in control of a public place to knowingly permit smoking in any enclosed area in said public place. 
5.  It shall be unlawful for an employer, owner, occupant or lessee in control of a public place to fail to post signage or remove ashtrays, as provided in subsection (E) of this section. 
(C)  Exemptions: The prohibitions on smoking set forth in this section shall not apply to: 
1.  Hotel and motel sleeping rooms that are rented to guests and are designated as smoking rooms; provided that all smoking rooms on the same floor must be contiguous and smoke from these rooms must not infiltrate into nonsmoking rooms or other areas where smoking is prohibited under the provisions of this section. Not more than 25 percent of the rooms rented to guests in a hotel or motel may be designated as rooms where smoking is permitted. The status of rooms as smoking or nonsmoking may not be changed, except to add additional nonsmoking rooms. 
2.  Private vehicles, not including public transportation facilities or government vehicles. 
3.  Private residences or dwelling places except when used as a childcare, adult daycare, healthcare facility, or any other home based business open to the public. 
4.  Private and semiprivate rooms in nursing homes and long term care facilities that are occupied by one or more persons, all of whom are smokers and have requested in writing to be placed in a room where smoking is permitted. 
5.  Any public place or place of employment that is a tobacco dealer, whose principal business is the sale at retail of tobacco and tobacco related products; provided that smoke generated by smoking on the premises of the tobacco dealer does not infiltrate into enclosed areas where smoking is otherwise prohibited; and no food or liquor license has been granted. 
(D)  Designation of other no smoking areas: Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, any employer, owner, occupant, lessee, operator, manager, or other person in control of any public place or place of employment may designate a nonenclosed area of said public place or place of employment, including outdoor areas, as an area where smoking is also prohibited, provided that such employer, owner, lessee or occupant shall conspicuously post signs prohibiting smoking in the manner described in subsection (E) of this section. 
(E)  Responsibilities of proprietors: Each owner, lessee, occupant, employer or other person in control of a public place or a place of employment shall be responsible for all the following: 
1.  Post conspicuous signs no smaller than five inches by seven inches in enclosed areas and the entrance or vestibule to the public place, place of employment or the building wherein they are located, as the case may be, bearing the text "No Smoking" or the international "no smoking" symbol, which consists of a pictorial representation of a cigarette enclosed in a circle with a bar across it. Such signs shall also be posted outside of the main entrance to the public place or place of employment, shall reference the 15-foot buffer zone in which smoking is prohibited, and contain the telephone numbers of the designated enforcement authorities noted in this section, in addition to the telephone number and website designated by the Illinois department of public health for registering complaints. 
2.  Remove ashtrays or other similar containers intended for the deposit of tobacco ash, cigarettes, cigars or other tobacco products from public places. 
3.  Request any person who smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited to refrain from smoking, and if the person continues to smoke, request the person to leave. 
4.  Notify employees regarding the requirements of this section. 
(F)  Enforcement: 
1.  This section shall be enforced by the Village of Glen Ellyn Police Department. 
2.  Notice of the provisions of this section shall be given to all applicants for a business license in the Village of Glen Ellyn. 
3.  Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this section may initiate enforcement by contacting the Village of Glen Ellyn Police Department. 
4.  An employer, owner, lessee, manager, operator, or employee of an establishment regulated by this section shall inform persons violating this section of the appropriate provisions thereof and request that the violator cease smoking in a prohibited area and, if the person continues to smoke, request the person to leave. 
(G)  Penalties: 
1.  Any person who shall violate subsection (B)1. or (B)2. of this section shall, on conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of $100.00 for a first violation and $250.00 for any subsequent violations within one year. Each day in which a violation of subsection (B)1. or (B)2. of this section occurs constitutes a separate and distinct violation. 
2.  Any person who shall violate subsection (B)3. or (B)4. of this section shall, on conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of $500.00 upon conviction for the first violation and $750.00 for each subsequent conviction stemming from a violation within one year of the initial violation of subsection (B)3. or (B)4. of this section. Each day in which a violation of subsection (B)3. or (B)4. of this section occurs constitutes a separate and distinct violation. 
3.  Any person who shall violate subsection (B)5. of this section shall, on conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of $250.00 for each violation. Each day during which a violation of subsection (B)5. of this section continues beyond the specified time for correction shall constitute a separate punishable offense, although owners, operators, managers or other controllers of public places and places of employment shall be given a reasonable time to come into compliance with subsection (B)5. of this section following issuance of a notice of violation, but such period shall not, in any event, exceed one week. 
4.  In addition to the fines established by this subsection, violation of this section by a person who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise controls a public place or place of employment may result in the suspension or revocation of any permit or license issued to the person for the premises on which the violation occurred. 
5.  Violation of this section is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, which may be abated by an action in the circuit court for injunctive relief, or other means provided for by law, and the Village may take action to recover the costs of the nuisance abatement. 
(Ord. 5643, 12-17-2007) 
Chapter 3 - ANIMAL CONTROL 

6-3-1. - Cruelty to animals. 
No person shall cruelly treat or inhumanely beat, underfeed, overload or abandon any animal in the Village. 
(1965 Code § 5.01) 
6-3-2. - Dangerous animals. 
It shall be unlawful to permit any dangerous or vicious animal to run at large within the Village. 
Exhibitions or parades of animals, which are ferae naturae in the eyes of the law, may be conducted only after securing a permit from the Police Chief. 
(1965 Code § 5.02) 
6-3-3. - Animal noise disturbance. 
It is unlawful for anyone to keep or harbor any animal which by loud, frequent or habitual barking, howling, yelping, whining or other oral noises creates a noise disturbance so as to unreasonably disturb and cause annoyance to any person of normal sensibilities. Before a violation shall be considered to have occurred, the person charged must have been notified at least once in writing within 12 months of the incident that a noise disturbance has taken place. In determining whether a noise disturbance has occurred, the Village may consider an audiotape recording or videotape with audio recording taken by a person who will testify as to the time and place at which the recording was made. A "noise disturbance" is caused by any animal which barks or makes other oral noises for: 
(A)  Ten minutes or more in any one hour interval so as to disturb a reasonable person of normal sensitivities between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. The time shall be measured by adding together periods of time in which the barking or other oral noises occur within two minutes of each other. The noise disturbance must be observed or recorded from either public property, such as a parkway or street, or from private property upon which a structure occupied for human use is located; or 
(B)  Five minutes or more in any one hour interval so as to disturb a reasonable person of normal sensitivities between the hours of one minute past 11:01 p.m. and 6:59 a.m. The time shall be measured by adding together periods of time in which the barking or other oral noises occur within three minutes of each other. The noise disturbance must be observed or recorded from either public property, such as a parkway or street, or from private property upon which a structure occupied for human use is located. 
(Ord. 4622, 8-10-1998) 
6-3-4. - Removal of animal excrement. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit an animal under their ownership or control to be on any property, public or private, not owned by such person unless such person shall have in his possession a device for the removal of any excrement which may be deposited by such animal. Any person who owns or controls an animal which deposits excrement upon any property, public or private, not owned by such person shall promptly remove such excrement to a proper receptacle located on property owned or possessed by such person. This provision shall not apply to blind or physically handicapped persons using an animal for assistance. 
(Ord. 4929, 4-9-2001; amd. Ord. 5352, 4-25-2005) 
6-3-5. - Killing dangerous animals. 
The members of the Police Department are authorized to kill any dangerous animal when it is necessary for the protection of any person or property. 
(1965 Code § 5.05) 
6-3-6. - Diseased animals. 
No domestic animal afflicted with a contagious or infectious disease shall be allowed to run at large or to be exposed in any public place whereby the health of man or beast may be affected, nor shall a diseased animal be shipped or removed from the premises of the owner, except under the supervision of a licensed veterinarian. 
No diseased animal shall be brought into the Village. 
It shall be the duty of the Police Department to secure the disposition of any diseased animal and the treatment of affected premises to prevent the communication and spread of the contagion or infection in all cases where no veterinarian is employed by the owner of the diseased animal. 
(1965 Code § 5.06; amd. Ord. 5352, 4-25-2005) 
6-3-7. - Number of permitted dogs and cats. 
It shall be unlawful for more than three dogs or cats, or any combination thereof, to be housed within the Village unless the premises or property on which said dogs or cats are housed is a kennel or cattery as defined within the Zoning Code. 
(Ord. 5352, 4-25-2005) 
6-3-8. - Prohibited animals. 
It shall be unlawful to stable or house horses, ponies, burros, mules, goats, cattle, swine, sheep, chickens or other similar animals within the Village. 
(Ord. 5352, 4-25-2005) 
6-3-9. - Vaccination required. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful to own or keep within the Village any animal which has not been vaccinated for rabies as required under the DuPage County Code of ordinances. Evidence of vaccination shall be the serially numbered tag issued by DuPage County Animal Care and Control. Such tags shall be attached to the collar or harness worn by the dog for which the tag was issued when the dog is off the property of the owner. 
(Ord. 6481, 2-13-2017) 
6-3-10. - Running at large. 
No owner of a dog shall permit such dog to run at large within the Village or to leave the owner's premises unless the dog be led upon a leash or chain and in a manner which will prevent the dog from biting any person or other animal. 
(Ord. 3254, 10-14-1986; amd. Ord. 6481, 2-13-2017) 
6-3-11. - Impounding dogs. 
It is the duty of the Police Chief or his/her designee to capture and confine, at a location in the Village or in a pound furnished by the County of DuPage, every dog found at large within the Village. 
The Police Chief or his/her designee shall make a reasonable effort to identify and notify the last-known owner of the dog that the dog has been impounded. In any event that the owner of the dog could not be reunited with the last-known owner and the Police Chief or his/her designee determines that Village facilities are not available for continued impoundment, then the dog shall be delivered to DuPage County Animal Control. 
The owner of any impounded dog shall be responsible for any fine for violation of this Code or any other applicable fees or costs incurred to impound the dog, whether at Village facilities or at DuPage County Animal Control. 
(Ord. 6481, 2-13-2017) 
6-3-12. - Impounding, disposing of fierce dogs. 
When the Administrator receives information that any person has been bitten by a dog or other animal, the Administrator, or his authorized representative, shall have such dog or other animal confined under the observation of a licensed veterinarian for a period of ten days. The Department of Agriculture may, by regulation, permit such confinement to be reduced to a period of less than ten days. Such veterinarian shall report the clinical condition of the dog or other animal immediately, with confirmation in writing to the Administrator within 24 hours after the dog or other animal is presented for examination, giving the owner's name, address, the date of confinement, the breed, description, age and sex of such dog or other animal, on appropriate forms approved by the Department. The Administrator shall notify the attending physician or responsible health agency. At the end of the confinement period, the veterinarian shall submit a written report to the Administrator advising him of the final disposition of such dog or other animal on appropriate forms approved by the Department. When evidence is presented that such dog or other animal was inoculated against rabies within the time prescribed by law, it may be confined in the house of its owner, or in a manner which will prohibit it from biting any person for a period of ten days, if the Administrator, or other licensed veterinarian, adjudges such confinement satisfactory. The Department may, by regulation, permit such confinement to be reduced to a period of less than ten days. At the end of the confinement period, such dog or other animal shall be examined by the Administrator, or another licensed veterinarian. 
It is unlawful for any person having knowledge that any person has been bitten by a dog or other animal to refuse to notify the Administrator promptly. It is unlawful for the owner of such dog or other animal to euthanize, sell, give away, or otherwise dispose of any such dog or other animal known to have bitten a person, until it is released by the Administrator, or his authorized representative. It is unlawful for the owner of such dog or other animal to refuse or fail to comply with the written or printed instructions made by the Administrator, or his authorized representative. If such instructions cannot be delivered in person, they shall be mailed to the owner of such dog or other animal by regular mail, postage prepaid. The affidavit or testimony of the Administrator, or his authorized representative, delivering or mailing such instructions is prima facie evidence that the owner of such dog or other animal was notified of his responsibilities. Any expense incurred in the handling of any dog or other animal under this section shall be borne by the owner. For the purpose of this section the word "immediately" means by telephone, in person or by other than use of the mail. 
(1975 Code; amd. Ord. 6481, 2-13-2017) 
6-3-13. - Rabies. 
It shall be the duty of any person owning or keeping a dog suffering from rabies, or a dog bitten by any animal suffering from rabies, to surrender the dog to a Village Police Officer. 
(1965 Code § 5.17; amd. Ord. 6481, 2-13-2017) 
6-3-14. - Report of rabies. 
Every veterinarian or person who discovers a dog or other animal suffering with rabies shall report that fact immediately to the Police Department. This report shall give the name, if known, and the place of residence of the person owning or keeping such dog, and the place where the dog can be found and its license number, if known. 
The dog or other animal so infected shall immediately be taken and impounded until the Police Department can make, or cause to be made, an examination of the dog or other animal. If the examination discloses that the dog or other animal is suffering with rabies, it shall be immediately killed. 
(1965 Code § 5.18; amd. Ord. 5352, 4-25-2005; Ord. 6481, 2-13-2017) 
6-3-15. - Trial; owner of vicious dog. 
The owner or keeper of any dog within the Village that has bitten any person, caused an abrasion of the skin, or attempted to bite or snap at any person shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
If the defendant is found guilty, the court may stay execution and continue the cause to a day certain within which time the defendant shall have the dog destroyed. 
Upon a satisfactory showing to the court that the dog has been destroyed, the court may, in its discretion, cause a nonsuit to be entered. 
(1965 Code § 5.19; amd. Ord. 6481, 2-13-2017) 
6-3-16. - Cat regulations. 
(A)  Female cats in heat: The owner or keeper of a female cat who permits her, while in heat, to be upon a sidewalk, street, parkway or other public place, or upon private premises other than the premises of the owner or keeper, or upon the unfenced part of the premises of the owner or keeper which is closer to a sidewalk, street or parkway than ten feet, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
Upon conviction, the court may order the cat committed to a kennel at the owner's expense until her period of heat shall terminate. 
(B)  Capture and impounding cats: Any cat which disturbs the peace and quiet of a neighborhood, or is found running at large or abandoned in the Village, shall be deemed to be a public nuisance. 
The Police Department, immediately upon impounding such cat, shall register the color and sex of the cat and, if bearing an inoculation tag, the number of the tag shall be recorded. When any cat is impounded, the Police Department shall take reasonable steps to give notice, by mail or telephone, informing the owner of such cat of the impoundment. 
(C)  Redemption or disposal of cat: If any impounded cat is redeemed by the owner or keeper thereof, an impounding fee of $10.00 per day during its impoundment shall be paid by such owner or keeper; if any impounded cat is not claimed within five days, the cat may be disposed of in a humane manner. 
Anything in this section to the contrary notwithstanding, no cat suspected of having rabies shall be released within less than ten days following its impounding. 
(D)  Rabies control: Each cat which bites a person shall be promptly reported to the Police Department and, thereupon, shall be securely quarantined in a veterinary hospital for a period of ten days. Upon a demand made by a Police Officer, the owner shall immediately surrender for supervised quarantine any cat which has bitten a person or which is suspected of having been exposed to rabies, and the expense of such quarantine shall be borne by the owner. 
An owner or keeper of a cat which has bitten a person, or which is suspected of having rabies, who shall, upon demand by a Police Officer, refuse to immediately deliver such cat to the officer, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
The Police Department of the Village, upon receipt of any notification or report of a cat bite or that a cat has symptoms indicative of rabies, shall immediately determine, so far as possible, the identity of each person known or suspected to have been bitten by or come in contact with such cat, so that each person, his parents or guardian, may be given adequate warning. 
Every veterinarian or any person discovering any cat suffering from rabies shall immediately report this fact to the Police Department. This report shall give the name, if known, the place of residence of the person owning or keeping such cat, and the place where the cat can be found. The cat shall be immediately taken up and placed in a veterinary hospital for observation by a licensed veterinarian until the time of its death or recovery. In the event of its death, the head shall be removed, and a suitable pathological examination of the brain made to determine whether or not the cat died of rabies. 
The owner or keeper of a cat suspected of having, or having, rabies shall be liable for all veterinary and laboratory fees incurred pursuant to any provisions of this section. 
(Ord. 1597, 7-8-1968; amd. 1975 Code; Ord. 2148, 11-22-1976; Ord. 5352, 4-25-2005; Ord. 6481, 2-13-2017) 
Chapter 4 - FAIR HOUSING 

6-4-1. - Policy. 
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the Village and the purpose of this chapter, in the exercise by the Village of its Police and regulatory powers for the protection of the public safety, for the health, morals, safety and welfare of the persons in and residing in the Village, and for the maintenance and promotion of commerce, industry and good government in the Village, to secure to all persons living, or desiring to live, in the Village an equal opportunity to purchase, lease, rent or occupy housing regardless of color, national origin, race or religion. 
(Ord. 1593, 5-27-1968) 
6-4-2. - Severability. 
If any provision of this chapter, or the application thereof to any person or circumstances, is held invalid, the remainder of this chapter and the application of the provisions to other persons not similarly situated, or to other circumstances, shall not be affected thereby. 
(Ord. 1593, 5-27-1968) 
6-4-3. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases are defined as follows: 
ADVERTISE: To announce publicly, by posted sign, printed notice or any other means, that property is for sale or rent. 
BOARD: The President and Board of Trustees of the Village. 
COMMISSION: The Glen Ellyn Community Relations Commission. 
DISCRIMINATE: To categorically distinguish between persons on a basis of color, national origin, race or religion rather than individual merit. 
HOUSING ACCOMMODATION: Includes any building or structure, or portion thereof, which is used or occupied, maintained, arranged or designed to be used as a home. 
LEASE: Includes sublease, assignment and rental, and includes any contract to do any of the foregoing. 
LENDING INSTITUTION: Any bank, insurance company, savings and loan association, other persons in the business of lending money or guaranteeing loans, any person in the business of obtaining, arranging or negotiating loans as agent or broker, and any person in the business of buying or selling loans or instruments for the payment of money which are secured by title to, or a security interest in, real estate. 
MEDIATOR: A person designated by the board to act between parties at variance to effect an agreement, compromise or reconciliation under the provisions of this chapter. 
OWNER: Any person, firm, corporation, trust or association holding any interest in property which may be used for housing accommodations. 
PURCHASE: Includes any contract to purchase. 
QUALIFIED BUYER: Any person having the present financial ability to purchase or rent the housing accommodation selected, or a duly authorized attorney or real estate broker representing such person. 
REAL ESTATE BROKER: Any person who, for a consideration, acts as an employee or agent to manage or negotiate the sale, purchase or rental of any real property, or any interest therein. Real estate broker includes, but is not limited to, all persons required to be licensed pursuant to the provisions of 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes. 
REAL ESTATE SALESMAN: Any person licensed as a real estate salesman in accordance with the provisions of 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes, or who is required thereby to be licensed. 
REAL ESTATE TRANSACTION: The purchase, sale, exchange or lease of any real property, or interest therein, or any negotiations in connection therewith. 
(Ord. 1593, 5-27-1968) 
6-4-4. - Licenses. 
Before the license of a real estate broker is issued or renewed, the applicant shall file a signed statement with the Village Clerk that he has read this chapter and agrees to comply with its provisions, and that each real estate salesman employed by him has read, and will comply with, this chapter. 
(Ord. 1593, 5-27-1968) 
6-4-5. - Unlawful real estate practices. 
It shall be unlawful for any real estate broker, either by himself or his officers, employees or real estate salesmen, to: 
(A)  Make any substantial misrepresentation or engage in untruthful advertising in connection with any real estate transaction. 
(B)  Act for more than one party in a transaction without the knowledge and consent of all parties for whom he acts. 
(C)  Fail to furnish copies, upon request, of all documents relating to a real estate transaction to all parties executing the same. 
(D)  Pay a commission or any consideration to any person for acts or services performed, in violation of this chapter. 
(E)  Employ any person as a means of evading the law. 
(F)  Display a "FOR RENT" or "FOR SALE" sign on any property without the written consent of an owner or his authorized agent, or advertise any property for sale or for rent in a newspaper or other publication without the consent of the owner or his authorized agent. 
(G)  Fail, within a reasonable time, to provide information requested by the board, commission or mediator in connection with a complaint for a violation of this chapter. 
(H)  Perform any other act which constitutes a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1593, 5-27-1968) 
6-4-6. - Discrimination prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner who has advertised or listed his property for sale or rent or a real estate broker, salesman, lender, financial institution or advertiser, either by himself or through his officers, employees, agents or salesmen to: 
(A)  Discriminate against any qualified buyer in connection with any real estate transaction. 
(B)  Publish or circulate, or cause to be published or circulated, any notice, statement or advertisement, announce a policy, use any form of application for the purchase, lease, rental or financing of real property, or make any record or inquiry in connection with the prospective purchase, rental or lease of real property, which expresses, directly or indirectly any discrimination, or intent to discriminate. 
(C)  Discriminate by overcharging any qualified buyer for real property, or by changing conditions or privileges of any kind relating to a real estate transaction. 
(D)  Discriminate in connection with borrowing or lending money, guaranteeing loans, accepting mortgages, or otherwise obtaining or making available funds for the purchase, acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, repair or maintenance of any real property in the Village. 
(E)  Solicit or enter into any agreement for the sale, lease or listing for sale or lease of any real property within the Village on the ground of loss of value due to the present or prospective entry into any neighborhood of any person or persons of any particular race, religion, national origin or gender orientation, in violation of section 6-2-1.1 of this title. 
(F)  Distribute, or cause to be distributed, written material or statements designed to induce any owner of real property in the Village to sell or lease real property because of any present or prospective change in the race, religion, national origin or gender orientation of persons in the neighborhood. 
(G)  Make any statement that the presence, or anticipated presence, of persons of any particular race, religion, national origin or gender orientation in that area will, or may, result in the lowering of real property values in the area, block or neighborhood, in an attempt to obtain a listing for lease or sale, or the lease or sale, of any property. 
(H)  Refuse to sell or lease real property, or any interest therein, to a qualified buyer because of race, religion, national origin or gender orientation. 
(I)  Refuse to show to any qualified buyer who has specified his needs and demonstrated his ability to finance the purchase or lease of real property the list or other records identifying all real properties reasonably meeting such specifications. 
(J)  Aid, abet, incite or coerce any person to engage in unlawful housing practices. 
(K)  Willfully interfere with the performance of a duty or the exercise of a power by the commission, or one of its members or representatives. 
(L)  Willfully obstruct or prevent a person from complying with the provisions of this chapter, or an order issued thereunder. 
(Ord. 1593, 5-27-1968; amd. Ord. 5751, 4-27-2009) 
6-4-7. - Inciting discrimination. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to aid, abet, incite or coerce any other person to discriminate in the sale, purchase or rental of a housing accommodation. 
(Ord. 1696, 1-11-1971) 
6-4-8. - Limitations and exclusions. 
(A)  This chapter shall not apply to the rental of a room in any owner occupied single-family dwelling, or to the rental of a housing accommodation in an owner occupied duplex. 
(B)  Nothing in this chapter shall require an owner to offer for sale or lease real property to the public at large, nor shall this chapter be deemed to prohibit discrimination for any reason other than race, religion, national origin or gender orientation. 
(C)  Nothing in this chapter shall require a broker or owner offering real property for sale or lease to show such property to any person not negotiating for the purchase or lease of such real property in good faith, either for himself or his principal. 
(D)  Nothing in this chapter shall prevent an owner from taking his property off the market or removing it from any previous listing. 
(E)  An agent acting for an undisclosed principal shall be personally liable for the contract he makes. 
(Ord. 1593, 5-27-1968; amd. Ord. 5751, 4-27-2009) 
6-4-9. - Duties of Community Relations Commission. 
It shall be the duty of the Community Relations Commission to initiate, receive and investigate complaints charging discrimination; seek conciliation of such complaints or compliance by violators; and hold hearings, make findings of fact, issue recommendations, and publish its findings of fact and recommendations, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter: 
(A)  Any person aggrieved in any manner by a violation of any provision of this chapter may file a written complaint with the mediator. The complaint shall be under oath, addressed to the commission, and shall state: 1) the name and address of the complainant, 2) the name and address of the person against whom the complaint is brought, if known to the complainant, and 3) the facts surrounding the alleged violation of this chapter. Such complaint shall state the name and address of all persons believed to have knowledge concerning the alleged violation. 
The commission shall provide a printed form of complaint for the use of aggrieved persons. 
(B)  After the filing of the complaint, the mediator shall serve a copy of the complaint personally, or by certified mail, on the party or parties charged, and shall furnish a copy to the chairman of the commission. 
(C)  The mediator shall investigate the complaint; and if he determines that probable cause exists in support of the allegations of the complaint, he shall set a date for a meeting and notify the parties of the time and place thereof. At such meeting, the mediator shall interview the complainant and the person or persons against whom the complaint has been directed, and attempt to resolve the complaint by reconciliation. 
(D)  If the mediator is unable to conciliate the complaint, he shall notify the chairman of the commission within 30 days after the filing of the complaint, and the commission shall, within ten days, hold a hearing on the complaint, either by the full commission or by a three-member panel thereof, as determined by the chairman. 
(E)  If the mediator determines that no grievance exists, the complaint shall be dismissed. 
(Ord. 1593, 5-27-1968; amd. Ord. 1696, 1-11-1971) 
6-4-10. - Hearing by commission or panel. 
Hearings shall be conducted by the commission or a panel thereof, upon notice, by certified mail, to all parties. The conference shall provide a court reporter to take a transcript of the hearing. All evidence shall be under oath administered by an officer authorized to administer oaths. All parties, at their election, may be represented by counsel, and shall have the right to call witnesses and cross examine witnesses. If the hearing is conducted by a three-member panel, the panel shall furnish the commission with its findings of fact, its recommendations, and a transcript of the hearing. 
(Ord. 1593, 5-27-1968) 
6-4-11. - Action by the Commission. 
Within five days after the conclusion of a hearing, the commission shall take any one or more of the following actions: 
(A)  Resolve the complaint by conciliation; 
(B)  Dismiss the complaint; 
(C)  Make findings and recommendations to the board regarding revocation of license; 
(D)  Recommend that the board file a complaint in the circuit court for a fine, or a complaint to enjoin the violation and for other appropriate relief; or 
(E)  In the case of the violation of this chapter by any person in the course of performing under a contract or subcontract with the state, or any political subdivision or agency thereof, or with the United States of America, or any agency or instrumentality thereof, notify, by certified mail, such contracting agency for the purpose of causing it to terminate such contract, or any portion thereof, either absolutely or on condition of compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1593, 5-27-1968) 
6-4-12. - Action by board. 
The Board shall act upon the report or recommendation of the commission on or before the second meeting following receipt of such report or recommendation. 
(Ord. 1593, 5-27-1968) 
6-4-13. - Action by complainant. 
At any time after final action by the board, or after dismissal of a complaint by the mediator or commission, or in the event of the failure of the mediator, commission or board to act on a complaint within the time limits herein set forth, the complainant may file a complaint in the circuit court for appropriate relief for the alleged violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1593, 5-27-1968) 
6-4-14. - Time limit; file complaint. 
Any complaint shall be barred from consideration unless it is filed with the commission within 30 days after the alleged discriminatory practice occurred. However, it is recommended that all complaints be filed within seven days of the first knowledge of the alleged discriminatory practice. 
(Ord. 1593, 5-27-1968) 
Chapter 5 - PARADES; OPEN AIR MEETINGS 

6-5-1. - Permit required. 
No parade shall be allowed on any public way, nor shall any open air public meeting be held in or upon any public way, or upon any ground abutting upon any public way, until a permit therefor shall first be obtained from the Police Chief. 
Application to conduct such parade, procession or open air meeting shall be made in writing to the Village President and Board of Trustees at least 30 days prior to the event by the person or persons in charge or control thereof or responsible therefor; and such application shall set forth the desired route along which such parade or procession is to proceed, the desired time of starting, the duration, the name of the person or society in control thereof, and the purpose of such parade or procession. 
In the case of an open air meeting, such application shall specify the place at which it is desired to hold such meeting, the purpose thereof, the name of the person or society in control thereof, the time at which such meeting is to be held, and the probable duration thereof. Upon such application being made, the Police Chief shall investigate, or cause to be investigated, the person or society making such application and the truth of the statements made therein. 
(Ord. 1555, 11-13-1967) 
6-5-2. - Prohibited throwaways. 
No candy, gum, balloons, toy, promotional novelty or advertisement shall be tossed or pitched from any vehicle participating in a parade, except that such items may be distributed by persons walking or standing along the permitted parade route. 
(Ord. 1555, 11-13-1967) 
Chapter 6 - POLICE/FIRE ALARM SYSTEMS 

6-6-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to define, prevent and abate nuisances resulting from false alarms summoning the Police/Fire Department by establishing regulations and controls for the various types of privately owned Police and fire alarm devices designed to summon the Police/Fire Department to any location in response to a signal, whether the signal is visual, audible, transmitted, telephoned, radioed, or otherwise relayed, directly or indirectly, to the Police/Fire Department, by requiring permits therefor, by establishing fees and by providing for punishment of violations of provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2827, 10-25-1982) 
6-6-2. - Definitions. 
ALARM SYSTEM: Any signaling device which sends visual and/or audible signals, whether that signal is visually displayed or audibly sounded in or on the premises where the alarm is located or transmitted over a signal line to be registered by indicators at a monitor panel in a receiving terminal of the Police/Fire Department and/or alarm answering company's receiving location. 
ALARM USER: Any person on whose premises an alarm system is maintained within the Village except for alarm systems on motor vehicles or contained within proprietary systems which have the control system located within the premises and under the supervision of, and monitored by, the proprietor of the protected premises. 
AUTOMATIC PROTECTION DEVICE: An instrument which automatically sends a visual and/or audible alarm signal directly to the Glen Ellyn Police and/or Fire Department over regular public telephone lines upon detection of a fire, unauthorized intrusion, and/or medical emergency. 
CALENDAR YEAR: The period commencing on January 1 and ending on December 31 of each year. 
FALSE ALARM: The activation of an alarm system through electrical or mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation, or negligence of the owner or lessee of an alarm system or of his employees or agents. "False alarm" does not include alarm signals activated by violent conditions of nature, telephone line interruptions, acts of God, or other extraordinary circumstances not reasonably subject to control by the alarm user. 
YEAR: The period commencing on September 1 and ending on August 31 of each year. 
(Ord. 2827, 10-25-1982; amd. Ord. 5737, 3-9-2009; Ord. 5765, 6-8-2009) 
6-6-3. - Automatic protection devices prohibited. 
No person shall operate or maintain any automatic protection device which automatically transmits a signal, message or warning directly to the Glen Ellyn Police/Fire Department or its agents. 
(Ord. 2827, 10-25-1982) 
6-6-4. - Permit required. 
Each person within the Village who wishes to install, maintain or operate, in his home, place of business or other premises, an alarm system, calculated to directly or indirectly summon the Police or Fire Department, or that is connected directly or indirectly to the Police and/or Fire Department or to an alarm answering company's receiving location, shall obtain an alarm user's permit for each separate alarm system he wishes to operate. 
Without regard to the person who is the holder of the license, the person or persons who install, maintain or operate the alarm system, along with the owner of the property where the alarm system has been installed, shall all be subject to the obligations and responsibilities under this chapter, although only one of them shall be required to procure and update the information, which results in the issuance of a permit. 
(Ord. 2827, 10-25-1982; Ord. 5765, 6-8-2009) 
6-6-5. - Restrictions on alarm systems. 
The following restrictions shall apply to all alarm systems installed, maintained or operated in the Village: 
(A)  Each alarm system and any corresponding alarm indicator which terminates at the Police/Fire Department shall be used to report only one specific type of emergency; 
(B)  Each alarm system terminating at the Police/Fire Department must include a reversible relay which will indicate whether an alarm indication is due to a transmission line malfunction; 
(C)  No person shall conduct any test or demonstration of an alarm system without first obtaining permission from the Police Chief or his duly authorized agent, and test or demonstration without prior permission shall be deemed a false alarm; 
(D)  Each alarm system terminating at the Police/Fire Department shall be installed, maintained, or operated with a device which will prevent activation of the alarm signal during the process of turning on and/or off the alarm system; and 
(E)  Each alarm system which will include a bell, horn or other noise making device which is mounted on the exterior of a building, or can be heard outside the protected premises must be equipped with an automatic reset device which will reset the alarm system within 30 minutes of an alarm. 
(Ord. 2827, 10-25-1982) 
6-6-6. - Application for permit by alarm user. 
Applications for permits to install, maintain or operate an alarm system shall be filed with the Police Chief on forms supplied by the Police Chief, and accompanied with an application fee of $25.00, a first year permit fee of $25.00, and a signed statement of understanding concerning the responsibilities and duties of the alarm user. An annual alarm user permit fee of $25.00 shall be due and payable to the Village of Glen Ellyn on September 1 each year. Thereafter, if the alarm user permit fee is not paid for a renewal on or prior to September 1 of each year, the applicant shall be charged double the applicable user permit fee. First time user permits purchased during the course of a permit year shall not be subject to any late fees. Whenever, after March 1 of any year, application is made for the issuance of an alarm user permit, the applicant shall only be required to pay one-half of the applicable user permit fee. 
The annual alarm user permit fee shall be waived for any unit of local government or school district that makes application for an alarm user permit. 
(Ord. 5765, 6-8-2009) 
6-6-7. - Permit form. 
The application for alarm permit shall include the following: 
(A)  Names, addresses, telephone numbers, emergency telephone numbers and type of business organization (individual, partnership, corporation) of the alarm user; 
(B)  If the alarm user is a partnership, then names, addresses, telephone numbers of the partners; 
(C)  If the alarm user is a corporation, then names, addresses, and telephone numbers of the principal officers and the state where incorporated; 
(D)  The names, addresses and telephone numbers of key holders to the premises and alarm system who can respond to the alarm location as soon as possible, but not to exceed 45 minutes; and 
(E)  The name and address of the alarm installer. 
(Ord. 2827, 10-25-1982) 
6-6-8. - Permit nontransferable. 
Such permit shall not be transferable to any other person and shall be valid only for the particular premises identified in the permit. 
(Ord. 2827, 10-25-1982) 
6-6-9. - Permit term. 
A permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid until any one of the following events occurs: 
(A)  The person to whom the permit is issued no longer has immediate control of the premises for which the permit is issued; 
(B)  The person to whom the permit is issued no longer has immediate control of the business for which the permit was issued; 
(C)  The permit is voluntarily relinquished or surrendered to the Police Chief; or 
(D)  The permit is revoked in the manner provided for herein. 
(Ord. 2827, 10-25-1982) 
6-6-10. - Permit not warranty. 
The issuance of a permit shall in no way constitute a warranty of the alarm system involved and issuance of said permit shall be specifically subject to the Village's disclaimer of liability as detailed in section 6-6-16 of this chapter and further detailed in 745 Illinois Compiled Statutes 10/2-206 of the local governmental and governmental employees tort immunity act. 
(Ord. 2827, 10-25-1982) 
6-6-11. - False alarms. 
Each permit holder shall be responsible for any false alarm transmitted by the alarm for which the permit is issued and shall have someone present at the alarm location as soon as possible following notification by the Police Department or fire company, but not more than 45 minutes after such notification. The Police Chief shall maintain a record of all false alarms so transmitted and pursuant to the required notice and opportunity to be heard may revoke or suspend the permit for the operation of the alarm system involved in the transmission of four false alarms or more in any calendar year or may make reasonable charges therefor. 
(Ord. 5765, 6-8-2009) 
6-6-12. - Service charges for false alarms; exceptions. 
The Chief of Police shall not charge an alarm user permit holder for the first three false alarms during any calendar year. A false alarm fee of $50.00 for each false alarm in excess of three but less than nine in any calendar year, transmitted by an alarm system shall be charged to the holder of the alarm user permit. A false alarm fee of $100.00 for each false alarm in excess of eight but less than 11 in any calendar year, transmitted by an alarm system shall be charged to the holder of the alarm user permit. A false alarm fee of $200.00 for each false alarm in excess of ten per calendar year shall be charged to the holder of the alarm user permit. Such false alarm fees shall be payable to the Village of Glen Ellyn. 
No charge shall be imposed for false alarms that occur within 60 days after the initial installation of, or within 30 days after major alterations or additions to an alarm system. False alarms during the aforementioned time periods shall not count towards the total number of false alarms during any calendar year. 
(Ord. 5765, 6-8-2009) 
6-6-13. - Contested service charge. 
Each permit holder challenging a service charge for a false alarm shall be entitled to an administrative hearing in accordance with the provisions of title 1, chapter 11 of this Code. At an administrative hearing, the alarm user may offer evidence that an alarm activation, for which he is charged, falls within one of the permissible exceptions as described in section 6-6-12 of this chapter. Failure to request an administrative hearing within ten days of receipt of the statement of the false alarm charge shall constitute an admission that the service charge is justified and due to the Village. 
(Ord. 5765, 6-8-2009) 
6-6-14. - Revocation of permit. 
The Police Chief or his designated agent may revoke any permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter if he determines that the alarm system under said permit has been installed, maintained, or operated in violation of the provisions of this chapter or any term or condition of said permit. Such violations shall include, but not be limited to: 
(A)  Any information on the alarm user's permit application has been found to be false or misleading; or 
(B)  The Police or Fire Department receives more than four false alarms in any one calendar year; or 
(C)  If the permit holder fails to pay any service fee charged to the permit holder within 30 days of issuance of service fee charges; or 
(D)  If any alarm activation does not automatically reset in a 30-minute period after activation. 
The permit holder shall be given written notice of the pending revocation and provided an opportunity to effect compliance, or acceptable assurances or explanation, within a period of ten days following the issuance of the notice. If such compliance, assurance or explanation is not accomplished or accepted, the permit revocation, unless timely challenged, shall become effective on the date contained in the written notice. 
(Ord. 2827, 10-25-1982) 
6-6-15. - Contested revocation. 
Each permit holder challenging the revocation of an alarm user's permit shall be entitled to an administrative hearing in accordance with the provisions of title 1, chapter 11 of this Code. 
(Ord. 2827, 10-25-1982) 
6-6-16. - Liability of the Village limited. 
In the event that the Village deems it necessary to revoke or suspend the alarm user's permit, the Village shall incur no liability by such action, whether or not the alarm system is functioning. 
(Ord. 2827, 10-25-1982) 
6-6-17. - Penalties for violation. 
It is a violation of this chapter for any person to: 
(A)  Operate an alarm system of the type prohibited by this chapter; 
(B)  Operate an alarm system designed to summon the Police/Fire Departments without having a valid alarm user's permit as required by this chapter; or 
(C)  Fail to pay any service charge assessed under this chapter. 
Each such violation constitutes an offense punishable by a fine from $25.00 to $500.00. Each day that such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. 2827, 10-25-1982) 
Chapter 7 - AUXILIARY POLICE UNIT 

6-7-1. - Authorization of auxiliary Policemen. 
The Village President, with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, is hereby authorized to designate 35 auxiliary Policemen as employees of the Village. Prior to such designation, each proposed auxiliary Policeman shall be fingerprinted, and his fingerprints shall be checked with the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Washington, D.C., for a possible criminal record; and no person shall be designated as an auxiliary Policeman if he has been convicted of a felony or a crime involving moral turpitude. 
The services of an auxiliary Policeman may be terminated by the Village President, with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, at any time. 
(Ord. 2393, 9-11-1978) 
6-7-2. - Qualifications of member. 
An auxiliary Policeman shall not be a member of the regular Police Department of the Village, but shall be bound by its rules and regulations. 
Identification symbols worn by an auxiliary Policeman shall be selected by the Police Chief and must be different and distinct from those used by the regular Police of the Village. 
(Ord. 2393, 9-11-1978) 
6-7-3. - Powers and duties. 
An auxiliary Policeman, when called for duty, shall be subject to the direction and control of the Police Chief of the Village, and when assigned to duty, shall have the following powers and duties: 
(A)  Direct traffic and assist in traffic control; 
(B)  Aid in controlling natural or manmade disasters; 
(C)  Assist in parade control and keeping the peace at large gatherings in and about the community; 
(D)  Act in all cases of riot, civil disorder and emergencies; 
(E)  Perform normal and regular Police duties on occasions when it is impracticable for members of the regular Police Department to perform such duties; 
(F)  Arrest, or cause to be arrested, with or without process, all persons who break the peace or violate a municipal ordinance or criminal law of the state; 
(G)  Commit arrested persons for examination; 
(H)  If necessary, detain arrested persons in custody overnight or Sunday in a safe place or until they can be brought before the proper magistrate; 
(I)  Serve and execute warrants for violating municipal ordinances or state criminal laws within the limits of the Village and, for this purpose, have all the common law and statutory powers of sheriffs; and 
(J)  Exercise such other powers as conservators of the peace as the corporate authorities may prescribe. 
(Ord. 2393, 9-11-1978) 
6-7-4. - Firearms, permission to carry. 
An auxiliary Policeman shall not carry firearms except with the special permission of, and when issued by, the Police Chief, and then only while in uniform and engaged in performing his assigned duties. 
(Ord. 2393, 9-11-1978) 
6-7-5. - Weapons training course required. 
Prior to entering upon any duties, an auxiliary Policeman shall receive a course of training in the use of weapons and other Police procedures from the Police Chief of the Village. Such course of training shall be of not less than ten hours' duration; and upon completion of the training course, the Police Chief shall file a certificate with the Village Clerk attesting to the auxiliary Policeman's completion of the training course. 
(Ord. 2393, 9-11-1978) 
6-7-6. - Compensation. 
An auxiliary Policeman shall receive no compensation for services performed. 
(Ord. 2393, 9-11-1978) 
Chapter 8 - ACCESS AND REVIEW OF CRIMINAL HISTORY 

6-8-1. - Record information; fee. 
The rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to law by the law enforcement assistance administration of the United States Department of Justice and the Illinois Department of Law Enforcement shall govern the rights of individuals to access and review of their records. The fee charged for such review shall be $10.00, nonrefundable, and shall be payable at the time of submission of an application for access and review of said records. 
(Ord. 2172, 2-18-1977) 
6-8-2. - Access and review of records. 
Access and review of said records shall be from 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, except for Village holidays. 
(Ord. 2172, 2-18-1977) 
6-8-3. - Time limit for access, review of records. 
The right to access and review of said records is limited to 60 days from the date of making said records. 
(Ord. 2172, 2-18-1977) 
6-8-4. - Request sent to bureau. 
The Police Department shall send the request to the Illinois State Bureau of Investigation within seven days of said request. 
(Ord. 2172, 2-18-1977) 
6-8-5. - Process time by bureau. 
The Illinois State Bureau of Investigation shall be requested to process the form within 30 days. 
(Ord. 2172, 2-18-1977) 
TITLE 7 - HEALTH AND SANITATION 
Chapter 1 - HEALTH DEPARTMENT 
(Repealed by Ordinance 3829, April 22, 1991) 
Chapter 2 - NUISANCES 

7-2-1. - Nuisances. 
In all cases where no provision is hereby made defining what are nuisances and how the same may be removed, abated or prevented, in addition to what may be declared a nuisance herein, those offenses which are known to the common law and the statutes of Illinois as nuisances may, in case the same exist within the Village limits, or within one mile thereof, be treated as nuisances and proceeded against as provided in this Code, or in accordance with any other provision of law. 
(1965 Code § 11.01) 
7-2-2. - Abatement. 
It shall be the duty of the Building and Zoning Official to serve notice in writing upon the owner, occupant, agent or person in possession or control of any lot, building or premises, in or upon which any nuisance may be found, requiring him to abate the same in such manner and within the time prescribed by the Building and Zoning Official; provided, however, that if the owner, occupant, agent or person in possession or control of any premises in or upon which any nuisance is found is unknown or cannot be found, the Building and Zoning Official shall proceed to abate such nuisance without notice; and, in addition to any penalty or fine, the expense of such abatement shall be collected from the person who is determined to have created, continued or suffered such nuisance to exist. The Glen Ellyn Police Department and the street division of the Department of Public Works are also authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2482, 8-27-1979) 
7-2-3. - Definitions. 
It shall be a nuisance: 
(A)  To obstruct or encroach upon any street, parkway, alley or sidewalk in the Village, except for purposes of repairing the same; 
(B)  To use or occupy any part of a street, parkway, alley or sidewalk in the Village for the purpose of carrying on, soliciting or promoting any trade, business or other enterprise in such manner as to impede or make it dangerous to persons traveling thereon; 
(C)  To conduct, or permit any business to be conducted, upon any lot or parcel of land within the Village, in violation of any provision of this Code; 
(D)  To create or permit to remain any condition which is, or may become, a menace to the health of individuals or the public; 
(E)  To keep, or permit to be kept, upon any premises within the Village any chicken coop, chicken house, stable, kennel, pen or other structure for the retention, care and shelter of any fowl or animals in an unclean, unsanitary or filthy condition, so as to produce offensive and noisome odors, to the annoyance and discomfort of others; 
(F)  To cause or suffer the carcass of any dead animal, any animal or vegetable matter, slops, swill, suds, garbage, filth, stable drippings, offal or noisome substances of any kind to be collected, deposited or remain in any place in the Village to the injury or prejudice of others; 
(G)  To keep, or permit to be kept, upon any premises within the Village a dog, other animal or fowl which, by loud, frequent or continuous noise, is offensive and annoying to others; 
(H)  To erect or use any building or other place for the exercise of a trade, employment, manufacture or other purpose which, by occasioning noxious exhalations, offensive smells or otherwise, is dangerous to the health of the public; 
(I)  To cause or permit any premises within the Village to become or remain littered with refuse, rubbish, junk, waste, manure, straw, weeds, brush, machinery or parts thereof, or other like matter or things which may, or do, become offensive or dangerous to the health of others; 
(J)  To store, or permit to be stored, on any premises lumber, bricks, other building material, crates, cases or boxes, if said articles are piled to a height greater than the distance from such pile to the public way, but in no event to a height exceeding eight feet, unless said yard or lot is entirely surrounded by a fence eight feet in height; 
(K)  To abandon or discard, in any place accessible to children, any refrigerator, icebox or ice chest of a capacity of one and one-half cubic feet or more, having an attached lid or door which may be opened or fastened shut by means of an attached latch; 
(L)  To abandon or discard, in any place accessible to children, any unperforated polyethylene bags or coverings; 
(M)  To keep or use, or permit to be kept or used, any premises within the Village in such condition that rats, flies, noxious vermin or insects infest the same; 
(N)  To create or permit to remain upon any premises within the Village any offensive condition which is dangerous to the health or offensive to others; 
(O)  To corrupt or render unwholesome or impure the water of any spring, river, stream, pond or lake, to the injury or prejudice of others; 
(P)  To obstruct any watercourse, ravine or gutter so as to cause water to stagnate therein, or to permit foul or stagnant water to stand upon any premises, to the injury or prejudice of others; 
(Q)  To allow or permit any dense smoke to come or be emitted from the smokestack of any locomotive, steamroller, steam derrick, steam pile driver, tar kettle or other similar machine or contrivance, from the smokestack or chimney of any building, or from an open fire within the Village; 
(R)  To spread, or to cause any agent or employee to spread, any poison for the purpose of killing rats, mice, rodents, insects or other vermin in any public way or public place in the Village, in any yard, court, passageway or open place on private premises on the outside of any building or structure, or in any place in the Village, in any yard, court, passageway or open place on private premises on the outside of any building or structure, or in any place within a building or structure which is open to the general public where pet dogs, cats or other domestic animals or fowl have access, without placing the same in a receptacle of such kind or character that it can be reached only by the kind of vermin which the poison is intended to kill, or without placing a wire or other guard about the same in such a way that no child or domestic animal, fowl or other harmless creature can reach such poison; 
(S)  To spit upon any public sidewalk, the floor of any public conveyance or the floor of any theater, hall, assembly room or public building; 
(T)  To drop, throw, discard or place any cartons, containers, wrappers, bags, facial tissue, paper napkins or any other wastepaper, waste matter, cans or bottles upon any public way, the floor of any public conveyance or building, the surface of any lot or parcel of ground, the roof of any building, or in any light or air shaft, court or areaway; 
(U)  To cast, drop or throw any object, missile or other substance or article in, from or into any public place, thereby endangering the safety or property of others; 
(V)  To drop or deposit anywhere within the Village, except at such place as may be authorized by a written permit of the Board of Trustees, any garbage, ashes, miscellaneous waste, manure or other substance that may contain diseased germs, be scattered by the wind, decompose, or become filthy, noxious or unhealthful; 
(W)  To rent, use or permit the use of a building or premises for any business, pleasure or recreation which, by its boisterous nature, disturbs or destroys the peace of a neighborhood or is dangerous or detrimental to health; 
(X)  To fail to complete the construction or remodeling of any building within the term for which a building permit is issued, or any extension thereof, if the condition has a depreciating effect on property values in the neighborhood and to the injury and prejudice of others; or 
(Y)  To abandon or leave unattended any grocery cart or shopping cart upon any public street, sidewalk or public way, or upon the private property of any person adjoining or abutting any public way or sidewalk, other than premises where said cart was originally obtained. 
(Z)  To pay or attempt to pay any municipal fine or permit fee or make payment for any other goods or services with check, money order, currency or coin which has been soiled, contaminated, tainted or polluted with any human or animal bodily secretions, such as, but not limited to, blood, urine, semen, feces, mucus, spit or other human or animal waste or which has been soiled, contaminated, tainted or polluted with any foodstuff, adhesive, gluey, gooey, gummy or other material which causes the check, money order, currency or coin to be stuck together or which provides an offensive and/or annoying odor. 
(1965 Code § 11.03; Ord. 3996, 2-22-1993) 
7-2-4. - Weeds. 
(Repealed by Ordinance 3133, July 22, 1985) 
7-2-5. - Diseased trees. 
(Repealed by Ordinance 4670, December 14, 1998) 
7-2-6. - Smoking in stores. 
(Repealed by Ordinance 5751, April 27, 2009) 
7-2-7. - Removal of graffiti. 
(A)  The Village of Glen Ellyn declares "graffiti", as defined in subsection (D) of this section, as a nuisance and as a nuisance, subject to abatement as provided herein. 
(B)  Upon notification by the Village, the owner of property upon which graffiti has been illegally placed shall remove the graffiti within ten working days from the date of the notice. Each day that the graffiti is allowed to remain after the date by which it should have been removed will constitute an additional violation. An extension of the time in which graffiti must be removed may be granted by the Village upon application of the property owner to the Police Department and a showing of cause. Cause shall include, but not be limited to: weather, temperature, availability of chemicals, or physical limitations. 
(C)  The Village of Glen Ellyn, upon notification of graffiti placed upon Village property, shall remove the graffiti within ten working days from the date of notification. 
(D)  "Graffiti" shall be defined as the painting, inscription, drawing or otherwise placement upon the surface of any building or structural surface, such as a wall, fence or tree, that is publicly or privately owned of any sign, symbol, marking, drawing, name, initial, word, diagram, sketch, picture, or letter, which violates any Village ordinance or was not placed there at the owner's request. The above list is not all inclusive, but is merely illustrative of items known as graffiti. It shall be an affirmative defense to the alleged violation of the foregoing provisions if such activity was undertaken with the prior written consent of the owner of the property, demonstrating that the owner was aware of the content and methods of inscription to be placed on the structure or wall; however, no owner of property shall place or give permission to place on any property, real or personal which is in public view any sign, symbol, marking, drawing, name, initial, work, diagram, sketch, picture or letter, which violates the provisions of any Village ordinance or which incites violence by reference to gang or criminal activity, depicts or expresses obscenity by referring to sexual activity or contains defamatory material about a public or private person. 
(E)  Upon a finding of guilty for a violation of this section, there shall be imposed a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00. 
(Ord. 5616, 9-24-2007) 
Chapter 3 - FOOD VENDING MACHINES 

7-3-1. - Food vending machines. 
(A)  Definitions: 
AUTOMATIC FOOD VENDING MACHINE: Any mechanical container or device used for the sale of any article of food, the operation of which is governed or controlled by the deposit of a coin or token. 
FOOD: Any cooked or uncooked article of food, drink, condiment or confection used for, or intended to be used for, human consumption. 
INSPECTING OFFICER: Any person or agency designated by the President and Board of Trustees to make inspections under this chapter. 
(B)  License required: It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of installing, keeping or maintaining an automatic food vending machine without first having obtained a license so to do. 
No person shall install, keep, maintain or use, or permit the installation, keeping, maintenance or use upon his premises, of any automatic food vending machine owned or operated by another who has not obtained a license therefor. 
Nothing herein contained shall require a duly licensed food purveyor or food dispenser to procure a license for operating an automatic food vending machine owned by him and operated upon his premises. 
(C)  Application: Application for such license shall be made in conformity with the general requirements of this Code relating to application for licenses. 
In addition, the applicant shall set forth the types of automatic food vending machines intended to be operated, and such information as may be required by the inspecting officer in order to inform him as to the type or types of machines and the kind or kinds of food to be dispensed therefrom. 
Before any license shall issue, the type of vending machine intended to be operated shall be approved by the inspecting officer, who also shall cause an inspection to be made of the premises of the applicant to determine the character and fitness of the premises from the standpoint of ensuring protection of food from improper handling, dust, dirt, flies, vermin or other contamination. 
(D)  License fee: The annual fee shall be according to the following schedule: Each individually mounted or freestanding machine, the operation of which requires a coin not in excess of $0.10 the fees shall be $15.00 per machine. 
If more than one machine but not more than six machines are permanently installed on a common stand, whose overall size is not more than three feet wide nor more than five feet high, and each machine requires a coin not in excess of $0.10, then the fee shall be a minimum of $15.00 for the first machine on a common stand, plus for each machine in excess of one, the fee shall be $2.50 per machine. 
Each machine, the operation of which requires coins in excess of $0.10, whether freestanding or contained on a common stand, the fee shall be $25.00 per machine. 
(E)  Prohibited location: No automatic food vending machine shall be installed or kept for use in any toilet or washroom. 
(F)  Special regulations: All articles of food purveyed by means of an automatic food vending machine shall be clean, wholesome, free from taint, decay or infection, and shall contain no poisonous, deleterious or injurious ingredients, in kind and quantity, so as to render such articles injurious or detrimental to health. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 16.11; Ord. 2974, 3-26-1984; Ord. 3390, 11-9-1987) 
7-3-2. - Enforcement interpretation. 
This chapter shall be enforced by the Village President and Board of Trustees, with the aid of such persons as they may designate, in accordance with the interpretations thereof contained in the latest edition of the United States public health service code regulating eating and drinking establishments. Three copies of said Code shall be kept available for public use, inspection and examination at the office of the Village Clerk. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 16.12) 
Chapter 4 - MILK 
(Repealed by Ordinance 3390, November 19, 1987) 
Chapter 5 - ROOMING HOUSES 

7-5-1. - Definition. 
Whenever used in this chapter, the term "rooming house" shall mean and include every building furnishing lodging rooms, with or without meals, for persons who are not members of the owner's or keeper's family, for compensation, exclusive of hotels or motels. 
(Ord. 6163, 9-9-2013) 
7-5-2. - Compliance with zoning regulations. 
Any rooming house accommodating three or more persons who are not members of the owner's or keeper's family shall conform to the requirements of the zoning ordinance of the Village, as adopted in section 10-1-2 of this Code, in addition to the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1617, 10-28-1968) 
7-5-3. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, keep, manage or operate a rooming house without first obtaining a license therefor. The license herein provided for shall be posted at all times in a conspicuous place in the building. 
(Ord. 1617, 10-28-1968) 
7-5-4. - License fee. 
The license fee required under this chapter shall be the sum of $0.50 per year for each person for whom lodging space is to be provided for compensation, the minimum license fee being $1.00. 
(Ord. 1617, 10-28-1968) 
7-5-5. - Application for license. 
Written application for a rooming house license shall be made annually to the Village Clerk upon forms furnished by him, which application shall give the following information: 
(A)  Name and address of applicant, 
(B)  Address of rooming house, 
(C)  Person in whose name the license shall issue, 
(D)  Name and address of the owner of the building, 
(E)  Number of rooms in the building, 
(F)  Number of rooms to be rented, and 
(G)  Number of persons to be accommodated in each rented room. 
(Ord. 1617, 10-28-1968) 
7-5-6. - Approval of application. 
The Village Clerk shall submit all applications to the Building and Zoning Official, who shall be authorized by the application and the applicant to make an inspection of the premises, either personally or by his deputy; no license shall issue until the application has been approved by the Building and Zoning Official. 
The Building and Zoning Official shall determine whether all requirements of the Building, Electrical, Fire and Plumbing Codes and the zoning ordinance have been complied with, and that the premises are safe and suitable for habitation and are provided with adequate heat, light and ventilation facilities. 
If such inspection discloses that the premises do not comply with the provisions of this Code, the applicant may correct the deficiencies within ten days. 
Any applicant who is dissatisfied with the decision of the Building and Zoning Official may appeal, in writing, to the Village President and Board of Trustees. The President and Board shall review the decision appealed from at their next regular meeting, and either affirm of reverse the decision. 
(Ord. 1617, 10-28-1968) 
7-5-7. - Duration of license; limitations. 
All licenses granted hereunder shall be issued by the Village President, shall expire on July 31 in each year, and shall be nontransferable. 
(Ord. 1617, 10-28-1968) 
7-5-8. - Inspection. 
In addition to the inspection provided for in section 7-5-6 of this chapter, at least one other inspection shall be made during the license year. 
(Ord. 1617, 10-28-1968) 
7-5-9. - Cellar, basement occupancy. 
No license shall issue to any person for rooming house occupancy of a "cellar", as defined in the zoning ordinance of the Village; no license shall issue for basement, third floor or attic rooms in any building without the express written approval of the Village Board of Trustees. 
(Ord. 1617, 10-28-1968) 
7-5-10. - Bathroom and toilet facilities. 
Every rooming house shall provide toilet, lavatory and bathing facilities; there shall be at least one toilet stool for every six occupants, or fraction thereof. 
(Ord. 1617, 10-28-1968) 
7-5-11. - Airspace. 
No room in any rooming house shall be occupied as a sleeping room unless it provides at least 480 cubic feet of airspace and not less than 60 square feet of floor space per person for each person occupying such room. 
(Ord. 1617, 10-28-1968) 
7-5-12. - Floor area. 
No rooming house shall be operated with less than the following floor area: 
(A)  Where the number of persons lawfully living in the building does not exceed 20, there shall be 200 square feet of floor area for each person living therein; 
(B)  Where the number of persons lawfully living in the building exceeds 20, but does not exceed 30, there shall be 4,000 square feet of floor area, plus an additional 150 square feet for each person in excess of 20; and 
(C)  Where the number of persons lawfully living in the building exceeds 30, but does not exceed 40, there shall be 5,500 square feet of floor area, plus an additional 100 square feet for each person in excess of 30. 
For the purpose of determining the floor area requirements of this section, no child under five years of age shall be included in the number of persons lawfully living in the building. 
(Ord. 1617, 10-28-1968) 
7-5-13. - Light housekeeping. 
No person who shall keep, conduct, operate or maintain a rooming house shall permit the keeping or preparation of food in any living or sleeping rooms. 
(Ord. 1617, 10-28-1968) 
7-5-14. - Light and air. 
Window space in each rented room must equal, or exceed, ten percent of the floor area, and at least one window must face directly to the outdoors. All windows shall be provided with adequate screening to protect against insects. 
(Ord. 1617, 10-28-1968) 
7-5-15. - Accessory building. 
No accessory building, as defined in the zoning ordinance, shall be used for rooming house purposes. 
(Ord. 1617, 10-28-1968) 
7-5-16. - Private clubs, fraternities. 
All the provisions of this chapter shall apply to private clubs, fraternities and sororities. For the purpose of this chapter, a "private club, fraternity or sorority" is defined to mean a club of individuals banded together under a constitution recognized by a school, chartered by the State of Illinois as a corporation, or affiliated with a nationally recognized organization which owns its own real estate or is leasing real estate from the owner for a period of not less than one year. 
(Ord. 1617, 10-28-1968) 
7-5-17. - Off street parking spaces. 
Rooming houses accommodating more than three persons, in addition to the members of the family of the owner or keeper, shall provide parking spaces as required by the zoning ordinance. Rooming houses accommodating less than three such roomers shall provide at least two off street parking spaces. 
(Ord. 1617, 10-28-1968) 
7-5-18. - Interpretation. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be interpreted to be the minimum requirements adopted for the protection of the public health, safety, comfort and general welfare. 
Where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings for rooming house purposes than are imposed or required by the provisions of any other code regulations, the provisions of this chapter shall control. 
(Ord. 1617, 10-28-1968) 
Chapter 6 - SOLID WASTE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 

7-6-1. - Administration. 
All matters relating to or affecting the accumulation, collection, removal or disposal of wastes, and residential solid waste, unless specifically otherwise assigned elsewhere herein, shall be subject to and under the supervision of the Village Administrator unless specifically otherwise assigned by the Village Administrator. 
All reusable containers shall be subject to inspection and approval or condemnation by the Village Administrator. 
For the purposes of fulfilling the requirements of this chapter, the Village Administrator is hereby authorized and directed to cause all residential solid waste to be collected regularly and systematically at least once each seven days from all residences in the Village, except where weather may dictate otherwise. 
(Ord. 4399, 7-22-1996) 
7-6-2. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, definitions of certain terms shall be as listed below. Other terms shall be as defined within applicable subsections. 
BUNDLE OF E-WASTE: A bundle of E-Waste shall not exceed the size of a brown paper grocery bag of approximately 12 x 7 x 17 inches. 
COMPOST: Includes those items defined in "Yard Waste", and specifically, grass clippings, garden vegetation, leaves and brush, food scraps, bread, vegetables, table scraps, dairy, coffee grounds, and pasta. 
CURBSIDE: Adjacent to the street pavement, alley pavement, and gutter and within five feet thereof. 
DISPOSAL UNIT: 
(A)  For purposes of refuse collection, a "disposal unit" shall mean one watertight metal or plastic reusable waste container with handles, no larger than 33 gallons in capacity or 50 pounds in weight when filled; one plastic or paper bag, box, carton, or other disposable container not to exceed thirty 33 gallons in capacity and 50 pounds in weight when filled, securely tied or closed in such a fashion so as to prevent the littering, leaking, or scattering of refuse or debris; one securely tied bundle of refuse or debris which is not placed in a container and that does not exceed two feet in diameter, four feet in length, and 50 pounds in weight; or one single miscellaneous or odd shaped item of refuse or debris that does not exceed 50 pounds in weight. A "large household item", as defined in this section, is to be considered a disposal unit. 
(B)  For purposes of yard waste collection, a "disposal unit" shall mean one biodegradable two-ply, 50-pound wet strength Kraft paper bag designed for yard waste collection not to exceed 33 gallons in capacity and 50 pounds in weight when filled; one watertight metal or plastic reusable waste container with handles, no larger than 33 gallons in capacity or 50 pounds in weight when filled; or one securely tied bundle of brush or branches using biodegradable cord, string, rope, or twine that does not exceed 50 pounds in weight, two feet in diameter, and four feet in length. 
E-WASTE: E-Waste shall mean any item defined as a "covered electronic devise" by 415 ILCS 150, the Electronic Products Recycling and Refuse Act. E-waste shall include, but not be limited to, computers, computer monitors, televisions, printers, keyboards, fax machines, videocassette recorders, portable digital music players, digital video disc players, video game consoles, computer mice, scanners, digital converter boxes, cable receivers, satellite receivers, digital video disc recorders, or small-scale servers. 
HOUSEHOLD CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS OR DEBRIS: Waste materials from interior and exterior household construction, remodeling, and repair projects, including, but not limited to, drywall, plywood, paneling, lumber, and other building materials; windows and doors; cabinets; carpeting; disassembled bathroom and kitchen fixtures; and small amounts of sod, earth, clay, sand, concrete, rocks, and similar materials. Such debris shall conform to the following: loose small items shall be placed in suitable containers not exceeding 50 pounds in weight when filled or in bundles not exceeding two feet in diameter, four feet in length, and 50 pounds in weight. Materials not conforming shall not be considered as household construction and demolition debris and shall be subject to collection requirements as specified in subsection 7-6-3(J) and section 7-6-8 of this chapter. 
LARGE HOUSEHOLD ITEM (OR BULK ITEM): Any discarded and unwanted large household appliance and furnishings, including, but not limited to, refrigerators, freezers, stoves, trash compactors, washers, dryers, dishwashers, furnaces, hot water heaters, air conditioners, furnaces, humidifiers, dehumidifiers, microwaves, water softeners, pianos, organs, tables, chairs, mattresses, box springs, bookcases, sofas, and similar furniture. All white goods, including those containing CFCs (chlorofluorocarbons), switches containing mercury, and PCBs (polychlorinated biphenyls) shall fit within this definition. 
NONRESIDENTIAL SERVICE: Collection and disposal service provided to nonresidential, commercial properties and to any single-family or multi-family residential property located within a complex in which refuse generated from the residents is placed in a common waste container. 
REAR DOOR COLLECTION: Collection of disposal units from any location on a property which is not included in the definition of "curbside". 
RECYCLABLES OR RECYCLABLE MATERIAL(S): At a minimum, brown paper bags, corrugated boxes, frozen food packages, magazines and catalogs, mixed paper, newspaper, paperBoard, telephone books, wet strength carrier stock, aerosol cans, aluminum cans, aluminum foil, aseptic packaging and gable top containers, formed steel containers, glass bottles and jars, PET (#1) plastic containers, HDPE (#2) plastic containers, PVC (#3) plastic containers (generally health and beauty products), LDPE (#4) plastic containers (generally food products), PP (#5) plastic containers (generally food products), plastic 6- and 12-pack rings, PS polystyrene (#6), steel cans, steel paint cans and lids, and motor oil (in disposable containers), in addition to any other items which become acceptable at material processing facilities. 
REFUSE: All discarded and unwanted perishable and nonperishable household and kitchen waste, including, but not limited to, food, food residues, and materials necessarily used for packaging, storing, preparing, and consuming same, usually defined as "garbage", and all combustible and noncombustible waste materials resulting from the usual routine of domestic housekeeping, including, but not limited to, aluminum and steel cans; glass, plastic, crockery, and other containers; metal; paper of all types, including newspapers, books, magazines, and catalogs; boxes and cartons; cold ashes; furniture, furnishings, and fixtures; household appliances of all kinds; tires, textiles, and leather; dead animals and animal waste; toys and recreational equipment; and similar items. For the purposes of this chapter, the terms "garbage", "refuse", "rubbish", and "waste" shall be synonymous unless otherwise more specifically defined (for example, "yard waste"). 
RESIDENTIAL SERVICE: Collection and disposal service provided to single-family detached or attached (townhouse or duplex) residences that are not located within a complex in which refuse generated from the residents is placed in a common waste container (i.e., a dumpster or roll off). 
SCHOCK'S SQUARE CONSOLIDATED REFUSE PROGRAM: The Schock's Square Consolidated Refuse Program is established pursuant to the provisions contained and referenced in Resolution No. 18-08. 
STOP (OR HOUSEHOLD): Any single-family detached or attached (townhouse or duplex) residence that is not located within a complex in which refuse generated from the residents is placed in a common waste container. The term "stop" shall be synonymous with the term "household". In this instance, single households will be counted for the purpose of defining the extent of the collection services to be provided and of determining the amount of refuse, recyclables, and yard waste to be collected. 
YARD WASTE (ALSO KNOWN AS LANDSCAPE WASTE): Grass clippings, leaves, branches and brush, other yard and garden trimmings, vines, garden plants, flowers, weeds, tree droppings (for example, pine cones and crab apples), and other similar organic waste materials accumulated as the result of the cultivation and maintenance of lawns, shrubbery, vines, trees, and gardens. Sod, dirt, Christmas trees, and greenery from wreaths and garlands shall not be considered yard waste and shall be disposed of as refuse unless the composting facility will accept it. 
(Ord. 4399, 7-22-1996; Ord. 6513, 7-17-2017; Ord. 6592, 4-9-2018) 
7-6-3. - Residential solid waste collection and disposal service. 
(A)  Residential service required: Every person in possession of any residence in the Village shall, except as otherwise provided herein, be required to have accumulations of residential solid waste collected and disposed of regularly and systematically at least once each seven-day period by the contractor employed by the Village according to the type of service desired and the attendant fee as specified in subsection 7-6-4(A) of this chapter. The occupancy of any premises for residential purposes shall be prima facie evidence that residential solid waste is being produced and accumulated on such premises. The Village shall have the authority to inspect the premises and cause to be removed therefrom any and all residential solid waste found, for which collection and removal service the required fee, as established by this chapter, shall have been or shall be paid by the person in whose name the Village carries the water or sewer account, or both, for the subject premises. 
(B)  Authorization: At any residence, all residential solid waste shall be collected and disposed of by the contractor duly authorized by the Village and, except as otherwise may be provided for herein, shall not be collected or disposed of in any other manner. 
(C)  Exclusive contract: All residential solid waste shall be collected from all households within the Village by the contractor under exclusive contract with the Village. No persons shall use the services of any other scavenger. 
(D)  Types of service: 
1.  Refuse: All households located within the Village's corporate boundaries shall be provided with weekly curbside or rear door collection of refuse, household construction and demolition debris, and large household items. Residents will be allowed to place unlimited amounts of disposal units of refuse at the curb for collection and disposal. There shall be no sticker required for the first approved disposal unit of refuse set out for collection each week. However, the second and any subsequent disposal unit must be properly stickered, or refuse must be placed in approved prepaid bags that do not require stickers. 
2.  Recycling: All households located within the Village's corporate boundaries shall be provided with weekly curbside or rear door collection of an unlimited quantity of acceptable recyclable materials. Disposal units containing recyclable materials will not require stickers. 
3.  Yard waste: All households located within the Village's corporate boundaries shall be provided with weekly curbside collection only of yard waste. Yard waste collection shall begin each year on the first Monday in April and end on the first Monday in December. Yard and leaf waste set out for collection will be done so on a pay per disposal unit basis. Notwithstanding programs implemented by the Village to provide alternate means of collecting all or part of the yard and leaf waste stream, residents will be allowed to place unlimited amounts of disposal units of yard and leaf waste at the curb for collection as long as a sticker is attached to each disposal unit. 
4.  Composting: All households located within the Village's corporate boundaries shall be provided with the option of subscribing to curbside collection of compost. Collection shall be weekly during the months of April to November and biweekly December to March. Residents shall be allowed to place unlimited amounts of disposal units of compost at the curb for collection and disposal. There shall be no sticker required for the first approved disposal unit of compost set out for collection each week. However, the second and any subsequent disposal unit must be properly stickered. 
5.  E-Waste: All households located within the Village's corporate boundaries shall be provided with weekly curbside collection of E-Waste. Households must tag each E-Waste item or bundle of E-Waste items with the number of refuse stickers required. There shall be no maximum or minimum amount of E-Waste that a household can set out for collection, provided that each item is properly stickered. 
(E)  Use of disposal units: All households receiving the aforementioned services shall be required to place all materials for collection and disposal into proper disposal units. 
(F)  Special haul service for the Village : The contractor, as provided for in subsection (C) of this section, will furnish refuse trucks and drivers for special ("natural disaster") cleanup activities on the following basis: 
8/1/2018 through 7/31/2019 $180.25/hr./2 men/1 truck  
(G)  (Repealed by Ordinance 4940, April 23, 2001) 
(H)  Counterfeit stickers: It shall be a violation of the provisions of this chapter for any person to make, sell, give away or use a refuse, yard waste, or leaf sticker, tag or prepaid bag which shall counterfeit the actual sticker, tag, or prepaid bag sold by or on behalf of the Village or its contractor. 
(I)  Hours and standards of collection by contractors and scavengers: No collections shall commence before 7:00 a.m. nor continue after 7:00 p.m. in residential districts. All collections shall be made as quietly as possible. 
(J)  Debris from building contractor's operation: Solid waste accumulated from the operation of lot clearing and building contractor's construction debris caused by building, rebuilding or otherwise altering a building or structure shall be removed by the person or building contractor performing such work, except that the person or contractor may employ a scavenger licensed under the provisions of title 3, chapter 28 of this Code; provided such scavenger shall not remove residential waste generated by the occupants of any residential unit whether or not under repair or construction. Such scavenger need not be the contractor employed by the Village but shall be licensed by the Village. 
(K)  Hours for placement of containers: Residential solid waste shall be set out no earlier than 4:30 p.m. on the evening before collection is scheduled and no later than 7:00 a.m. on the day collection is scheduled. All containers and solid waste shall be removed from the specified location within 24 hours after the contractor has been present for the purpose of collection and disposal, and the contractor's refusal to collect such solid waste does not limit the requirements provided for herein. 
(Ord. 4399, 7-22-1996; Ord. 4785, 11-22-1999; Ord. 4940, 4-23-2001; Ord. 5357, 5-9-2005; Ord. 6039, 7-9-2012; Ord. 6513, 7-17-2017; Ord. 6617, 7-16-2018) 
7-6-4. - Residential solid waste collection fees. 
(A)  Residential collections : Effective on the August 1, 2018 Village Services Bill, the fees to be charged for residential solid waste collection and disposal services shall be as follows: 
      Monthly Base Rate 
Monthly refuse collection program: 
Curbside collection of one Village provided 35-gallon wheeled cart ..... $11.74 
Curbside collection of one Village provided 65-gallon wheeled cart ..... $15.51 
Curbside collection of one Village provided 95-gallon wheeled cart ..... $17.72 
Senior rate for curbside collection of one Village provided 35-gallon wheeled cart ..... $10.57 
Rear door collection of one Village provided 35-gallon wheeled cart ..... $19.91 
Rear door collection of one Village provided 65-gallon wheeled cart ..... $26.41 
Rear door collection of one Village provided 95-gallon wheeled cart ..... $26.41 
Senior rate for rear door collection of one Village provided 35-gallon wheeled cart ..... $17.92 
Curbside compost collection of one Village provided 35 gallon wheeled cart ..... $10.86 
Curbside compost collection of one Village provided 65 gallon wheeled cart ..... $12.64 
Curbside Compost collection of one Village provided 95 gallon wheeled cart ..... $15.73 
Monthly supplemental rate: 
In addition to the base rate, each account will also be charged a monthly fee for branch and brush collection, biannual clean sweep, toter replacement, account/billing administration, and any applicable recycling credit. ..... $3.08 
Individual sticker prices: 
Refuse Sticker ..... $2.58 
Yard waste ..... $2.58 
Leaf Sticker ..... $1.55 
Large household items (non-electronics) ..... 2 Refuse Stickers 
TV and monitors up to 25" ..... 10 Refuse Stickers 
TV monitors greater than 25" ..... 16 Refuse Stickers 
Bundles of electronic waste ..... 6 Refuse Stickers 
Single small electronic waste item ..... 2 Refuse Stickers 
(B)  Billing: The monthly fee for refuse and recycling services shall be billed by the Village to, and paid by, the person in whose name the Village water and sewer account then appears. The Village shall be responsible for collecting any and all delinquent accounts. Monies received in payment for the combined water, sewer, Fire Department service fee and solid waste bill will be credited first to any outstanding balances, then to the solid waste account fee, then to the Fire Department service fee, with the balance credited to the water and sewer fee. The Village may refund or adjust on a monthly pro rata basis an amount equal to such service paid for but not received. 
(C)  Nonresidential collections: Solid waste collection and disposal service for nonresidential establishments and residences for which nonresidential service is required shall be performed by scavengers fully licensed to operate in the Village in accordance with title 3, chapter 28 of this Code at such schedules and rates as may be mutually agreed upon between the licensed scavengers and such nonresidential accounts. 
(D)  Senior citizen collection rates: A senior citizen collection rate, where the head of the family unit is age 65 or older, shall be available only after application for such rate has been filed with the Cashier's Office. A person claiming eligibility for a senior citizen rate shall file an application certifying that the head of the family unit residing at the address is age 65 or older. The Village may require reasonable verification of the age, address, and head of family unit status of the applicant. The senior citizen rate shall not be retroactively applied to cause a rebate or reduction of an amount previously billed at the regular rate. 
(Ord. 4399, 7-22-1996; Ord. 6204, 12-9-2013; Ord. 6414, 6-27-2016; Ord. 6513, 7-17-2017; Ord. 6617, 7-16-2018) 
7-6-5. - Nonresidential solid waste collection and disposal service. 
(A)  Service required: 
1.  It shall be the duty of every owner of property for which nonresidential service is appropriate to provide for the collection and removal of all solid waste of any quantity whatsoever generated by such property with such frequency as is necessary to avoid health hazards or unreasonable accumulations of waste materials. 
2.  It shall be the duty of every property owner who provides for the collection and removal of such nonresidential solid waste to effect proper placement of nonresidential solid waste containers. 
3.  It shall be the duty of every owner of residential property for which nonresidential service is appropriate to provide for the separate collection and removal of recyclable material from the residents of the property. For purposes of this subsection, recyclable material shall include the following: at a minimum, brown paper bags, magazines and catalogs, mixed paper, newspaper, paperBoard, aluminum cans, glass bottles and jars, PET (#1) plastic containers, HDPE (#2) plastic containers, and steel cans. 
(B)  Containers: 
1.  Containers for such nonresidential solid waste shall be watertight, equipped with tightfitting covers and be so designed and maintained as to prevent waste deposited therein from being blown or scattered about. 
2.  All containers for such nonresidential solid waste shall be located in an area set aside for the storage and collection of such material; and when such area includes an enclosure or screen specifically identified for the purpose of shielding the containers, all such containers shall be wholly located therein or behind said enclosure or screen. 
(C)  Location: All areas set aside for the collection of nonresidential solid waste shall be so located as to not be unsightly in appearance and offensive in odor and shall be so maintained as to prevent substances from scattering and becoming windblown. 
(D)  Licensing Requirements: It shall be the duty of every property owner who provides for the collection and removal of nonresidential solid waste and recyclables to see that such collection is effected by a scavenger duly licensed to operate in the Village pursuant to this chapter as well as title 3, chapter 28 of this Code. 
(E)  Hours of operation by scavengers: The regulations outlined in subsection 7-6-3(I) of this chapter shall also apply to nonresidential collection and disposal. 
(F)  Hazardous materials: The applicable state regulations shall govern the removal and disposal of hazardous materials. 
(G)  Effective date: The provisions of subsection (A)3. of this section relating to the separate collection of recyclable material shall become effective November 23, 2000. 
(H)  Exemption for hardship: Property owners who believe that the collection of recyclable materials as described herein cannot be implemented at a certain location may petition the Village for an exemption from this requirement. Petition shall be made to the Environmental Commission by both the owner and hauler for the property and shall identify the specific hardship for which the waiver is requested and shall include all pertinent information for review. The petition should include information on what options were considered and the reasons they were excluded and a properly scaled site plan showing the location of all buildings, structures, utilities and other obstacles needed for consideration. In the event that the Environmental Commission should deny a petition for exemption from this requirement, the petitioner shall be allowed to appeal the decision to the Village Board within 30 days of the Environmental Commission decision. The Village Board shall affirm, reverse, or modify the decision of the commission. 
(Ord. 4785, 11-22-1999) 
7-6-6. - Disposal of solid waste other than by collection. 
(A)  Burning restricted; burying prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to burn solid waste within the Village except in accordance with chapter 7 of this title. Properly designed and installed kitchen garbage disposal units may be used for the disposal of garbage into the Village's sanitary sewer system. It shall be unlawful for any person to bury solid waste anywhere within the Village or to permit the same to be placed or accumulated at any place or manner other than in a proper container. 
(B)  Accumulation prohibited: It shall be unlawful for the occupant and/or owner of any premises in the Village to accumulate thereon litter, debris, scrap metal, solid waste, nonoperable motor vehicles or parts thereof. It shall be unlawful for any person to accumulate any solid waste, etc., on any premises except in compliance with the provisions hereof. 
(C)  Depositing solid waste containers on another's premises: Except where a bulk storage container is provided for the multiple occupants of one or more buildings or structures, it shall be unlawful for any person to deposit his garbage or refuse, or his residential solid waste, or his residential solid waste containers upon the property of another for the purpose of having such residential solid waste picked up by a scavenger. Any person committing this prohibited act shall be deemed to have committed the offense of littering. 
(D)  Duty to remove construction debris: It is the duty of the owner of any property to remove therefrom all construction debris. In the event such owner fails or refuses to remove such construction debris, the Village may elect to do so; and, in that event, the costs of such removal, if not paid upon written demand, shall be made a lien upon such property. 
(Ord. 4399, 7-22-1996) 
7-6-7. - Failure of owner to remove solid waste. 
If the owner of any private property in the Village upon which there is deposited any solid waste or other debris in violation of this chapter refuses or neglects to remove such solid waste or to have the same removed as herein provided, within seven days after sending of written notice by certified mail to the property owner to do so from the Village Administrator or his designee, the Village may remove such solid waste or other debris and may collect from such owner the reasonable cost thereof. 
Such cost shall be a lien upon the real estate affected, superior to all subsequent liens and encumbrances, except tax liens if, within 60 days after such cost and expenses are incurred by the Village, notice of lien is filed in the office of the County Recorder of Deeds. 
Such notice shall consist of a sworn statement setting out: a) a description of the real estate sufficient for identification thereof, b) the amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred or payable for the removal of service, c) the date or dates when such cost and expense were incurred by the Village, and d) the date when notice was served. 
Such Village's lien shall not be valid as to any purchaser whose rights in and to such real estate have arisen subsequent to removal of the solid waste or debris and prior to the filing of such notice, and said lien of the Village shall not be valid as to any mortgagee, judgment creditor or other lien whose right in and to such real estate arose prior to the filing of such notice. Upon payment of the cost and expense by the owner or persons interested in such property after notice of lien has been filed, the lien shall be released by the Village or person in whose name the lien has been filed, and the release may be filed of record as in the case of filing notice of lien. The lien may be enforced by proceedings to foreclose as in the case of mortgages or mechanic's liens. Suit to foreclose the lien shall be commenced within two years after the date of filing notice of lien. 
(Ord. 4399, 7-22-1996) 
7-6-8. - Collection and disposal of solid waste by scavengers. 
No person shall transport residential solid waste over the streets or other public ways in the Village unless such residential solid waste is contained in a leakproof vehicle approved and licensed by the Village. Such equipment shall be cleaned at sufficient frequency to prevent nuisance and insect breeding and shall be maintained in good condition and repair. 
A scavenger shall immediately clean up any residential solid waste, ashes or miscellaneous waste that it may have caused to spill in private or public places. Such cleanup shall be in a neat and workmanlike manner. Scavengers shall replace any reusable containers destroyed by their employees or agents. 
It shall be unlawful for any person owning or controlling any vehicle for the purpose of carrying, carting, hauling or transporting residential solid waste, ashes or miscellaneous waste to cause any of said substances to dump, fall or scatter on any public way or public place. 
Any vehicle and any box, can, or other receptacle thereon in which any of the substances above described are carried shall be constructed with a close fitting metal cover and shall be practically air and water tight so as to prevent any part of the contents thereof from falling, leaking, spilling or emitting any odor. 
It shall be unlawful for a vehicle used for carrying and transporting of residential solid waste, ashes, or miscellaneous waste to stand within 25 feet of any building or structure occupied by any person for a longer period of time than is necessary to load the vehicle. 
Each vehicle shall be kept in a sanitary condition, and it shall be the duty of the person in possession or control of the vehicle to immediately replace thereon any part of the contents thereof which falls, dumps or scatters from the vehicle while it is being loaded. 
No person shall dump or deposit residential solid waste, ashes, or miscellaneous waste anywhere within the Village except at such place as may be authorized by a written permit of the President and Board of Trustees. 
No person shall remove, collect, transport, dispose of or contract to remove, collect, transport or dispose of residential solid waste, ashes or miscellaneous waste without obtaining, prior to such removal, a license from the Village to do so. 
(Ord. 4399, 7-22-1996) 
7-6-9. - Theft of recyclables. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to collect, obtain, possess or pick up any recyclable material placed at the curb or other designated location for collection and disposal by the authorized contractor as provided for in subsection 7-6-3(C) of this chapter as part of the Village's residential solid waste collection and disposal services contract. 
(Ord. 4399, 7-22-1996) 
7-6-10. - Schock's Square Consolidated Refuse Program. 
Schock's Square Refuse Storage and Access: Businesses storing refuse containers that are serviced by haulers through and over the Village-owned Schock's Square property and that are not participating in the Schock's Square Consolidated Refuse Program shall abide by all applicable provisions of Title 7 Chapter 6 of the Glen Ellyn Village Code Section 10-5-5 (Wall, screen) in lieu of those provisions described in Resolution No. 18-08. 
(Ord. 6592, 4-9-2018) 
Chapter 7 - AIR POLLUTION 

7-7-1. - Definitions. 
Terms used in this chapter have the following meanings: 
AIR POLLUTION: The discharging from stacks, chimneys, exhausts, vents, ducts, openings, buildings, structures, premises, open fires, portable boilers, vehicles, processes or any other source of any smoke, soot, fly ash, dust, cinders, dirt, noxious or obnoxious acids, fumes, oxides, gases, vapors, odors, toxic or radioactive substances, waste, particulate, solid, liquid or gaseous matter, or other materials injurious to human, plant or animal life or property. 
COMBUSTIBLE REFUSE: Any combustible waste material containing carbon in free or combined state other than liquids or gases. 
DENSE SMOKE: For the purpose of testing and grading the density of smoke, the Ringelmann smoke chart is hereby adopted, and shall be used, as a standard for such grading. Smoke is hereby declared to be "dense" when it is of a degree of density of number two, or greater, of Ringelmann smoke chart for more than six minutes in an hour, whether such period of time is consecutive or not. 
OPEN FIRE OR BURNING: Any fire from which the products of combustion are admitted directly into the open air without passing through a stack or chimney. 
RINGELMANN CHART: The chart used in estimating the light obscuring capacity of smoke, published and described in the U.S. bureau of mines information circular 6888, on which are illustrated the graduated shades of gray to black. 
SMOKE: Small gasborne particles, consisting, predominately of carbon and other combustible material, resulting from incomplete combustion and present in sufficient quantity to be observable independently of the presence of other solids. 
STACK OR CHIMNEY: A vertical conduit, duct, vent or flue attached to a permanent structure. 
(Ord. 1681, 8-10-1970) 
7-7-2. - Emission of dense smoke. 
It is unlawful for any person to cause or permit the emission of dense smoke or fumes from any fire, chimney, engine, oil burner or any other agency in the Village which causes annoyance or discomfort to the residents thereof. 
The owner, proprietor, lessee or occupant of any building, or the person in charge of the furnace therein, who causes, permits or allows dense smoke or fumes to issue or be emitted from the smokestack of any stationary furnace, or the chimney or smokestack of any building in the Village contrary to the provisions of this Code, is guilty of creating a nuisance. 
(Ord. 1681, 8-10-1970) 
7-7-3. - Open burning. 
The open burning of leaves, brush, trimmings from trees or bushes, paper, garbage, refuse, waste or other combustible material on any property, public or private, from any source whatsoever, within the Village is unlawful and is hereby prohibited, with the exception of: 
(A)  Fires set and supervised or authorized by a representative of the Village, or a department thereof, for the disposal of diseased trees, public safety or recreation purposes, and 
(B)  Fires in outdoor fireplaces or burners when cooking food. 
(Ord. 1681, 8-10-1970) 
Chapter 8 - ABANDONED VEHICLES 

7-8-1. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter: 
DERELICT VEHICLE: Any inoperable, unregistered, discarded motor vehicle, regardless of title, having lost its character as a substantial property and left unattended without justification on the owner's land contrary to the public policy expressed in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5 /4-301 of the Illinois motor vehicles act. 
PROPERTY: Any real property within the Village which is not a street or highway. 
STREET OR HIGHWAY: The entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular traffic. 
VEHICLE: Any contrivance propelled by power other than human power designed to travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners or slides and transports persons or property or pulls machinery, and shall include, without limitation, automobiles, trucks, trailers, motorcycles, tractors, buggies, carts and wagons. 
(Ord. 1467, 6-13-1966; amd. Ord. 2519, 1-28-1980) 
7-8-2. - Abandonment prohibited. 
(A)  No person shall abandon any vehicle within the Village, and no person shall leave any vehicle at any place within the Village, for such time and under such circumstances which would reasonably cause it to appear that such vehicle was abandoned. 
(B)  No person shall leave any partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked, junked or discarded vehicle on any street or highway within the Village. 
(Ord. 1467, 6-13-1966) 
7-8-3. - Junked vehicles. 
No person shall allow any partially dismantled nonoperating, wrecked, junked, derelict, unregistered or discarded vehicle to remain on property over which he has control, either as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise, for longer than 24 hours, nor on any other property within the Village for longer than 12 hours; except that this shall not apply to a vehicle in an enclosed building, a vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful place and manner, when necessary to the operation of such business, or a vehicle in an appropriate storage place maintained in a lawful manner by the Village. 
(Ord. 2519, 1-28-1980) 
7-8-4. - Notice; remove; impound vehicles. 
(A)  Whenever a vehicle reasonably appears to be in violation of this chapter, a notice of violation shall be affixed to the vehicle by the Police Chief, or any member of the Police Department designated by him. 
(B)  The Police Chief, or any member of the Police Department designated by him, is hereby authorized, after a period of seven days from the date the notice of violation is affixed, to remove or cause to be removed, any vehicle found at any place within the Village which reasonably appears to be in violation of this chapter. Such vehicle shall be impounded until lawfully claimed or disposed of in accordance with 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/4-200 et seq. 
(Ord. 3389, 11-9-1987) 
Chapter 9 - SEWER USE REGULATIONS AND PRETREATMENT MONITORING 

7-9-1. - Definitions. 
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of the terms used herein shall be as follows: 
ACT: The federal water pollution control act, also known as the clean water act, as amended (33 USC 1215 et seq.), and/or the Illinois environmental protection act as the text requires. 
APPROVAL AUTHORITY: The designated approval authority shall be the regional administrator for USEPA region V. 
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF INDUSTRIAL USER: 
(A)  In the case of a corporation: 
1.  A President, Secretary, Treasurer or Vice President of the corporation in charge of a principal business function or any other person performing policy or decision making duties for the corporation; or 
2.  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding $25,000,000.00 (in second quarter 1980 dollars), if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
(B)  In the case of a partnership or sole proprietorship, a general partner or proprietor respectively; or 
(C)  In the case of a federal, state or local governmental facility, a Director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of activities at the facility or their designee. 
(D)  The individuals identified in subsections (A), (B) and (C) of this definition may designate an authorized representative if: 
1.  The authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates, or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the facility; and 
2.  The authorization is submitted in writing to the manager. 
BASELINE REPORT: That report required by 40 CFR section 403.12(b)(1-7). 
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD): The quantity of oxygen, expressed in mg/l, utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures as described in "Standard Methods", for the examination of water and wastewater. 
CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (COD): The quantity of oxygen consumed from a chemical oxidant (standard potassium dichromate solution) under standard laboratory procedures as described in "Standard Methods". 
CITIZENS UTILITIES: Citizens Utilities Company of Illinois, a corporation doing business within DuPage County. 
COMBINED SEWER: A sewer which is generally located in a public right-of-way or easement and is designed to carry wastewater and industrial waste, as well as storm water, directly or indirectly, to the POTW. 
COMPOSITE SAMPLE: A sample of wastewater based on a flow proportional or time proportional method. 
CONTROL MANHOLE OR STRUCTURE: A structure constructed for the purpose of measuring flow and of sampling waste. 
DIRECTOR: Public Works Director of the Village of Glen Ellyn, or his duly authorized representative. 
DOMESTIC SOURCE: A source of sanitary wastewater, as opposed to industrial wastewater, that is a primary residence for no more than four unrelated individuals or no more than four families. 
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA): The U.S. environmental protection agency or, where appropriate, the regional water management Director, or other duly authorized official designated as its representative. 
EXECUTIVE OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE: The executive oversight committee of the Glenbard Wastewater Authority, constituted in the intergovernmental agreement between the Village of Glen Ellyn and the Village of Lombard which created the Glenbard Wastewater Authority. 
EXISTING SOURCE: Any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior to the publication by the EPA of proposed categorical pretreatment standards which will be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with section 307 of the act. 
GARBAGE: The wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
GARBAGE, SHREDDED: The wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of foods that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-fourth inch in diameter. 
GLENBARD WASTEWATER AUTHORITY OR AUTHORITY: The joint venture formed by an intergovernmental agreement between the Village of Glen Ellyn and the Village of Lombard, as that agreement is amended from time to time. 
GRAB SAMPLE: A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one time basis without regard to the flow in the waste stream and without consideration of time. 
INDIRECT DISCHARGE OR DISCHARGE: The introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works (POTW) from any source regulated under section 307(b), (c) or (d) of the act, other than a domestic source. 
INDUSTRIAL USER: Any person who introduces pollutants into a POTW from any nondomestic source regulated under the act, state law, or local ordinance. 
INDUSTRIAL WASTE: Any liquid, gaseous, solid or other waste substance or a combination thereof resulting from any process of industry, manufacturing trade or business or from the development, processing or recovery of any natural resources. 
INTERFERENCE: A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, either: 
(A)  Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal; or 
(B)  Is a cause of violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations): section 405 of the clean water act, the solid waste disposal act (SWDA) (including title II more commonly referred to as the resource conservation and recovery act [RCRA]), and including state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the SWDA, the clean air act, the toxic substances control act and the marine protection, research and sanctuaries act. 
INTERMEDIATE USER: Any entity which owns or operates a sanitary sewage collection system: 
(A)  Which services multiple users; 
(B)  Is operated in easements or public rights-of-way; and 
(C)  Directly or indirectly discharges to the POTW. 
Intermediate users shall include, but not be limited to, Citizens Utilities, the County of DuPage and the Village of Villa Park. The Village of Lombard and the Village of Glen Ellyn are classified as primary users of the POTW. 
MANAGER: The facilities manager of the Glenbard Wastewater Authority. Whenever necessary to carry forth the provisions of this chapter, the manager shall be the agent of the Village when so acting. 
MAY: Is permissive. 
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD (NCPS): Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with section 307 (b) and (c) of the act (33 USC 1317), which applies to industrial users and which appears in 40 CFR chapter 1, subchapter N, parts 405-471. 
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM PERMIT (NPDES PERMIT): A permit issued pursuant to section 402 of the federal clean water act (33 USC 1342). 
NEW SOURCE: 
(A)  Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed "pretreatment standards" under section 307(c) (33 USC 1317) of the act, which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
1.  The construction is a site at which no other source is located; or 
2.  The process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source is totally replaced; or 
3.  The production of wastewater generating processes are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent factors, such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered. 
(B)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria of subsection (C)1.(a) or (C)1.(b) of this definition but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(C)  Construction of a new source as defined under this subsection (C) has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
1.  Begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous on site construction program: 
(a)  Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
(b)  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation of structures or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
2.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this subsection (C)2. 
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER: Water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product or final product. 
OVERHEAD SEWERS: A plumbing system having sewer lines from plumbing fixtures which are installed near the first floor elevation and routed to the service line at an elevation above the basement floor elevation. Drainage from all basement floor drains and fixtures must be routed to an approved, vented, ejector pump and pumped up into the overhead sewer through a check valve, which shall be accessible for maintenance, and shall be installed on a vertical stretch of the pump discharge pipe. 
pH: The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of hydrogen ions expressed in moles per liter of solution. 
POTW TREATMENT PLANT: That portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment (including recycling and reclamation) of wastewater and industrial waste. 
PASS THROUGH: A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation). 
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agent or assigns. The masculine shall include the feminine, the singular shall include the plural where indicated by the context. 
POLLUTANT: Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, or industrial, municipal and agricultural waste or any other contaminant exhibiting certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor). 
PRETREATMENT: The reduction, elimination, or alteration of pollutant properties to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharge or introduction into a POTW. This can be accomplished by physical, chemical, or biological processes, process changes, or other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR part 403.6(d). 
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS: Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a pretreatment standard, imposed on an industrial user. 
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS: For any specified pollutant, prohibitive discharge standards as set forth in section 7-9-26 of this chapter, specific limitations on discharge as set forth in section 7-9-27 of this chapter, the State of Illinois pretreatment standards or the applicable national categorical pretreatment standards, whichever standard is most stringent. 
PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM: Any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating wastewater on private property. 
PUBLIC SEWER: A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights and is owned, operated or controlled by a public body or a utility controlled by the Illinois Commerce Commission. 
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW): The Glenbard Advanced Wastewater Treatment Plant, the Lombard Combined Sewage Treatment Facilities, the North Regional Interceptor and the South Regional Interceptor. This definition includes any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature or that convey wastewater to the POTW regardless of ownership. 
SANITARY SEWER: A sewer which is generally located in a public right-of-way or easement and is designed to carry only wastewater and industrial wastewater from users, directly or indirectly, to the POTW, and to which storm, surface, and ground water are not intentionally admitted. 
SERVICE LINE: The sewer line connecting any building with the public sewer, and extends from the building to the point of connection with the public sewer main. 
SEWAGE: Water carried human or related wastes. 
SHALL: Is mandatory. 
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER (SIU): 
(A)  All industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under 40 CFR part 403.6 and 40 CFR chapter I, subpart N; or 
(B)  Any industrial user that: 
1.  Discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater); 
2.  Contributes a process waste stream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or 
3.  Is designated as such by the manager on the basis that the industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement (in accordance with 40 CFR part 403.6(f)). 
4.  Upon a finding that an industrial user meeting the criteria in subsection (B)2. of this definition has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the manager may at any time, on its own initiative, or in response to a petition from an industrial user, and in accordance with 40 CFR part 403.8(f)(6), determine that such industrial user is not considered a significant industrial user. 
SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE (SNC): 
(A)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which 66 percent or more of all of the measurements taken during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) the daily limit or the average limit for the same pollutant parameter; 
(B)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as in which 33 percent or more of all measurements for each pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
(C)  Any other violation of a pretreatment standard that the manager determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through (including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public); 
(D)  Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare, or to the environment or has resulted in the POTW's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(E)  Failure to meet, within 90 days after the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
(F)  Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, required reports such as, but not limited to, baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and progress reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(G)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; 
(H)  Any other violation or group of violations which the manager determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
SLUDGE: The settleable solids separated from the liquids during any wastewater treatment processes. 
SLUG: Any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature, including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or nonroutine batch discharge, which in either flow rate or pollutant concentration could cause a violation of section 7-9-27 of this chapter, or cause interference or pass through with the POTW. 
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION CODE (SIC): A classification pursuant to the "Standard Industrial Classification Manual" issued by the U.S. office of management and budget. 
STANDARD METHODS: The laboratory procedures set forth in the latest edition, at the time of analysis, of "standard methods" for the examination of water and wastewater prepared and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, and the Water Pollution Control Federation, and any other procedures recognized by the USEPA and IEPA. 
STORM SEWER: A conduit or sewer which carries storm water, but is designed to exclude wastewater and industrial wastes. 
STORM WATER: Any flow, including snowmelt, occurring during, following or resulting from any natural form of precipitation. 
SUSPENDED SOLIDS: The solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering. Refer to "standard methods" for the examination of water and wastewater. 
TOXIC POLLUTANT: Any pollutant or combination of pollutants identified as toxic pursuant to section 307(a) of the federal water pollution control act or other federal statute or in regulations promulgated by the state under state law. 
USER: Any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of wastewater, industrial waste or storm water to the POTW treatment plant. 
VILLAGE: The Village of Glen Ellyn, an Illinois Municipal Corporation in DuPage County. 
WASTEWATER: Liquid and waterborne industrial wastes and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to the POTW. 
WASTEWATER HAULER: Any person, partnership or corporation engaged in transporting sanitary wastewater as a commercial venture. 
WATERS OF THE STATE OF ILLINOIS: All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems, and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the State of Illinois or any portion thereof. 
(Ord. 4581, 4-13-1998, eff. 5-1-1998) 
7-9-2. - Scope of this chapter. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all users of any public sewer that directly or indirectly connects with any sewage system owned and operated by the Village so long as the users' discharge, directly or indirectly, contributes to the Village's portion of the POTW total flow. 
(Ord. 4581, 4-13-1998, eff. 5-1-1998) 
7-9-3. - Connection to public sewer required. 
The owner or occupant of any building for occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purpose situated within the corporate limits of the Village within the region served by the Glenbard Advanced Wastewater Treatment Facilities, and abutting on any street, alley, right-of-way or easement in which there is now located or may in the future be located any sanitary or combined sewer discharging into the POTW is hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper sanitary or combined sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within 90 days after the date of written notice to do so, provided that said sanitary sewer is within 250 feet (76.2 meters) of any property line. In the case of involuntarily annexed property, the time period for such connection may be extended as provided in subsection 7-11-31(D) of this title. 
(Ord. 4581, 4-13-1998, eff. 5-1-1998) 
7-9-4. - Private sewage disposal. 
Where a sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of section 7-9-3 of this chapter, a building shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system in the manner prescribed by the DuPage County Health Department, and/or state law. 
(Ord. 4581, 4-13-1998, eff. 5-1-1998) 
7-9-5. - Service line connection permit required. 
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with, or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any sanitary or combined sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a Village written service line connection permit from the Director for nonindustrial users and from both the Director and the manager for industrial users. This requirement for a service line connection permit shall apply to all sanitary sewers and combined sewers, whether located within or outside the Village limits, so long as the sewer discharge will, directly or indirectly, be part of the Village's portion of the POTW total flow. 
(Ord. 4581, 4-13-1998, eff. 5-1-1998) 
7-9-6. - Service line connection permits; permit procedure. 
(A)  There shall be two classes of service line connection permits: 
1.  Nonindustrial users; and 
2.  Industrial users. 
(B)  Prior to connection of any service line to a public sewer, including sanitary sewers and combined sewers, discharging directly or indirectly into the POTW, the owner or his agent shall make application on a form furnished as is necessary to allow the Director and the Manager to determine compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(C)  The service line connection permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the Director or the Manager. 
(D)  An industrial user, as a condition of permit authorization for a service line connection permit, must provide information describing its wastewater constituents, characteristics and type of activity. 
(E)  The issuance of a service line connection permit for a service line serving or capable of serving an industrial user shall confer no rights of use on any industrial user. Use of public sewers by an industrial user shall be conditioned upon the continued compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(F)  In addition to the requirements of this chapter, all connections to any sanitary sewer shall be subject to all requirements and permit procedures of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency (IEPA) and state and federal statutes, rules and regulations. 
(G)  Every industrial user or owner of property which has a service line capable of servicing an industrial user shall notify the Director of any change in industrial users, the wastewater constituents, characteristics or type of activity, no less than five days prior to the change. A copy of any notice of change received by the Director shall be sent to the Manager. 
(Ord. 4581, 4-13-1998, eff. 5-1-1998) 
7-9-7. - Sanitary sewer permits. 
(A)  No sanitary sewer or combined sewer designed to constitute an integral part of the sewer system which discharges directly or indirectly into the POTW shall be constructed or connected to directly or indirectly discharge into the POTW until the Director has been furnished with three sets of plans and specifications prepared by a registered professional engineer of the state and has recommended issuance of a sewer connection permit to the Village President. This requirement shall apply to all sanitary sewers and combined sewers, whether located within or outside the Village limits, so long as the sewer discharge will, directly or indirectly, be part of the Village's portion of the POTW's total flow. 
(B)  After approval of the permit by the Village President and by any other agency having jurisdiction over such permits, and payment of the applicable fees, and posting of the bond required by subsection (C) of this section, construction of the sewer and connection to an existing sanitary sewer may be commenced. 
(C)  In addition to all other requirements, any person constructing a sanitary sewer pursuant to this section shall post a surety bond in the principal sum of one and one-fourth times the construction cost as reasonably estimated by the Public Works Director and conditioned upon the faithful performance of the construction as shown in the approved plans, compliance with the provisions of this chapter and other applicable laws and ordinances, that all damage to the existing public sewer shall be repaired and that all streets, sidewalks, pavements and other public utilities will be restored to the same condition as existed before the work was undertaken. The bond shall continue in full force and effect for at least two years after issuance of the permit. 
(D)  No combined sewer shall be constructed or connected to the Village's sewer system. 
(Ord. 4581, 4-13-1998, eff. 5-1-1998; Ord. 5454, 4-10-2006) 
7-9-8. - Sewer connection bond. 
Each person making an application to connect a service line to the sanitary sewer system shall furnish a surety bond in the principal sum of $10,000.00 in a form approved by the Director, conditioned to indemnify and save the Village harmless from all costs, loss or damage caused in either the execution or protection of the work of making such connection, including all damage to persons or property; and, further, guaranteeing that the applicant, or persons employed by him, will conform to all conditions and requirements of this chapter, restore the street, sidewalks and pavement disturbed, and fill all excavations, so that the premises will be restored to the same condition as existed before the work was undertaken. The bond shall continue in full force and effect for at least two years after issuance of the permit. 
(Ord. 4581, 4-13-1998, eff. 5-1-1998) 
7-9-9. - Adequate capacity required. 
A service line connection permit shall not be issued and a connection to the sanitary sewer shall not be allowed if the downstream sanitary sewer does not have sufficient reserve capacity to adequately handle the additional, anticipated wastewater flow, as determined by the Director. 
(Ord. 4581, 4-13-1998, eff. 5-1-1998) 
7-9-10. - Costs of installation. 
All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of the service line shall be the responsibility of the owner. The owner shall indemnify the Village and the POTW from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the service line. 
(Ord. 4581, 4-13-1998, eff. 5-1-1998) 
7-9-11. - Separate service lines. 
A separate and independent service line shall be provided for at least every building. 
(Ord. 4581, 4-13-1998, eff. 5-1-1998) 
7-9-12. - Old service line. 
(A)  An old service line may be used in connection with a new building only when it is demonstrated by the owner or his representative to be of sufficient capacity, integrity and construction to meet the reasonable standards established by the Director and the Manager. If the old service line is not acceptable, it shall be replaced by the user. 
(B)  Sewer service lines which are abandoned or taken out of service for more than six months shall be disconnected from the sanitary sewer main at the main by the owner or applicant. All costs incurred for this work, including excavation and restoration, shall be the responsibility of the owner or applicant. 
(Ord. 4581, 4-13-1998, eff. 5-1-1998) 
7-9-13. - Construction standards. 
The service line shall be a minimum of six inches in diameter; it shall be vitrified clay, polyvinyl chloride (PVC), or cast or ductile iron in composition, as determined by the Director. A minimum slope of one percent and a maximum slope of ten percent shall be maintained. A larger service line may be required by the Director. The service line shall extend from the building to the sanitary sewer, where it shall be securely connected to the sanitary sewer. All methods of excavating, placing pipe, jointing and backfilling shall conform to the "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer Main Construction In Illinois". 
(Ord. 4581, 4-13-1998, eff. 5-1-1998) 
7-9-14. - Overhead service lines required. 
Overhead service lines are required as follows: A building drain system wherein the building drain exits the building at a minimum depth below the grade and has no openings flowing by gravity inside the building below the grade of the adjacent street in which the sanitary sewer is located shall be required within the Village for all new construction and remodeling of existing structures whenever remodeling constitutes over 50 percent of the value of the structure, prior to the work. 
(Ord. 4581, 4-13-1998, eff. 5-1-1998) 
7-9-15. - Lifting means. 
In all buildings in which any service line is too low to permit gravity flow to the sanitary sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such service line shall be lifted by a means which is approved in accordance with federal standards promulgated pursuant to the act and more stringent state and local standards, and discharged to the sanitary sewer. 
(Ord. 4581, 4-13-1998, eff. 5-1-1998) 
7-9-16. - Prohibited connections. 
No person shall make or maintain connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of storm water, surface runoff or ground water to a service line, which in turn is connected, directly or indirectly, to a sanitary sewer, to a combined sewer or to otherwise discharge into the POTW. 
(Ord. 4581, 4-13-1998, eff. 5-1-1998) 
7-9-17. - Storm sewer connection. 
For all new habitable structures, all building subsoil drain sump pump discharge pipes shall be connected to the storm sewer system wherever there is a storm sewer reasonably available for such connection or discharged onto the ground, at the discretion of the Director. This provision is not intended to require that storm sewers be extended to serve each and every lot in addition to providing adequate surface drainage of storm water. 
(Ord. 4581, 4-13-1998, eff. 5-1-1998) 
7-9-18. - Design criteria. 
The connection of the service line into the sanitary sewer shall conform to the requirements of the Glen Ellyn Plumbing Code, or other applicable rules and regulations of the Village, or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the "Water Pollution Control Federation Manual Of Practice No. 9" and "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer Main Construction In Illinois". All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. 
(Ord. 4581, 4-13-1998, eff. 5-1-1998) 
7-9-19. - Expiration of permits. 
A service line connection permit or a permit for extension of a sanitary sewer under which no work has commenced within 90 days after issuance shall expire by limitations, and a new permit shall be secured before work is started. All work commenced shall continue uninterrupted and be completed within 18 months from the date initial work commences. 
(Ord. 4581, 4-13-1998, eff. 5-1-1998) 
7-9-20. - Notice of connection. 
Before connection, the Director shall be notified when the service line is ready for inspection and connection to the sanitary sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the Director or his representative. 
(Ord. 4581, 4-13-1998, eff. 5-1-1998) 
7-9-21. - Construction barricades. 
All excavations for service line installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the Village. 
(Ord. 4581, 4-13-1998, eff. 5-1-1998) 
7-9-22. - Cost of maintaining service line. 
All users shall maintain and repair any service line from the user to the sanitary sewer, including any lifting means required by section 7-9-15 of this chapter, at their own cost and expense. Maintenance means keeping the sanitary sewer connection, service line, lifting means and other sewer facilities in satisfactory working condition and a good state of repair, including, but not limited to, preventing any obstruction, extraneous material or excessive flows of storm water from entering the service line, protecting the service line and facilities from any damage, keeping the service line and facilities free from defects or malfunctions and making necessary provisions and taking necessary precautions to assure that the service line and other facilities are at all times capable of satisfactorily performing the services and adequately discharging the functions and producing the final results and purposes, which the facilities are intended to perform, discharge or produce. 
(Ord. 4581, 4-13-1998, eff. 5-1-1998) 
7-9-23. - Prohibited waste deposits. 
No person shall place or deposit, or permit to be deposited upon public or private property within the Village or in any area under the jurisdiction of said Village, in any unsanitary manner, any human or animal excrement, garbage, industrial wastes, wastewater or other objectionable waste. 
(Ord. 4581, 4-13-1998, eff. 5-1-1998) 
7-9-24. - Prohibited discharges to natural outlets. 
No person shall discharge to any natural outlet within the Village, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the Village, any wastewater, industrial waste or other polluted waters, without a valid NPDES permit. 
(Ord. 4581, 4-13-1998, eff. 5-1-1998) 
7-9-25. - Discharge of storm water to sanitary sewer prohibited. 
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into any sanitary sewer system any storm water. 
(Ord. 4581, 4-13-1998, eff. 5-1-1998) 
7-9-26. - Other prohibited discharges. 
(A)  No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will result in interference with the operation or performance of the POTW or will pass through the POTW. 
(B)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any sanitary or combined sewer: 
1.  Any pollutant, whether solid, liquid or gas which may create a fire or explosion hazard in the collection system or the POTW, including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit (60 degrees Celsius), using the test methods specified in 40 CFR part 261.21. 
2.  Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to cause pass through or interference or to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process or equipment of the POTW, so as to constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant. 
3.  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than five and one-half or higher than ten or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage treatment plant or of interfering with any sewage treatment process. 
4.  Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the POTW such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, or the like, either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
5.  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature greater than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius); or which will inhibit or interfere with biological activity at the POTW, but in no case which causes the temperature upon introduction to the POTW to exceed 104 degrees Fahrenheit (40 degrees Celsius). 
6.  Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous materials, or oils, whether emulsified or not, in amounts that may cause pass through or interference, or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 degrees Fahrenheit and 150 degrees Fahrenheit (0 degrees Celsius and 65 degrees Celsius). 
7.  Any garbage, except shredded garbage as defined herein. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the Director. 
8.  Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the POTW, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the POTW effluent cannot meet the requirements of all agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
9.  Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems. 
10.  Any pollutant, including, but not limited to, oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD 5 , etc.), discharged at a flow rate and/or concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with the POTW. 
11.  Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the manager. 
12.  Wastewater which, either alone or in conjunction with other sources, will cause the receiving POTW's effluent to fail a toxicity test. 
13.  Detergents, soaps, surfactants or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW or pass through its effluent. 
14.  Any discharge which, either at the point of discharge into the POTW, or at any point within the POTW, causes two readings on an explosion meter of more than ten percent, or any single reading in excess of 20 percent of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter. 
15.  Hazardous wastes as defined under 40 CFR part 261. 
(Ord. 4581, 4-13-1998, eff. 5-1-1998) 
7-9-27. - Specific limitations on certain discharges. 
Discharges from each separate discharge of a user, as measured under the provisions of this chapter, shall not contain in excess of the following concentrations based upon a 24-hour composite sample, or from a grab sample where indicated. Multiple industrial wastewater discharges from a permitted facility may be combined in a flow weighted manner to determine compliance with the following limitations: 
Pollutant Maximum Concentration Arsenic 0.60 mg/l Cadmium 5.0 mg/l Chromium (total) 1.5 mg/l Copper 2.0 mg/l Lead 0.50 mg/l Manganese 2.0 mg/l Mercury 0.0005 mg/l Nickel 2.0 mg/l Selenium 1.30 mg/l Silver 0.1 mg/l Zinc 7.0 mg/l  
Data for the parameters listed above shall be obtained from a 24-hour composite sample. 
Pollutant Maximum Concentration Chromium (hexavalent) 0.1 mg/l Cyanide 0.34 mg/l Fats, oil and grease (hexane soluble or equivalent) 100.0 mg/l pH >5.5 STD 
<10.0 units Ignitability Any discharge with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit (60 degrees Celsius)  
Data for the above listed parameters shall be obtained from a grab sample. 
Compliance with the limits listed herein are mandatory for all industrial users. The manager shall make annual reports to the Village recommending amendments to the specific limitations, as necessary to protect the POTW. 
(Ord. 4581, 4-13-1998, eff. 5-1-1998) 
7-9-28. - Stricter standards required. 
(A)  The national categorical pretreatment standards of the USEPA as listed in 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N, parts 405-471 are hereby incorporated. 
(B)  Upon promulgation and incorporation of a national categorical pretreatment standard for a particular industrial category, said standard, when effective, shall be enforceable under the provisions of this chapter. The manager shall notify all known affected users of the applicable reporting requirements listed under 40 CFR part 403.12. 
(C)  Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the manager may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c). 
(D)  Where a wastewater discharge subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with a wastewater discharge not regulated by the same standard, the manager shall impose alternate limits using the combined waste stream formula contained in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
(E)  A variance from a categorical pretreatment standard may be obtained, pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions contained in 40 CFR 403.13, if a user can prove that factors related to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors used by USEPA in the development of the categorical pretreatment standard from which the variance is being sought. 
(F)  A net /gross adjustment to a categorical pretreatment standard may be granted if a user meets the applicability and criteria outlined in 40 CFR 403.15. 
(Ord. 4581, 4-13-1998, eff. 5-1-1998) 
7-9-29. - Options of Village. 
(A)  If any waters or wastes discharged or proposed to be discharged to the sanitary or combined sewers contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in sections 7-9-26 and 7-9-27 of this chapter; or which are in violation of the pretreatment standards provided in chapter 1, "EPA Rules And Regulations", subchapter D, water programs part 128-pretreatment standards, "Federal Register" volume 38, no. 215, Thursday, November 8, 1973, and any amendments thereto, and which in the judgment of the manager may have a deleterious effect upon the sewer, the POTW, the wastewater treatment process employed by the POTW, the POTW's equipment or receiving waters; or otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the manager may do any or all of the following: 
1.  Reject the wastes; or 
2.  Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the sanitary sewers; or 
3.  Require the user to restrict discharge during peak flows, designate that certain wastes be discharged only at specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sanitary waste streams from industrial waste streams, and such other requirements as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine the user's state of compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
4.  Require payment to cover the added costs of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges, under the provisions of this Code. 
(B)  If the manager requires the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the user shall provide, operate, and maintain at their expense all equipment and facilities necessary to comply with the most stringent standards of this chapter, national categorical pretreatment standards as established by 40 CFR, chapter N, subpart I, state standards, and any limitations imposed by the "discharge control document". The design and installation of such equipment shall be subject to prior review and approval of the Director and manager and are subject to all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws. No waste shall be discharged into the sanitary sewer until the provisions of this section have been complied with in full. 
(C)  Whether or not the manager exercises any of the options listed in subsection (A)1., (A)2., and (A)3. of this section, the user may in addition be subject to enforcement actions for violations of any applicable federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
(Ord. 4581, 4-13-1998, eff. 5-1-1998) 
7-9-30. - Fat, oil, grease, sand and petroleum product traps. 
(A)  The purpose of this section is to establish certain minimum reasonable rules and regulations for any automotive service facility or food processing food sales, or food service facility or user connected to, or applying to connect to, the Village's sanitary sewer system regarding the collection and disposal of fats, oils, greases, sand or petroleum products in wastewater, not otherwise required to obtain and hold an Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit from the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and/or the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. This section also establishes certain minimum reporting requirements for waste haulers in the disposal of fats, oils, greases, sand and petroleum product wastes. 
(B)  Definitions . Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of the terms used herein shall be as follows: 
DIRECTOR: The Village's Director of Public Works or his/her designated agent or representative. 
FOG: Fats, oils, greases, sand, starch, proteins, waxes, free fatty acids, calcium and magnesium soaps, mineral oils, motor oil, gasoline, and certain other materials from animal, vegetable and petroleum origins. FOG may originate from discharges from scullery sinks, pot and pan sinks, dishwashing machines, soup kettles and floor drains located in areas where the aforementioned materials may exist. 
FOG PRODUCING FACILITY: A food processing, food sales or food service facility, or motor vehicle repair facility, as herein defined. 
FOG QUARTERLY MAINTENANCE REPORT: A document submitted to the Environmental Resources Coordinator, or his/her designee, at Glenbard Wastewater Authority, Village pursuant to subsection (I) below, along with the manifest when applicable, to certify that maintenance was performed by the business in accordance with the requirements of subsection (D) below. 
FOG RECOVERY SYSTEM: A system of interceptors, separators, traps or FOG recovery devices, which prevents free floating FOG from entering the sewage system by recovering and removing the FOG from the wastewater. Such systems may be inside a building (typically less than 100 gallon capacity) or outside a building (typically 1,000 gallon or greater capacity). 
FOOD: Any raw, cooked, processed edible substance, ice, beverage or ingredient used or intended for use, or for sale, barter or exchange, in whole or part for human consumption. 
FOOD PROCESSING FACILITY: A commercial facility in which food is manufactured or packaged for human consumption. The term does not include a food service facility, retail food store or commissary. 
FOOD SALES FACILITY: A retail and wholesale grocery store(s); retail seafood store(s); food processing plants(s); bakeries; confectionaries; fruit, nuts and vegetables store(s), and places of business; and, similar establishments, mobile or permanent, engaged in the sale of food primarily for consumption off premises. 
FOOD SERVICE FACILITY: Any facility for the preparation and serving of meals, lunches, short orders, sandwiches, frozen desserts or other edible products. The term includes: restaurants, coffee shops, cafeterias, short order cafes, luncheonettes, taverns, lunchrooms, places which manufacture retail sandwiches, soda fountains, institutional cafeterias, catering establishments, food vending and operations connected therewith, and similar facilities by whatever name called or by whomever operated. 
GRAVITY GREASE INTERCEPTOR: Any relatively large in ground or above-ground tank, with internal plumbing and baffling intended to act as a grease recovery system to serve one or more fixtures. 
HAULER: A waste disposal or rendering business or firm, licensed by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, that hauls and disposes of FOG as described in this section. 
HYDRO MECHANICAL GREASE INTERCEPTOR: Any relatively small appurtenance, generally of fabricated steel or polyethylene, with internal configuration and internal or external flow control, intended to function as a grease recovery system. 
MANIFEST: A log or document record of the hauler name, address and State license/permit number; and, the volume, date of removal and disposal destination of pumped materials or wastes from a FOG trap, FOG recovery system, or other interceptor device. (See, 415 ILCS 5/22.30(d) and (e)). 
MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR FACILITY: Any facility which provides motor vehicle repair or motor vehicle service, which has floor or other drains that are required to be equipped with a FOG trap or a FOG recovery system pursuant to the Illinois Plumbing Code. 
PUMP AND RETURN METHOD: The method of recanting or discharging removed waste or wastewater back into the FOG recovery system from which waste was removed or to any other FOG recovery system or sewer connection. 
TWENTY-FIVE PERCENT RULE: All FOG traps and/or FOG recovery systems shall be cleaned based on the 25 percent rule. For example: If the total depth (TD) of a FOG trap or FOG recovery system is 40 inches, the maximum allowable depth (d) of floatable and settled FOG equals 40 inches multiplied by 0.25 or d=TD × 0.25 = 10 inches. Therefore, the maximum allowable depth of floatable and settled FOG in the FOG trap or FOG recovery system should not exceed ten inches. 
USER: Any FOG producing facility, its owner(s) or operator(s), or their agent(s), that contributes to the Village's wastewater collection system. 
(C)  System required . All food processing, food sales or food service facilities newly constructed or with modifications made to the existing plumbing system, after June 1, 2018 effective date of this ordinance shall have a FOG recovery system sized at a minimum in accordance with the State of Illinois Plumbing Code, as locally adopted and amended by the Village. The FOG recovery system shall produce a continuous effluent quality of 100 mg/l FOG or less in accordance with the local limit for FOG found at section 7-9-27 of this Code. In addition, food processing, food sales or food service facilities must exercise proper kitchen best management practices to ensure that excess concentrations of FOG are not discharged to the collection system and the POTW. 
(D)  New construction or remodeled facilities requiring building permits . 
1.  No person shall construct, modify or install a FOG recovery system without the prior approval of, and issuance of a building permit by the Village. 
2.  All kitchen drains and any other drains that may carry grease-laden waste shall be connected to a FOG recovery system, this includes but is not limited to; preparation sinks, wok lines, hand sinks, mop basins, floor drains and bar sinks. No domestic sewage shall be routed to the FOG recovery system. 
3.  All new construction or remodeled food processing, food sales or food service facilities that discharge to the collection system or the POTW shall be required to install, operate, clean and maintain a FOG recovery system of appropriate size and design to achieve compliance with requirements of this chapter. 
4.  All new construction food processing, food sales or food service facilities shall have a control manhole or sampling chamber installed and located at a point downstream of the FOG recovery system. 
(E)  Existing users . 
1.  Any existing food processing facility, food sales facility or food service facility without a FOG recovery system or a functional FOG recovery system shall be required to install one sized at a minimum in accordance with the State of Illinois Plumbing Code, as locally adopted and amended by the Village. The FOG recovery system shall be installed in an expedient manner in an agreed upon timeframe, no longer than three years. Where feasible, all kitchen drains and any other drains that may carry grease-laden waste shall be connected to this FOG recovery system, this includes but is not limited to; vegetable sinks, preparatory sinks, wok lines, hand sinks, mop basins, floor drains, dishwashers and bar sinks. No domestic sewage shall be routed to the FOG recovery system. 
2.  Any existing food processing facility, food sales facility or food service facility with a FOG recovery system that is not meeting the discharge limits for FOG as set forth in section 7-9-27 of this Code shall be given the period of one year to implement additional staff training and best management practices as defined by the Village to come into compliance with this chapter. If the discharge does not consistently comply with the limits after one year, the food processing facility, food sales facility or food service facility shall be required to upgrade to a FOG recovery system that will produce a continuous effluent compliant with the limits found in section 7-9-27 of this Code. The new FOG recovery system shall be installed in an expedient manner in an agreed upon timeframe, no longer than three years. Where feasible, all kitchen drains and any other drains that may carry grease-laden waste shall be connected to this FOG recovery system, this includes but is not limited to; vegetable sinks, prep sinks, wok lines, hand sinks, mop basins, floor drains, dishwashers and bar sinks. No domestic sewage shall be routed to the FOG recovery system. 
3.  Any existing food processing facility, food sales facility or food service facility that is found to have caused or contributed to significant grease deposits in the sanitary sewer or a combined sewer overflow (CSO) or sanitary sewer overflow (SSO), as determined by the Environmental Resources Coordinator, or his/her designee, at Glenbard Wastewater Authority, shall be given the period of one year to implement additional staff training and best management practices as defined by the Village to come into compliance with this chapter. If the discharge does not consistently comply with the limits after one year, the food processing facility, food sales facility or food service facility shall be required to upgrade to a FOG recovery system that will produce a continuous effluent compliant with the limits found in section 7-9-27 of this Code. The new FOG recovery system shall be installed in an expedient manner in an agreed upon timeframe, no longer than three years. Where feasible, all kitchen drains and any other drains that may carry grease-laden waste shall be connected to this FOG recovery system, this includes but is not limited too; preparatory sinks, wok lines, hand sinks, mop basins, floor drains and bar sinks. No domestic sewage shall be routed to the FOG recovery system. 
4.  Any existing food processing facility, food sales facility or food service facility that is found to have fixtures not routed to the FOG recovery system in compliance with this version of the Code in effect at the time, as determined by the Environmental Resources Coordinator, or his/her designee, at Glenbard Wastewater Authority, the fixtures were installed shall be required to re-route the fixtures to the existing FOG recovery system. 
(F)  New businesses-existing facility. 
1.  Any new food processing facility, food sales facility or food service facility which will occupy a space previously occupied by a food processing facility, food sales facility or food service facility may use the previously installed FOG recovery system provided that the FOG recovery system is in good working order. Should drainage fixtures be added or increased in size, the FOG recovery system shall be subject to upgrade to the adopted code requirements, as determined by the Building and Zoning Official of the Village, with input by the Environmental Resources Coordinator, or his/her designee, at Glenbard Wastewater Authority. Use of a previously existing FOG recovery system does not relieve the food processing facility, food sales facility or food service facilities of the requirement to comply with the limits found in section 7-9-27 of this Code. 
2.  All motor vehicle repair facilities shall install a FOG recovery system as required by, and in accordance with, the provisions of the State of Illinois Plumbing Code, any adopted local amendments and this Code. 
(G)  System maintenance . 
1.  General. All FOG recovery systems, both existing and new, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition, and in good working order, in compliance with all applicable laws, rules and regulations. 
2.  Maintenance responsibility. The owner(s) of the FOG recovery system, and any designated agents for the owners, shall be responsible for the maintenance of the FOG recovery system for a FOG producing facility at all times. All costs and expenses relating thereto shall be the responsibility of the owner(s). 
3.  Property owner, business owner or tenant, whichever is applicable of any buildings that are used as a FOG producing facility are ultimately responsible for the payment of any fees required or fines imposed under this Code. 
(H)  Maintenance requirements . 
1.  All users shall maintain any FOG recovery system so that the discharges are in compliance with all applicable laws, rules and regulations in relation thereto. At a minimum, a gravity grease interceptor shall be cleaned at least once every 90 days and hydro-mechanical FOG recovery system shall be cleaned at least once per week. The minimum frequency may be increased in order for the FOG recovery system to be compliant with the 25 percent rule. Cleaning frequencies may be extended with the approval of the director. 
2.  Gravity grease interceptors must be fully emptied at a minimum of twice per year. At other required cleaning intervals, skimming of the interceptor is acceptable. In addition, all internal plumbing must be inspected for damage and corrosion. If repairs are required, they shall be performed within 30 days of noting that the repair is required. 
3.  Hydro-mechanical FOG recovery systems may be maintained by the FOG producing facility. When cleaned, the FOG recovery system must have surface grease, oil and settled solids removed. These contents must be disposed of properly in accordance with federal, state, county and local laws, rules and regulations. In addition, the interior sides must be scraped and removable parts removed and cleaned. The hydro-mechanical FOG recovery system shall be inspected for damage and corrosion, and be properly reassembled. If repairs are required, they shall be performed within 30 days of noting the need for a repair. A cleaning log must be kept and available for the director to review during the FOG recovery system inspection. 
4.  The material that is removed in the process of cleaning a FOG recovery system shall not be discharged into any part of the collection system of the POTW, any private sewer, any drainage piping, or storm sewer system. All materials removed shall be handled and disposed of in accordance with federal, state, county and local laws, rules and regulations. 
5.  All motor vehicle repair facilities FOG traps, and all other motor vehicle repair facilities FOG recovery systems, shall be completely pumped out annually or when the content thereof exceeds the 25 percent rule. Semi-annual maintenance, annual maintenance and maintenance due to exceeding the 25 percent rule shall include the complete recovery of all contents, including floating materials, wastewater and bottom sludges and solids. The frequency of maintenance may be increased to comply with the applicable daily maximum discharge limit(s), the manufacturer's recommendation or the 25 percent rule. The frequency shall be as often as necessary to prevent overflows of FOG from entering the Village's wastewater collection system. 
6.  The pump-and-return method of decanting or discharging of removed waste or wastewater back into the FOG recovery system is prohibited. 
7.  Any removal and hauling of FOG as a result of the complete pumping of a FOG trap and all other FOG recovery systems shall be performed by a hauler licensed by the State of Illinois. 
8.  If any FOG recovery system discharge wastes fail to meet the applicable daily maximum limit(s), the director is authorized to require that the user repair, replace or upgrade its FOG recovery system, at the sole expense of the user. 
9.  No user may place an additive of any type into the FOG trap or FOG recovery system without the prior written approval of the director. 
(I)  Maintenance records . Each User, at each FOG producing facility, shall maintain an accurate and complete record of all cleaning(s) or maintenance of its FOG producing facility's FOG recovery system, and shall file copies of same with the Environmental Resources Coordinator, or his/her designee, at Glenbard Wastewater Authority, on a quarterly basis (April 15 th , July 15 th , October 15 th and January 15 th ) with said maintenance records to cover the three full calendar months preceding the filing date. The following records shall be kept on-site at the FOG producing facility for a minimum two year period: 
1.  Haulers. The hauler shall provide the FOG producing facility, at the time of service, a manifest conforming to all state statutes and regulations (see, 415 ILCS 5/22.30(e)), and the provisions of this Code. 
2.  Manifest(s). The removal of FOG recovery system contents shall be recorded on a manifest that identifies the pumping, hauling and disposing of the wastes, and whether collected from an interior or an exterior FOG recovery system. 
3.  Manifest information. Each manifest shall contain the following information and such other information as may be required by state statute: 
(a)  User information, including name, address, the volume pumped from each FOG recovery system, and date and time of the pumping; 
(b)  Hauler information, including company name, address, state license/permit number and disposal/receiving facility location information; and 
(c)  Receiving facility information, including the facility name and address, date and time of receiving, and EPD number. 
(d)  A certification that the FOG trap or FOG recovery system was in working order. 
(e)  A certification that the maintenance requirements, as set forth in subsection (H) above, are being complied with by the user relative to the FOG trap or FOG recovery system. 
4.  Manifest/maintenance log . The owner(s) of each FOG producing facility shall maintain, and keep available on the premises, a continuous log of manifests, FOG quarterly maintenance reports (and other similar record(s) regarding each cleaning or maintenance of the FOG recovery system for the previous 24 months. The log shall be kept on the FOG producing facility premises in a location where the log is available for inspection or review by the director, or his/her designated agent(s) or representative(s). 
(J)  Repairs . Any repair that is required in regard to a FOG trap or FOG recovery system shall be made by the user within 30 days of the user receiving notice of the need for a repair from either the hauler or the director. 
(K)  Inspections . 
1.  The Building and Zoning Official of the Village, or his/her designated agent(s) or representative(s), shall make or conduct an inspection of each FOG producing facility as the he/she may deem necessary, to evaluate and enforce compliance with the provisions of this section. 
2.  The Building and Zoning Official of the Village, or his/her authorized agent(s) or representative(s), shall have the authority to enter any property at any reasonable time to inspect for sanitation purposes and compliance with the provisions of this section and any other applicable provisions of this Code relating to the wastewater system. The Building and Zoning Official of the Village, may also make any necessary tests, measurements or sampling to determine compliance with the requirements of this section and any other applicable provisions of this Code relating to the wastewater system. 
3.  The user shall make sure that the FOG trap and/or FOG recovery system are accessible for inspection at all times, and shall make sure that no obstructions block access to any FOG trap or FOG recovery system. 
4.  The user shall, upon request by the Building and Zoning Official of the Village, or his/her authorized agent(s) or representative(s), open the access to the FOG trap or FOG recovery system for inspection, including, but not limited to, unbolting and removing covers and/or manholes. 
5.  A user charged with a Notice of Violation (an "NOV"), issued by the Building and Zoning Official of the Village, shall be re-inspected at any time within 30 days of the date of the issuance of the NOV. Subsequent re-inspection(s) may occur at any time for as long as the user is non-compliant under the original NOV. The user shall be responsible for payment of a re-inspection fee for all re-inspections in the amount of $250.00, which shall be added to the sanitary sewer bill of the user. 
6.  When a sewer overflow or blockage occurs at or downstream of a FOG producing facility, a demand inspection may be made or conducted by the Building and Zoning Official of the Village, or his/her designated agent(s) or representative(s). If the user of the FOG producing facility is found to be in violation of any provision of this section, or any other applicable provision of this Code relating to the wastewater system, and that violation(s) is believed to have caused or resulted in the sewer overflow or blockage, the user shall be responsible for the payment of the demand inspection fee in the amount of $250.00, as well as the labor, equipment and material cost(s) to correct the sewer overflow or blockage, which amounts shall be added to the sanitary sewer bill of the user. 
(L)  Notice of violation . 
1.  Whenever the Building and Zoning Official of the Village, or his/her authorized agent(s) or representative(s), determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there is, or has been, a violation of this section, the Building and Zoning Official of the Village, or his/her authorized agent(s) or representative(s),shall give notice of the alleged violation(s) to the user and/or the person in control of the FOG trap or FOG recovery system, as herein provided. Such notice shall: 
(a)  Be in writing; 
(b)  Include a statement of the reason(s) for issuance of the notice; 
(c)  Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires; 
(d)  Be served upon the user or operator of the FOG producing facility, as the case may require; provided that such notice shall be deemed to have been properly served upon such user or operator when a copy thereof has been sent by first class mail, postage prepaid, to his/her last known address as furnished to the Village, or personally delivered to the Executive Director or other person in charge of the FOG producing facility; and 
(e)  Contain an outline of remedial action which is required to affect compliance. 
(f)  In the event the alleged violation(s) are not remediated in a timely fashion, as determined by the Building and Zoning Official of the Village, or his/her designated agent(s) or representative(s), a citation will be issued which shall be adjudicated through the Village's Administrative Adjudication process set forth in Title I, Chapter 13 of the Glen Ellyn Municipal Code. 
2.  Whenever an emergency exists which requires immediate action to protect the public health, safety or welfare, or to protect public or private property from damage or destruction, the Building and Zoning Official of the Village, or his/her designated agent(s) or representative(s) may, without any administrative notice or procedure, seek an injunction to require that such action be taken as may be deemed necessary to meet the emergency. 
(M)  Enforcement penalties/remedies. 
1.  Any person or user, who violates any provision of this section, shall be fined not less than $100.00 or more than $750.00 for each violation, with each day that a violation has existed or continues to exist constituting a separate offense. 
2.  In addition to (1) above, any sewer or manhole overflow, or sewer back-up, resulting from a violation(s) of any provision of this section, or an inadequately operating FOG recovery system, or lack of an approved FOG recovery system, shall result in the imposition of a charge to the responsible owner(s) or user(s) equal to the costs incurred by the Village in cleaning the blockage out of the immediately adjacent Village wastewater collection system. Imposition of a charge under this subsection (2) shall not preclude other enforcement action(s). In addition, the responsible owner(s) or user(s) shall be responsible for payment of any fine levied by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency against the Village as a result of any overflow or blockage in the Village's wastewater collection system, or NPDES permit discharge violations attributable to the owner(s)' or user(s)' violation of any provision of this section, or an inadequately operating FOG recovery system, or lack of an approved FOG recovery system. Any such charges as referenced in this subsection (2) shall be added to the sewer bill of the user. 
3.  The Building and Zoning Official of the Village, or his/her designated agent(s) or representative(s) may also take any other available legal action necessary to prevent or to remedy any violation, including, but not limited to, appropriate equitable or injunctive relief or discontinuation of wastewater treatment service to the FOG producing facility. 
(Ord. 6595, 4-23-2018) 
Editor's note- Ord. 6595, adopted April 23, 2018, repealed § 7-9-30 and enacted a new section as set out herein. Former § 7-9-30 pertained to traps required and derived from Ord. 4581, adopted April 13, 1998. 
7-9-31. - Dilution prohibited. 
No user shall increase the use of process water, or in any other way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate pretreatment to achieve compliance with any applicable federal, state, and/or local pretreatment standard or requirement. The manager may impose mass limitations on users who use dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in cases where mass limitations are deemed appropriate. 
(Ord. 4581, 4-13-1998, eff. 5-1-1998) 
7-9-32. - Spill containment required. 
(A)  Each industrial user whose wastewater includes, or could include, compatible or incompatible pollutants in amounts or concentrations great enough to cause interference or pass through at the POTW treatment plant or to otherwise violate the provisions of this chapter shall provide protection from accidental discharge to the POTW of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this chapter. Slug control plans and/or facilities to prevent such accidental discharge shall be provided and maintained at the owner's or user's expense. 
(B)  Each significant industrial user, and other industrial users as deemed necessary by the manager, shall be evaluated at least once every two years to determine the necessity for a slug control plan and/or facilities to prevent the accidental discharge of compatible or incompatible pollutants. The manager may require the user to develop, submit for approval, and implement a slug control plan. At the manager's discretion, such a plan may be developed for any user for which it is deemed necessary. Such a plan shall be developed in accordance with the requirements outlined in 40 CFR part 403.8(f)(2)(v)(A)-(D), and shall contain the following: 
1.  A description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges; 
2.  A description of stored chemicals; 
3.  Procedures for immediate notification to the POTW of slug discharges, including any discharge that would violate a prohibition under 40 CFR 403.5(b), with procedures for follow up written notification within five days; 
4.  If necessary, procedures to prevent adverse impact from accidental spills, including inspection of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants (including solvents) and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
(C)  In the case of an accidental or deliberate discharge of compatible or incompatible pollutants, including, but not limited to, slug loadings, which may cause interference at the POTW or will pass through the POTW or violate requirements of this chapter, it shall be the responsibility of an authorized officer of the industrial user to notify the manager and Director or other officials of the POTW by telephone, within 24 hours of discovery of the incident. The notification shall include name of caller, location and time of discharge, type of wastewater, concentration and volume. 
(D)  Within five working days following such an accidental or deliberate discharge or slug loading, the industrial user shall submit to the manager a detailed written report, signed by an authorized officer, describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Follow up reports may be required by the manager as deemed necessary. Such report, or reports, shall not relieve the industrial user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such report relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties or other liability which may be imposed by this chapter or otherwise. Failure to report accidental or deliberate discharges may, in addition to any other remedies available to the Village or authority under this chapter, result in disconnection of the discharger's service line. 
(E)  The industrial user shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with all applicable regulations upon reduction, loss, or accidental failure of its facility, until the facility is restored or an alternative method is provided. This requirement includes the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the facility is reduced, lost or fails. 
(F)  In cases where violations of discharge standards have occurred, the industrial user shall, in addition to providing 24-hour notification of violation to the POTW, resample its discharge for compliance with applicable discharge standards within 30 days. 
(G)  A notice in English and the language of common use shall be permanently posted on the industrial user's bulletin Board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of an accidental or illegal discharge. Employers shall ensure that all employees who are in a position to cause, discover, or observe such discharges are advised of the emergency notification procedures. 
(Ord. 4581, 4-13-1998, eff. 5-1-1998) 
7-9-33. - Responsibility of intermediate user. 
Any intermediate users shall be primarily responsible for complying with all provisions of this chapter. If any user serviced by an intermediate user is violating any provision of this chapter, it shall be the responsibility of the intermediate user to compel compliance by the user and, if necessary, disconnect the user from the intermediate user's collection system. 
Any enforcement procedures provided in this chapter, including fines, costs, and disconnection, may be instituted by the manager directly against the intermediate user, as well as the end user. In addition, the intermediate user shall be responsible for providing monitoring facilities as set forth in section 7-9-37 of this chapter where such facilities are deemed to be required or necessary by the manager. 
(Ord. 4581, 4-13-1998, eff. 5-1-1998) 
7-9-34. - Failure to pay sewer charges. 
Any user, whether domestic, nonindustrial, industrial or intermediate, who fails to pay the sewer charges provided by section 7-11-28 of this title shall be subject to late penalties, possible termination of service including disconnection from the sanitary sewer and a lien for delinquent charges upon the real estate to which the service is supplied or upon an intermediate user's collection system, as provided by sections 7-11-17 and 7-11-19 of this title. 
(Ord. 4581, 4-13-1998, eff. 5-1-1998) 
7-9-35. - Maximum allowable flow. 
(A)  The maximum allowable daily flow from a service line to a sanitary sewer shall be no more than three times the average daily domestic water usage of the users served by the service line. 
(B)  The maximum allowable daily peak flow of the intermediate users shall be no more than the amount determined by the following formula, plus uncorrected, nonexcessive inflow and infiltration, as follows: 
Three times domestic water usage plus permitted infiltration of 1,500 gallons per inch diameter per mile per day, plus allowable uncorrected, nonexcessive inflow and infiltration as follows: 
1.  For Citizens Utilities service area uncorrected, nonexcessive inflow and infiltration of 2.2 million gallons per day; 
2.  For Glen Ellyn Heights area served by DuPage County uncorrected, nonexcessive inflow and infiltration of 0.52 million gallons per day. 
(Ord. 4581, 4-13-1998, eff. 5-1-1998) 
7-9-36. - When pretreatment required. 
All significant industrial users shall provide necessary wastewater pretreatment as required to comply with this chapter, and shall achieve compliance with all applicable pretreatment standards within the time limitations as specified by appropriate statutes, regulations, and this chapter. National categorical pretreatment standards shall be made a part of this chapter as described in section 7-9-28 of this chapter. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the POTW shall be provided, properly operated and maintained at the user's expense. All industrial users shall obtain all necessary construction-operating permits from the IEPA. Such pretreatment facilities shall be under the control and direction of an IEPA certified wastewater treatment operator. Any subsequent significant changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and required to be accepted by the manager prior to the industrial user's initiation of the changes. 
(Ord. 4581, 4-13-1998, eff. 5-1-1998) 
7-9-37. - Monitoring facilities. 
(A)  The significant industrial user shall provide, at its own expense, monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling and flow measurement of the service line in internal drainage systems. The monitoring facility will be situated on the user's premises unless such a location would be impractical and cause undue hardship to the user, and the manager allows the facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping, parked vehicles, or other activities of the user. 
(B)  Where required by the manager, to meet the objectives of this chapter, additional control manholes or sampling chambers shall be provided at the end of each industrial process, at the expense of the industrial user, which are suitable for the determination of compliance with pretreatment standards. 
(C)  Whenever required by the manager, any significant industrial user shall install a large manhole or sampling chamber for each separate discharge into the service line in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the manager, installed and maintained at all times at the user's expense, which shall have ample room in each sampling chamber to permit the manager to obtain accurate composite samples for analysis. The chamber shall be safely, easily and independently accessible to authorized representatives of the Glenbard Wastewater Authority at any time. 
1.  Each sampling chamber shall contain a Palmer-Bowlus flume unless a weir or similar device is approved by the manager with a recording and totalizing register for measurement of the liquid quantity; or at the discretion of the manager the metered water supply to the industrial plant may be used as the liquid quantity where it is substantiated that the metered water supply and waste quantities are approximately the same, or where a measurable adjustment agreed to by the POTW is made in the metered water supply to determine the liquid waste quantity. 
2.  When required, samples shall be taken by the industrial user every hour or half hour, as determined by the manager, and properly refrigerated and preserved in accordance with "standard methods" and shall be composited in proportion to the flow of a representative 24-hour sample. 
3.  The sampling chamber, metering device, and documentation of the frequency of sampling, sampling methods and analyses of samples shall be subject, at any reasonable time, to inspection and verification by the manager. 
(Ord. 4581, 4-13-1998, eff. 5-1-1998) 
7-9-38. - Testing standards. 
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in accordance with 40 CFR 136, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no such manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole, in the sanitary sewer, to the point at which the service line is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage treatment plant and to determine the existence of hazards to the treatment process and equipment and public health, safety and welfare. The particular analyses involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite of all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. 
(Ord. 4581, 4-13-1998, eff. 5-1-1998) 
7-9-39. - Reporting requirements. 
(A)  Categorical dischargers: The following reporting requirements shall apply to categorical dischargers, and to significant industrial users not subject to categorical standards when required by the manager: 
1.  Discharge application: Significant industrial users shall submit an application form furnished by the POTW and signed by an authorized representative of the user. 
2.  Baseline report: 
(a)  Industrial users subject to national categorical pretreatment standards shall submit baseline monitoring reports to the POTW in a form prescribed and furnished by the POTW. 
(b)  Within 180 days after the effective date of a national categorical pretreatment standard, or 180 days after a final administrative decision has been made upon a categorical determination submission in accordance with 40 CFR section 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, industrial users which are existing sources subject to such national categorical pretreatment standards and currently discharging to the POTW shall submit to the manager a properly completed baseline monitoring report. 
(c)  New sources, when subject to a national categorical pretreatment standard, shall submit a baseline monitoring report no later than 90 days prior to commencement of any discharge to the POTW. A new source shall provide the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards, and estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged. 
(d)  In support of the baseline monitoring report, the industrial user shall submit, in units and terms specified in the application, the following information: 
(1)  Name and address of the facility including the name of the operator and owner (s). 
(2)  List of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 
(3)  Brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classification of the operations carried out by such user. This description shall include a schematic process diagram indicating points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes. 
(4)  Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from each of the following: 
A.  Regulated process streams; and 
B.  Other streams as necessary to allow use of the combined waste stream formula of 40 CFR section 403.6(e). 
(5)  The industrial user shall identify the national categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process, and shall: 
A.  Submit the results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Both daily maximum and average concentration shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations. 
B.  A minimum of four grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile organics. For all other pollutants, 24-hour composite samples must be obtained through flow proportional composite sampling techniques where feasible. The control authority may waive flow proportional composite sampling for an industrial user that demonstrates that flow proportional sampling is infeasible. In such cases, samples may be obtained through a minimum of four grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. 
C.  Sample based on the flow of the sampled stream, as follows (composite samples are required where feasible): 
i.  Where the flow of the stream being sampled is less than or equal to 950,000 liters /day (approximately 250,000 gpd), the industrial user shall take a minimum of three samples within a two-week period. 
ii.  Where the flow of the stream being sampled is greater than 950,000 liters/day (approximately 250,000 gpd), the industrial user shall take a minimum of six samples within a two-week period. 
D.  Take the samples immediately downstream from pretreatment facilities if such exist or immediately downstream from the regulated process if no pretreatment exists. If other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated wastewater prior to pretreatment, in order to evaluate compliance with the national categorical pretreatment standards, the industrial user shall measure the flows and concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined waste stream formula of 40 CFR section 403.6(e). Where an alternate concentration has been calculated in accordance with 40 CFR section 403.6(e), this adjusted limit along with supporting data shall be submitted to the POTW. 
E.  Submit, only with POTW authorization, a baseline monitoring report which utilizes only historical data, so long as it provides information sufficient to determine the need for industrial pretreatment measures. 
F.  Provide for each report the time, date and place of sampling and methods of analysis and certification that such sampling and analysis is representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant discharges to the POTW. 
(6)  The industrial user shall provide a statement, reviewed by an authorized representative of the industrial user and certified by a qualified professional indicating whether national categorical pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance measures or additional pretreatment is required for the industrial user to meet the national categorical pretreatment standards. 
(7)  If additional pretreatment or operation and maintenance measures will be required to meet the national categorical pretreatment standards, the industrial user will provide the shortest schedule which will provide such additional pretreatment or operation and maintenance measures. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable national categorical pretreatment standard. 
A.  Where the industrial user's national categorical pretreatment standard has been modified by the combined waste stream formula (40 CFR section 403.6(e)), or net /gross calculations (40 CFR section 403.15), at the time the industrial user submits a baseline monitoring report the information required in 40 CFR section 400.115(a)(4)(F) and (G) shall pertain to the modified limits. 
B.  If the national categorical pretreatment standard for the industrial user is modified after the baseline monitoring report is submitted, the industrial user shall make any necessary amendments to information provided as a response to 40 CFR section 400.115(a)(4)(F) and (G) and submit them to the POTW within 60 days after the modified limit is approved. 
(8)  The following conditions shall apply to any schedule submitted in response to 40 CFR section 400.115(a)(4)(G): 
A.  The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable national categorical pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contract for major components, commencing construction, completing construction). 
B.  No increment referred to in 40 CFR section 400.115(a)(4)(H) shall exceed 180 days. 
C.  Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the POTW including, at a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the industrial user to return the construction to the schedule established. In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the POTW. 
D.  Such other information as may be reasonably requested by the POTW. 
3.  Compliance date report: Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable national categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source, introduction by the new source of wastewater into the POTW, any industrial user subject to such pretreatment standards shall submit to the manager a report, on forms provided by the POTW, indicating the nature of the concentration of all pollutants in the discharge from the regulated process which are limited by pretreatment standards and requirements and the average and maximum daily flow for these process units in the user's facility which are limited by such pretreatment standards. The report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and if not, what additional user operation and maintenance or pretreatment techniques or installations are necessary to bring the user into compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. This statement shall be signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user and certified by a qualified professional. 
4.  Periodic compliance reports for significant industrial users: 
(a)  All significant industrial users subject to an applicable national categorical pretreatment standard, after the compliance date of such applicable national categorical pretreatment standard or, in the case of a new source, after discharge of wastewater to the POTW begins, shall submit to the POTW during the months of June and December for the preceding two calendar quarters, unless required more frequently in the national categorical pretreatment standard or by the POTW or IEPA, a certified report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the effluent which are limited by such applicable national categorical pretreatment standards. In addition, this report shall include a record of measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. 
(b)  At the discretion of the POTW, the significant industrial user not subject to national categorical pretreatement standards shall sample, analyze and report pollutants semiannually during the months of June and December for the preceding two calendar quarters, as determined and required by the manager, with any conditions he deems necessary. 
(c)  At the discretion of the POTW and in consideration of such factors as a local flow rate, holidays and budget cycles, the POTW may agree to alter the months during which the above reports are submitted. 
(d)  All wastewater discharge applications, baseline monitoring reports, and user compliance reports must be signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain the following certification statement: 
    I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction and supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations. 
(B)  Industrial and intermediate users: The following reporting requirements shall apply to all industrial and intermediate users: 
1.  Industrial users and intermediate users are required to complete and return questionnaires, which may include baseline monitoring reports within 30 days of receipt to the Director or the manager. These questionnaires will inquire as to the nature and volume of wastes generated by particular industrial users. Additional information may be required concerning the disposal of byproducts or sludges generated by the industrial user, or excessive inflow or infiltration into the service lines of all users discharging into a sanitary sewer of an intermediate user or excessive infiltration or inflow into the sanitary sewer of an intermediate user. 
2.  The industrial user and intermediate user are required to submit a baseline monitoring report or any information regarding the introduction of pollutants into the sewage system. All information gathered through industrial user or intermediate user reports with respect to effluent data will be available to the public without restriction. 
Confidentiality may be granted to the industrial user by the EPA once the industrial user follows prescribed steps in claiming such confidentiality in compliance with 40 CFR part 2. In addition to the questionnaires as described in subsection (B)1. of this section, additional reports may be required at the discretion of the manager in carrying forth the objectives of this chapter. 
3.  In accordance with section 7-9-52 of this chapter, the industrial user shall assist the manager in his efforts to locate and identify all discharges into the sewage system which are in violation of this chapter. 
(C)  Record keeping procedures: Record keeping procedures shall be in accordance with 40 CFR 403.12(n). These provisions include the following: 
1.  Record keeping requirements: Records shall include for all samples: 
(a)  Names of sampling persons. 
(b)  Dates analyses were performed. 
(c)  Names of who performed analyses. 
(d)  The analytical methods used. 
(e)  The results of such analyses. 
2.  Records retention: The user shall keep the records for a minimum of three years. 
3.  Records inspection: All records shall be made available for inspection and copying by the Director, the manager, the Director of the Illinois environmental protection agency, and the regional administrator of the USEPA or their designees. This period of retention of records shall be extended during the course of any unresolved litigation regarding the industrial user or POTW or when requested by the Director, the manager, the Director of IEPA or the regional administrator of USEPA. 
(Ord. 4581, 4-13-1998, eff. 5-1-1998) 
7-9-40. - Required testing; expense. 
(A)  Any industrial user discharging industrial waste or industrial wastewater may be required by the manager to take samples and provide laboratory measurements, tests and analyses of wastewater and wastes to demonstrate compliance with this chapter and with any orders issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(B)  The number, type, and frequency of the sampling and testing shall be as stipulated by the manager, and all samples and test results shall be reported within five days of completion. 
(C)  The user shall be responsible for all expenses of sampling, measurements, testing, analyses and reporting required by the manager. 
(Ord. 4581, 4-13-1998, eff. 5-1-1998) 
7-9-41. - Means for ensuring compliance. 
To ensure compliance with the industrial pretreatment program, the manager may take the following actions: 
(A)  Deny or condition new or increased contributions of pollutants, or changes in the nature of pollutants, to the POTW by industrial users where such contributions do not meet applicable pretreatment standards and requirements or where such contributions would cause the POTW to violate its NPDES permit. 
(B)  Require compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements by industrial users. 
(C)  Control, pursuant to the requirements outlined in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(1)(iii), compliance with national categorical pretreatement standards, in those cases where such limits are applicable, and local ordinance limits, which are applicable to all industrial users, through issuance of a discharge control document. Such a document shall contain the required elements stated in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(1)(iii)(A)-(E), and shall consist of: 
1.  Statement of duration (in no case more than five years); 
2.  Statement of nontransferability (without prior written notification to the control authority and provision of a copy of the existing control document to the new owner or operator); 
3.  Statement of applicable federal, state, and/or local effluent discharge limits; 
4.  Statement of self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record keeping requirements; 
5.  Statement of applicable criminal and civil penalties and any applicable compliance schedule (such a schedule may not extend the compliance date past applicable federal deadlines). 
(D)  Require the development of a compliance schedule by each industrial user for the installation of technology required to meet applicable pretreatment standards and requirements; and the submission of all notices and semiannual self-monitoring reports from industrial users as are necessary to assess and assure compliance by industrial users with pretreatment standards and requirements including, but not limited to, the reports required in 40 CFR 403.12; said schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of pretreatment facilities required for the user to meet applicable pretreatment standards (including, but not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary or final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation); 
1.  No increment required in a compliance schedule shall exceed nine months; 
2.  The user shall submit progress reports no later than 14 days following each date in a compliance schedule and the final date of compliance. Such reports shall include, at a minimum, whether or not the increment of progress has been met, the reason for any delay, and, where necessary, the steps to be taken by the user to return to the established schedule. 
(E)  Carry out at least once yearly inspection and sampling of all significant industrial users to determine, independent of information supplied by industrial users, compliance or noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements by industrial users. 
(F)  Obtain remedies for noncompliance by any industrial user with any pretreatment standard and requirement. 
(G)  Identify and locate all possible industrial users which might be subject to the pretreatment program. Any compilation, index, or inventory of industrial users made under this division shall be made available to the regional administrator or Public Works Director upon request. 
(H)  Provide industrial users with information concerning applicable pretreatment standards. 
(I)  Receive and analyze semiannual self-monitoring reports and other notices submitted by industrial users in accordance with the self-monitoring requirements of the pretreatment program. 
(J)  Randomly sample and analyze the effluent from industrial users and conduct surveillance and inspection activities in order to identify, independent of information supplied by industrial users, occasional and continuing noncompliance with pretreatment standards. The results of these activities shall be made available to the regional administrator or Public Works Director upon request. 
(K)  Investigate instances of noncompliance with pretreatment standards and requirements, as indicated in the reports and notices required or indicated by analysis, inspection, and surveillance activities. Sample taking and analysis and the collection of other information shall be performed with sufficient care to produce evidence admissible in enforcement proceedings or in judicial actions; and 
(L)  Notify the Village to instigate enforcement procedures, where necessary to obtain compliance, as set forth in sections 7-9-48 through 7-9-50 of this chapter. 
(M)  The Manager shall require all industrial users to: 
1.  Identify the character and volume of pollutants contributed to the POTW by the industrial users and require the industrial user to provide notification to the POTW of any discharge that could be considered a hazardous waste if disposed of in a different manner. 
2.  Provide to the control authority, in writing, prior notification of any changes in the volume or character of the pollutants in their discharges. 
(Ord. 4581, 4-13-1998, eff. 5-1-1998) 
7-9-42. - Public notification of significant noncompliance. 
The Manager shall annually publish in the largest daily newspaper published in the municipalities in which the authority is located, a list of industrial users and intermediate users who were determined to be in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards or requirements or excessive inflow or infiltration during the previous 12 months. The notification shall also summarize any enforcement actions taken against those industrial users or intermediate users during the same 12 months. 
(Ord. 4581, 4-13-1998, eff. 5-1-1998) 
7-9-43. - Compulsory compliance procedures. 
(A)  Notice of violation and compliance meeting: Should a violation of this chapter by an industrial user or intermediate user occur, including a violation of the maximum permissible inflow and infiltration of storm water, whether or not a significant industrial user, the manager shall notify the offending user, in writing, through a "notice of violation" as to the particulars of such violation or violations and set a time and place for a meeting (hereinafter called a "compliance meeting") to be attended by representatives of the POTW and the industrial user and/or intermediate user. The purpose of such a meeting shall be to establish such procedures, investigations, studies and compliance measures as the manager deems necessary and desirable to control and prevent violation of this chapter. Prior issuance of a "notice of violation" is not required for the manager to institute further enforcement actions, in addition to the procedures outlined above. The industrial user and/or intermediate user shall cooperate fully with the manager in making such investigations and studies. 
(B)  Order: 
1.  Following the completion of any procedures, investigations or studies as described in subsection (A) of this section, the manager may issue an order which may: 
(a)  Require compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(b)  Require the user to control the contribution to the POTW to ensure compliance with applicable treatment standards and requirements and the conditions of any NPDES permit of the authority or the POTW. 
(c)  Require the development of a compliance schedule for the installation of technology required to meet applicable pretreatment standards and requirements; and the submission of all notices and self-monitoring reports as are necessary to assess and assure compliance by industrial users with pretreatment standards and requirements, including, but not limited to, the reports required by sections 7-9-36 through 7-9-41 of this chapter. 
(d)  Require abatement of excessive inflow or infiltration of storm water. 
(e)  Require payment of any costs associated with sampling, analytical or testing purpose to detect or prove any violation of this chapter. 
2.  If the manager has sufficient information at the time of the compliance meeting to determine necessary and desirable compliance measures, he may, at the time of the compliance meeting, issue an order directing and requiring the industrial user and/or intermediate user to take such action, including pretreatment, without further investigation or study. 
3.  Failure to comply with the order of the manager shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and may be grounds for such other actions as may be authorized for violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 4581, 4-13-1998, eff. 5-1-1998) 
7-9-44. - Order to show cause regarding disconnection. 
(A)  Order to show cause: The manager may, upon discovering an ongoing or potential discharge to the POTW which presents or may present a danger to the environment or which threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, including excessive inflow or infiltration of storm water, immediately issue an order to the responsible industrial user and/or intermediate user to show cause why the POTW or Village should not disconnect service, or seek injunctive relief to prohibit the industrial user or intermediate user from making the discharge to the POTW. 
(B)  Procedures for show cause hearing: 
1.  A notice shall be served on the industrial user and/or intermediate user specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held by the manager or his delegate regarding the ongoing or potential discharge of pollutants or excessive storm water to the POTW which reasonably appears to present an imminent danger to the health or welfare of persons, or the operation of the POTW, the reasons why the action is to be taken, the proposed action, and directing the industrial user and/or intermediate user to show cause why its service should not be disconnected. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, at least ten days before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent or officer of a corporation or other business entity. 
2.  The executive oversight committee may itself conduct the hearing and take the evidence, or may designate any of its members or its attorney to conduct the hearing as a Hearing Officer and to: 
(a)  Issue in the name of the executive oversight committee notices of hearings requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearing; 
(b)  Take the evidence; 
(c)  Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to the executive oversight committee for action thereon. 
3.  At any hearing held pursuant to this chapter, testimony taken must be under oath and recorded stenographically or by tape recording. The transcript of said hearing will be made available to any member of the public or any party to the hearing upon payment of the usual copying charges therefor. 
4.  After the executive oversight committee has reviewed the evidence, it may issue an order to the industrial user or intermediate user responsible for the discharge directing either: 
(a)  That the service be disconnected; or 
(b)  That following a specified time, the sewer service shall be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances have been installed and operated properly; or 
(c)  Direct the user to cease the unauthorized discharge effective after a specified period of time; or 
(d)  That such other action as deemed necessary by the executive oversight committee to abate the discharge be done by the industrial user or by the intermediate user. Further orders and directives as are necessary may be issued. 
5.  Following an order under this section, the industrial user or intermediate user shall cease discharging to the POTW in accordance with the terms of said order. Failure to do so shall be prima facie evidence of continuing harm to the POTW and provide grounds for the granting of injunctive relief or temporary restraining orders. 
(Ord. 4581, 4-13-1998, eff. 5-1-1998) 
7-9-45. - Excessive inflow or infiltration of storm water for users other than industrial users or intermediate users. 
(A)  This section applies to all users other than industrial users and intermediate users. 
(B)  In the event the Director or the manager determines that a user to whom this section applies, is discharging excessive flows of storm water to a sanitary sewer due to improper connections, inadvertence, lack of maintenance of the service line or due to any other cause, then the Director or the manager may institute the compulsory compliance and show cause procedures set forth in sections 7-9-43 and 7-9-44 of this chapter as to the user, as though the user was an industrial user. The remedy of disconnection of the service line from the sanitary sewer shall not apply in these instances, until the user has failed to eliminate the prohibited storm water connection or the excessive flow or infiltration of storm water for 120 days after being ordered to do so. 
(C)  In addition to the remedies set forth herein, the remedies set forth in sections 7-9-48 through 7-9-51 of this chapter shall apply. 
(Ord. 4581, 4-13-1998, eff. 5-1-1998) 
7-9-46. - Immediate disconnection of service. 
(A)  Conditions for immediate disconnection of service: Any industrial user is subject to immediate disconnection of service whenever immediate disconnection is required to halt or prevent any discharge of pollutants to the POTW which reasonably appears to the manager to present an imminent endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The manager may also immediately suspend an industrial user's discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW or which presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment. 
(B)  Procedures of immediate disconnection: Not withstanding section 7-9-43 or 7-9-44 of this chapter, the manager shall have the authority, after informal notice to the industrial user and the Village, to immediately and effectively halt or prevent any discharge of pollutants to the POTW that reasonably appears to present an imminent endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. When the manager determines that such an emergency situation exists, he shall issue a verbal order (followed immediately by a written order) to the industrial user stating the problem and requiring immediate cessation of discharge. The manager's actions may include disconnection of wastewater collection service, by blockage or severance of the sewer connection. The manager shall obtain the concurrence of the attorney for the Village before disconnection. Methods of informal notice shall include, but not be limited to, any of the following: personal conversation between the industrial user and authority employees, telephone calls, letters, hand delivered messages or notices posted at the industrial user's premises or point of discharge. 
(Ord. 4581, 4-13-1998, eff. 5-1-1998) 
7-9-47. - Elimination of discharge; reinstatement. 
Any industrial user and/or intermediate user notified of a disconnection of wastewater treatment service under sections 7-9-43 and 7-9-44 of this chapter shall immediately stop or eliminate the discharge. In the event of a failure of the industrial user and/or intermediate user to comply voluntarily with the disconnection order, the manager shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate blockage or severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or danger to any person. If the manager exercises his authority under section 7-9-46 of this chapter, the manager shall reinstate the wastewater treatment service upon satisfactory proof of the elimination of the noncomplying discharge. 
(Ord. 4581, 4-13-1998, eff. 5-1-1998) 
7-9-48. - Injunctive relief. 
(A)  The Village may institute a civil action for an injunction to restrain violations of this chapter. 
(B)  The Village may, upon discovering an ongoing or potential discharge of pollutants or of excessive storm water to the POTW which reasonably appears to present an imminent danger to the health or welfare of persons, or an ongoing or repetitive interference with proper operation of the POTW, including excessive flows of storm water, seek and obtain a temporary restraining order or preliminary injunction to halt or prohibit such discharge. Informal notice between the Village and the discharger shall be attempted, but shall not be considered a condition precedent to POTW petitioning for and obtaining a temporary restraining order. 
(Ord. 4581, 4-13-1998, eff. 5-1-1998) 
7-9-49. - Additional remedies. 
(A)  In addition to remedies available to the Village set forth elsewhere in this chapter, if the POTW, the authority or the Village is fined by the State of Illinois or USEPA for violation of the POTW NPDES permit, violation of water quality standards or violation of the maximum capacity of the POTW as the result of discharge of pollutants or of excessive inflow or infiltration of storm water, then the fine, including all the POTW legal, sampling, analytical, and testing costs and any other related costs shall be charged to the responsible industrial user or intermediate user. Such charge shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other remedies the Village may have under this chapter, statutes, regulations, at law or in equity. 
(B)  If the discharge from any user causes a deposit, obstruction or damage to any of the POTW, the manager shall cause the deposit or obstruction to be promptly removed or cause the damage to be promptly repaired. The cost for such work, including materials, labor and supervision, shall be the responsibility of the user causing such deposit, obstruction or damage. 
(C)  The remedies provided in this chapter shall not be exclusive and other remedies as authorized by statute, at law or in equity may be sought against any user violating the provisions of this chapter. 
(D)  In addition to any fine levied under sections 7-9-50 and 7-9-51 of this chapter, where the circumstances of the particular case so dictate, injunctive relief to prohibit the user from discharging into the sanitary sewer system, or to provide such other affirmative relief as may be appropriate may be sought. 
(Ord. 4581, 4-13-1998, eff. 5-1-1998) 
7-9-50. - Fines and costs. 
Any user who is found to have violated an order of the manager or who has failed to comply with any provision of this chapter and the orders, rules and regulations, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, in which case the standard of proof shall not be such standard as is applicable in an ordinance violation without a fine; or in the event that imprisonment up to six months in jail is sought, the standard shall be that applicable to a criminal penalty. For the purpose of this section, each day in which any such violation shall occur, shall be deemed a separate violation, and a separate violation shall be deemed to have occurred for each constituent which has limitations listed in section 7-9-28 of this chapter found to exceed the limits established in this chapter during any such day. In addition to the penalties provided herein, the Village may recover reasonable attorney fees, court costs, court reporter fees and other expenses of litigation such as sampling analytical and testing costs by appropriate suit at law against the person found to have violated this chapter or the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder. 
(Ord. 4581, 4-13-1998, eff. 5-1-1998) 
7-9-51. - Falsification. 
Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representation or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this chapter or wastewater discharge permit, or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this chapter, shall be subject to the penalties and costs provided in section 7-9-50 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 4581, 4-13-1998, eff. 5-1-1998) 
7-9-52. - Power and authority of inspectors. 
As a condition of the provisions of sewage collection and/or treatment, the manager and other duly authorized representatives of the authority and/or of the Village, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all properties of any user for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing to determine compliance with the provisions of this chapter. The management or duly authorized representatives shall have authority to inquire into any processes, including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper or other industrial processes beyond that point having a direct effect on the kind and source of discharge to the storm or sanitary sewers, natural outlet or facilities for wastewater treatment. Failure to allow such inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing at any reasonable time may result in the termination of service to such premises. Notification of such intention to terminate service to such premises shall be given in accordance with section 7-9-46 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 4581, 4-13-1998, eff. 5-1-1998) 
7-9-53. - Appeal from decision of Director. 
Any person directly aggrieved by any provisions of this chapter or any decisions of the Director made pursuant to this chapter shall have the right to request a variance from the provisions of this chapter or appeal any decision of the Director made pursuant to this chapter to the Board of Trustees. 
(Ord. 4581, 4-13-1998, eff. 5-1-1998) 
7-9-54. - Appeal from decision of manager. 
Any person directly aggrieved by any provisions of this chapter or any decision of the manager made pursuant to this chapter shall have the right to request a variance from the provisions of this chapter or appeal any decision of the manager made pursuant to this chapter to the authority. 
(Ord. 4581, 4-13-1998, eff. 5-1-1998) 
7-9-55. - Severability. 
If any provision, paragraph, word, section or article of this chapter is invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions, paragraphs, words, sections and chapters shall not be affected and shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Ord. 4581, 4-13-1998, eff. 5-1-1998) 
7-9-56. - Waiver of liability. 
All sewer connections applied for, and all sewer service used under this chapter shall be upon the express conditions that the Village shall not be liable for any claim made against it, for damages or injury caused by reason of the breaking of any main, branch, service pipe, apparatus or appurtenance connected with said pipe, apparatus or appurtenance connected with said system, or for any interruption of service by reason of the breakage of equipment or machinery or by reason of stoppage, alteration, extension or renewal. 
(Ord. 4581, 4-13-1998, eff. 5-1-1998) 
7-9-57. - Property owner's responsibility. 
The sanitary service line serving a building and extending to the public sewer is owned by the property owner. The property owner is responsible for the maintenance and repair of the service line serving his property in accordance with section 7-9-22 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 5318, 12-20-2004) 
7-9-58. - Cost sharing for repair. 
The Village will reimburse a property owner for one-half of costs to repair the service line where the area of repair occurs in the public right-of-way between the sanitary sewer main and a point ten feet from the edge of pavement or back of curb on the property owner's side of the street (the cost share area) when all the terms and conditions of this repair program are satisfied. A repair will typically consist of excavation, pipe replacement, pipe bedding, backfill, and temporary surface restoration to return the dig site to a safe and usable condition. 
(Ord. 5318, 12-20-2004) 
7-9-59. - Need for repair. 
The property owner must determine, to the satisfaction of the Village and at his expense, the need for and location of the proposed repair of the service line. 
(Ord. 5318, 12-20-2004) 
7-9-60. - Repairs performed by property owner. 
The property owner will be responsible for hiring the underground contractor to perform repairs. The contractor must have the requisite experience and ability; have sufficient capital, facilities, and plan to perform the intended repair successfully and promptly; and be properly licensed, bonded, and insured. The Village may assist the property owner by providing a list of contractors that could be contacted to perform the repair. The Village reserves the right to review the proposal provided by a contractor to the property owner for terms, completeness of the project scope, and reasonableness of costs. 
(Ord. 5318, 12-20-2004) 
7-9-61. - Permits required. 
The property owner will be responsible for procuring the required Village permit prior to the start of repair work. The Village will inspect the work performed to verify the location of the repair and that the repair satisfies code requirements. 
(Ord. 5318, 12-20-2004) 
7-9-62. - Surface restoration costs. 
The Village will be responsible for all final surface restoration costs associated with qualifying service line repairs that are required in the cost share area. Restorations may include pavement, curb and gutter, landscaping, sidewalk, shoulder and driveway. The Village may utilize its own forces or outside contractors to perform the final restorations required. The property owner is solely responsible for all sewer pipe repairs /replacement and surface restoration costs for service line repairs that occur from the building to the demarcation point located ten feet from the back of curb or edge of pavement. 
(Ord. 5318, 12-20-2004) 
7-9-63. - Maintenance responsibility. 
Property owners are solely responsible for all maintenance activities on their private sanitary sewer service line from the building to the main public sewer. Maintenance activities include, but are not necessarily limited to, sewer rodding, flushing, cleaning, root cutting or other root eradication procedures, televising, and locating. 
(Ord. 5318, 12-20-2004) 
7-9-64. - Applicability to new construction projects. 
Property owners may participate in the sanitary sewer service line repair cost sharing program if the work is part of a project to replace the entire private sanitary service line from the building to the Village sanitary sewer main and meets any one of the following requirements: 
(A)  The existing building floor area is increased by not less than 75 percent or more than 150 percent. 
(B)  The existing building exterior roof and wall area is structurally altered by not less than 50 percent or more than 75 percent. 
(C)  The existing building is remodeled with a hard cost not less than $15,000.00 and not more than $200,000.00. 
(Ord. 5996, 1-30-2012, eff. 3-1-2012) 
7-9-65. - Sanitary sewer mains and services on private property. 
Where a sanitary sewer service serving a property lies wholly or substantially outside of the public right-of-way, the Village will reimburse a property owner for one-half of the costs to repair the service line when the area of repair occurs between the sanitary sewer main and a point established toward the principal structure a length of one-third of the distance between the structure and the centerline of the main, but in any case not less than 15 feet nor greater than 25 feet (private property cost share area). 
Private property surface restorations would be the responsibility of the property owner. The Village will reimburse the owner a lump sum amount of $500.00 to defray restoration costs within the private property cost share area. The Village will not be responsible for extraordinary expenses associated with the removal and replacement of structures, landscaping and other impediments to performing the service line repairs within the private property cost share area. 
(Ord. 5379, 7-25-2005) 
Chapter 10 - WATER SYSTEM REGULATIONS 

7-10-1. - Water division. 
(A)  Creation: There is hereby created the water division within the Public Works Department, consisting of the water superintendent and such other officers and employees as may be assigned thereto. 
(B)  Superintendent: The water superintendent shall be appointed by the Village Administrator. 
(C)  Duties: The water superintendent shall be responsible for the efficient management of the water division. All officers and employees assigned to this division shall perform their duties, subject to the control and supervision of the superintendent, and shall obey all instruction and orders given by him. 
(D)  Enforcement of regulations: The water superintendent, and all officers and employees of the water division, shall be charged with, and be responsible for, the enforcement of all regulations relating to the water supply system. 
(E)  Plumbing inspection: In the absence of a specific appointment to the office of plumbing inspector, plumbing will be self-inspected by a state licensed plumber. 
(Ord. 2732, 2-22-1982; Ord. 3829, 4-22-1991) 
7-10-2. - Jurisdiction. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, there is hereby vested in the water division, subject to the control of the President and Board of Trustees, the responsibility for the operation, maintenance, preservation and extension of the waterworks system of the Village and the procuring and selling of water. 
(Ord. 2732, 2-22-1982) 
7-10-3. - Reports. 
(A)  The water superintendent shall, when requested by the Board of Trustees, report upon the condition of the division and all matters and things relating thereto. 
(B)  He shall also prepare and keep in his office a complete atlas of all water mains, and appurtenances thereto, laid or constructed in the Village. 
(Ord. 2732, 2-22-1982) 
7-10-4. - Forms. 
The Management Services Director, in consultation with the water superintendent and subject to the approval of the President and Board of Trustees, shall cause to be prepared suitable forms for applications for water service and for water bills, with such information concerning rules, regulations, ordinances and water rates printed thereon as may be deemed advisable. 
(Ord. 2732, 2-22-1982) 
7-10-5. - Extension of water mains. 
(A)  It shall be the duty of the Public Works Director to determine when it is necessary or advisable to lay or extend any water mains or water supply pipes in the Village and to recommend to the Village Board the proposed location and size of such main or pipe. 
(B)  No water main or water supply pipe shall be laid or extended except upon the passage and approval of an ordinance by the President and Board of Trustees, directing the laying or extension of such main or pipe, fixing the location thereof, the size to be used, and the method of financing the cost of the same. 
(Ord. 2732, 2-22-1982; Ord. 5454, 4-10-2006) 
7-10-6. - Extension of combined waterworks and sewage system to new areas. 
(A)  Preliminary survey: When the owner of one or more building sites within a lot, block, tract or parcel of land within the corporate limits of the Village, which is not served by the Village water or sanitary sewage system, requests permission to construct, at his expense, an extension of the water or sewage system to serve the property owned by him, the Public Works Director shall make a preliminary survey of the premises, and report to the Board of Trustees on the feasibility of such construction and connection to the water or sewage system. The property owner requesting such connection shall pay the cost of this preliminary service. 
(B)  Plans, specifications and estimate of cost: If it appears from the report of the Public Works Director that the Village water or sewage system, as it then exists, is of ample size and design to accommodate the property which will be serviced by such extensions, and if the property owner desires to proceed with construction, the property owner shall employ a registered professional engineer to prepare construction plans, specifications and a detailed estimate of cost including construction engineering fees. The plans, specifications and cost estimates shall be submitted to the Public Works Director for review and approval. An engineering review and inspection fee equal to four percent of the estimated costs of the improvements shall be paid to the Village Collector. 
(C)  Construction bids: Upon approval of the plans, specifications and cost estimates by the Public Works Director and at the discretion of the property owner requesting the water or sewer extension, the Board of Trustees shall advertise and take bids for the construction of the work specified in the plans and specifications and exhibit such bids to the property owner. 
(D)  Cost deposit: If one of the bids is acceptable, the property owner will deposit with the Village an amount of money sufficient to pay the entire cost of constructing said extension, including construction, engineering and legal fees, if any; and the Village Collector shall hold the money so deposited with him in a separate account which shall be used for no purpose other than to pay the cost of constructing the water and sewer extension. 
(E)  Contract for work: Upon the deposit of money provided for above, the Board of Trustees will enter into a contract with the successful bidder for the construction of the requested water or sewer extension, and the work shall be done under the supervision of the Public Works Director. 
(F)  Payments for work: Payments for the work shall be made by the management services Director from the funds deposited with him upon payment estimates from time to time received from the Village Engineer, which have been approved by the Board of Trustees. 
(Ord. 2615, 12-8-1980; amd. Ord. 2732, 2-22-1982; amd. Ord. 5454, 4-10-2006) 
7-10-7. - Permit required. 
No person shall turn on or use water from the water system unless so authorized by the water superintendent, by the issuance of a permit to use the water system. 
(Ord. 2732, 2-22-1982) 
7-10-8. - Seals. 
No seal affixed by the water division at any meter, valve, fitting or other water connection shall be defaced or broken. 
(Ord. 2732, 2-22-1982) 
7-10-9. - Fire hydrants. 
(A)  No person, other than a member of the Fire Department or an employee of the water division, shall open or use water from any fire hydrant connected with the water system of the Village unless specifically authorized by the utilities superintendent. 
(B)  Any use of fire hydrants authorized by the utilities superintendent shall be through Village furnished hydrant meters. Water supplied through hydrant meters shall be billed at twice the current rate charged for water and sewer service in the Village. No discount shall be given for water used and not returned to the Village sanitary sewer system. A nonrefundable administrative charge of $50.00 and a deposit of $500.00 shall be collected prior to the issuance of all hydrant meters for use in the Village. Said deposit shall be returned to the applicant, minus the cost of the water used, upon return of the meter in good condition to the Public Works Department. 
(C)  Water may be purchased in bulk quantities at the Reno Public Works Service Center at a ten percent surcharge to the current water rate charged to residents. This water charge will not include a sewer charge. 
(D)  Any use of fire hydrants authorized by the Public Works Department for the demolition of any structure or part thereof shall be through Village furnished hydrant meters and must comply with the following regulations: 
1.  All meters shall be installed and removed by the Village of Glen Ellyn. The demolition permit applicant or authorized agent shall contact Public Works to schedule the hydrant installation for the date of the proposed demolition. A minimum of 48 hours' notice is required to schedule the hydrant installation. On the day of the demolition, Public Works staff will install the meter before 8:00 a.m. Contractors must be on site to accept responsibility for the hydrant meter and show that a one and one-half inch diameter hose is available. When the outdoor temperature is 32 degrees or less, a hydrant meter shall not be required for demolition unless authorized by the Public Works Director, and in lieu thereof a watering truck must be provided as a source of water to control dust and airborne particles during the demolition process. 
2.  The Village will remove all hydrant meters by 4:00 p.m. The applicant or authorized agent shall contact Public Works for an earlier removal or special arrangements can be made for a later pick up at the applicant's expense. 
3.  The fee for water usage, hydrant meter installation and removal in the amount of $250.00 for the first day and an additional fee in the amount of $75.00 for each additional day shall be required for the demolition of a building or structure, or part thereof, greater than 1,000 and up to 4,000 square feet and not exceeding 45 feet in height. 
4.  The fee for water usage, hydrant meter installation and removal in the amount of $400.00 for the first day and an additional fee in the amount of $100.00 for each additional day shall be required for the demolition of a building or structure, or part thereof, greater than 4,000 square feet or exceeding 45 feet in height. 
(E)  Any use of fire hydrant meters may only occur when the ambient temperature is above 32 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(Ord. 4581, 4-13-1998, eff. 5-1-1998; Ord. 4599, 5-26-1998; Ord. 5432, 2-13-2006; Ord. 5996, 1-30-2012, eff. 3-1-2012) 
7-10-10. - Tampering with meter. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with any water meter, or in any way interfere with the proper recording of the water consumed on, or in respect to, any premises. 
(Ord. 2732, 2-22-1982) 
7-10-11. - Connection required. 
All buildings constructed in the Village on lots which are within 400 feet of a water main shall be connected thereto and subject to the provisions of this chapter. In the case of involuntarily annexed property, the time period for such connection may be established as provided in subsection 7-11-31(D) of this title. 
(Ord. 4075, 12-20-1993) 
7-10-12. - Supplying other premises. 
No person receiving water through the water system of the Village shall supply other persons or premises unless a permit to do so has been applied for and obtained from the utilities superintendent. 
(Ord. 2732, 2-22-1982) 
7-10-13. - Private water supply system restrictions. 
(A)  Interconnection prohibited: Whenever a private water system which receives its supply from any well, cistern or other source apart from the water system of the Village is installed or maintained inside or outside of any building or structure, on public or private property, such private water system shall be kept entirely separated from and not connected, directly or indirectly, with any pipe or system of pipes receiving water from the water system of the Village. 
(B)  Limitation on use: No private water supply system shall be installed or maintained to serve any premises or property within the Village limits if that premises or property is within 400 feet of the water system of the Village, except to construct, maintain and operate a private water supply system solely to irrigate landscaped areas, in accordance with the following requirements: 
1.  No more than one private water supply system shall be permitted per lot, parcel, or zoning lot. No private water supply system is allowed to provide service to another lot, parcel or zoning lot. 
2.  The private water supply system shall not be connected in any manner to supply potable water, drinking water or water for any other domestic use, including filling or replenishing swimming pools. In order to assure that water from such a private water supply system is not so connected, the Village may require and take a periodic bacteriological sampling of the water entering any building on the property served by such a system. 
3.  No private water supply system shall be permitted which, within reasonable engineering certainty, could adversely affect the aquifer from which the well receives water or otherwise interfere with any public or other private water supply system. 
4.  No permit for a private water supply system shall be granted if such private water supply system is in violation of any rule or regulation of the DuPage Water Commission or in breach or violation of any contract between the Village and the DuPage Water Commission which presently exists or may be entered into by the Village in the future. 
5.  Should the DuPage Water Commission charge the Village any amount of fee, penalty or other charge relative to the water supplied by any private water supply system for which a permit is granted, then the owner of the private system shall pay such amount to the Village as a condition of maintaining such private water supply system. 
6.  Wells for the private water supply system shall not be drilled to a depth greater than 200 feet. 
7.  Wells shall be no less than 15 feet from any publicly operated or privately owned water main. 
8.  No permit for a private water supply system shall be issued until evidence is provided that a reduced pressure principle backflow preventer (RPZ), or equal device as approved by the water division, has been installed on any water service pipe(s)/line(s) connecting a structure to the well and on any water service pipe(s)/line(s) connecting the structure to the public water supply. The owner of property required to install a reduced pressure principle backflow preventer (RPZ) shall have the device tested annually at his or her expense by a person approved by the Illinois environmental protection agency as a cross connection control device inspector (CCCDI). This certificate of inspection shall be filed with the Village utilities superintendent or his designee within ten days of the annual inspection requirement date. Each RPZ shall have a tag attached listing the date of the most recent test, the name of the CCCDI, and type and date of any repairs. The owner shall maintain a maintenance log including: a) date of each test, b) name and approval number of person performing the test, c) test results, d) repairs or servicing required, e) repairs and date completed, and f) service performed and date completed. The backflow prevention device shall be maintained in good working condition by the owner. 
9.  The private water supply system may supply water to a pond or other storage facility from which water is pumped for use solely to irrigate landscaped areas. 
Should the pond to which the well supplies water also be used for detention or retention as part of a stormwater management system, then an engineering analysis and opinion must be provided by the private water supply system owner to show to the reasonable satisfaction of the Public Works Director that the stormwater management function of the pond will not be adversely affected by pumping well water to the pond, or if such stormwater management function could be adversely affected by pumping well water to the pond, then operation limitations shall be suggested in the engineering analysis to eliminate any adverse effect on the stormwater management function of the pond. 
10.  Any permit for construction, operation and maintenance of a private water supply system shall be subject to such conditions as the Village Board deems proper to protect the health, safety or welfare of the Village and its residents. 
11.  The Village reserves the right to shut off or cap the private water supply system without advance notice to the owner in the event of an emergency affecting the health or safety of persons. 
(C)  Permit required: It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or permit to be maintained, to dig, drill, redrill or extend, or cause to be dug, drilled, redrilled, or extended, any well, hole or other excavation in the ground for the purpose of extracting water therefrom, without: 1) having first applied for and obtained a permit for such well from the Village, which permit shall not be issued unless the applicant provides satisfactory evidence to the effect that such well is permitted under provisions of subsection (B) of this section; 2) establishing that permits therefor have also been issued by DuPage County, the Illinois Department of Mines and Minerals and any other governmental authority having jurisdiction thereof; and 3) certifying that such well will be in full compliance with all applicable health and safety requirements of DuPage County and the state. Permit fee cost shall be $100.00. 
(D)  Water conservation regulation: Such private water supply systems shall not be subject to the water conservation regulations in section 7-10-26 of this chapter if the owner or occupant of the property on which the well is located displays a "private well" sign. A metal sign shall be placed in the front yard or a paper sign in the window of the property in a location clearly visible from the street. Except as otherwise provided in the preceding sentences, such private water supply systems shall be subject to the water conservation regulations in section 7-10-26 of this chapter. 
(E)  Public drinking fountains: In any event, no private water supply system shall be used to furnish water for a public drinking fountain or as a source from which to supply or sell to the public water for drinking or domestic purposes. 
(F)  Annual fee: Expenses incurred by the Village to regulate and administer private water supply systems for irrigation use shall be paid for by the owners of such systems through an annual fee of $50.00. The fee charged shall be added to the water bill for Village water for such system owner and shall constitute an expense to the owner thereof. 
(G)  Penalty: In the event that the certificate of inspection for the reduced pressure principle backflow preventer (RPZ) is not filed with the Village utilities superintendent or his designee within ten days of the annual certification date, the utilities superintendent or his designee shall notify the property owner (by certified mail) of the delinquency. The utilities superintendent or his designee is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue the water service to any property after reasonable written notice. Water service to such property shall not be restored until such certification has been provided to the Village and until a $20.00 service fee for termination of service is paid to the Village. 
(H)  Costs: If contamination of the Village's water system occurs through an illegal cross connection or improperly installed, maintained, repaired and/or bypassed backflow prevention device, the private water supply system owner must bear the cost of cleanup of the Village's water system. In addition to any other legal remedy to collect such costs, such costs shall constitute a lien on such property which shall be filed by the Village with the recorder of DuPage County. 
(I)  Violations: Remedies for violations of this section, as set forth herein, shall not be deemed exclusive or a limitation upon the authority of the Village to apply the penalty provisions available in section 7-10-28 of this chapter, to such violations. 
(J)  Annual inspection: To the extent permitted by law, the Village reserves the right to make periodic visits to properties or premises with a private water supply system for the purposes of inspection and water sampling. Such spot checks will occur on an annual basis but may occur at random times throughout the year. Reasonable access to properties by the Village for the purposes of inspection and sampling shall not be denied by owners of private water supply systems. 
(K)  Annual report: For a period of three years following the effective date hereof, the Utilities Superintendent shall provide the Village Board of Trustees with an annual report of activities and information related to the number, status and administration of private water supply systems in the Village. 
(Ord. 4247, 4-10-1995; Ord. 5454, 4-10-2006) 
7-10-14. - Wells. 
(A)  Permit: No water well shall be constructed or repaired, except in accordance with the provisions of this Code, regulations prescribed by the health officer and after obtaining a permit therefor from the Village Collector. 
(B)  Application for permit: Applications for a permit for the construction or repair of a well shall be in writing on a form prescribed by the utilities superintendent. 
Each application shall be accompanied by a plat showing the location of all wells, septic tanks, subsurface tile systems and privy vaults constructed, or to be constructed, upon the lot or premises. 
(C)  Prohibited locations: No well shall be constructed or maintained within 75 feet of any septic tank or privy vault, or within ten feet of any tile leading to a septic tank. 
(D)  Construction regulations: The construction or repair of water wells shall be governed by the following: 
1.  The well site shall have good surface drainage and be higher than all sources of pollution, such as septic tanks, subsurface tile systems and privy vaults. 
2.  The well shall be a drilled or driven well, and the casing thereof shall be extra heavy, threaded joint, galvanized iron or steel pipe. If solid rock is encountered, the casing ends at the depth of less than ten feet from the ground surface, there must be a watertight union of the casing with the rock. In case the upper rock stratum consists of creviced limestone to solid rock, the well shall be encased in a concrete envelope or as an alternative, the well shall be encased to a depth of at least 15 feet below the maximum drawdown level when pumping with the pump to be installed or its equivalent, and approved equipment for continuous and adequate chlorination shall be provided. 
3.  A pump pit should be avoided, but if necessary shall be constructed of monolithic, waterproof, reinforced concrete, at least six inches in thickness, and the pump pit cover shall be of watertight construction. The casing top shall extend at least 18 inches above the concrete floor of the pump pit, and no pit drain shall be permitted. If water accumulates in the pit, a concrete sump, with an automatic sump pump with a free fall discharge aboveground, shall be provided. 
4.  The annular opening between the well casing and the drop pipe shall be sealed, either by the casing extending up into a solid base pump, by an oakum and lead seal, or by flanged and bolted fittings. 
(E)  Testing of water: Newly constructed water wells and systems shall be disinfected, and the owners thereof shall have the water analyzed and approved by the department of health of the state before the well is placed in service. It shall also be the duty of the owner or user of the well to have the water therefrom analyzed and approved by the state department of health at regular intervals of not more than 90 days, and a copy of such analysis, together with the original approval, shall be filed with the DuPage County Health Department. The cost of each analysis and report shall be borne by the owner or user of the well. 
(Ord. 2732, 2-22-1982) 
7-10-15. - Permit application. 
Any person desiring to make any connection with the water system of the Village, or to use the water therefrom, shall first make application to the Village Collector upon such form as may be furnished for that purpose. Each applicant shall state in such application the location of the premises for which such service is sought, the type of improvement thereon and the purposes for which the water is to be used. 
(Ord. 2732, 2-22-1982) 
7-10-16. - Deposit required. 
(A)  A cash deposit of no less than $150.00 shall be required with each application for service. When service to the applicant is discontinued permanently, this deposit, less any amount due the Village for water service, shall be refunded to the applicant without interest. 
(B)  For the purposes of this section, the shutting off of any water supply for nonpayment of a water bill, or for any other causes due to the fault of the consumer, shall be considered as a permanent discontinuance of such water service; and a new application shall be required before the water service shall be restored. 
(C)  Should any person fail to make the cash deposit required by this section within ten days after a request therefor has been made by the Village, then the Village may terminate all sewer and/or water services to that consumer, and such termination shall be considered as a permanent discontinuance of such water and/or sewer service, thereby requiring a new application before service will be restored. 
(D)  The deposit requirement as identified in subsection (A) of this section shall be waived in the event the applicant applies for, and remains in good standing, participation in the Village's "auto bill pay" program. 
The Management Services Director is hereby authorized to process a refund of deposits held by the Village on behalf of water and sewer customers who participate in the "auto bill pay" payment program. Refunds shall be processed in the form of an account billing credit. 
(Ord. 2732, 2-22-1982; Ord. 3284, 1-12-1987, eff. 2-1-1987; Ord. 5148, 3-10-2003; Ord. 5319, 12-20-2004) 
7-10-17. - Permit for service inside corporate limits. 
Where the premises for which water service is sought are located within the Village limits, application to make a connection with the water system shall be referred to the Utilities Superintendent, who, if satisfied that all pertinent requirements of this chapter have been complied with, shall then issue a permit authorizing a connection to be made and specifying the size thereof. No connection shall be made prior to the issuance of such permit. 
(Ord. 2732, 2-22-1982) 
7-10-18. - Permit for service outside corporate limits. 
Where the premises for which water and sewer services are sought are located outside the Village, permission to make such connections may be granted only by the Village President and Board of Trustees to whom applications must be for both water and sewer services; neither service will be extended without the other. If permission is granted for extension of the water and sewer services, the Village President and Board of Trustees may impose conditions, restrictions or limitations thereon as they deem advisable, and reserve the right to discontinue the services when required to do so by order of a superior authority. 
(Ord. 2732, 2-22-1982) 
7-10-19. - Water connections. 
All water connections to the Village water supply proposed for any purpose shall be reviewed and approved by the utilities superintendent prior to construction. This work will be performed by the owner at his expense and includes the tapping of the water main, insertion of a corporation cock, installation of service line from the corporation cock to a point seven feet from the property line of the premises being served, at which point a curb stop shall be inserted and a B-box attached in conformance with water division specifications for materials and workmanship. 
(Ord. 3829, 4-22-1991) 
7-10-20. - Installation, maintenance of service pipes. 
(A)  All water service lines from the water main to the premises being served shall be installed by, and at the cost of, either the owner of the premises or the applicant for water service. All service lines, meters and other equipment from the curb stop to and within the premises shall be property of the owner or applicant. Installation of all service pipes shall be made under the supervision and approval of the utilities superintendent, and no service pipes shall be installed unless they are a minimum of one inch in diameter and made of type "K" copper or ductile iron in three inches and larger sizing. No such installation shall be covered until the work has been inspected by the utilities superintendent. 
(B)  Service lines from the curb stop of the water meter of the premises being served shall be kept in good repair at all times, and all repairs to the water pipe shall be made by and at the expense of either the owner of the property or the occupant receiving the service. 
(C)  Water service lines which are abandoned or taken out of service for more than six months shall be disconnected from the water main at the corporation cock by the owner or applicant. All costs incurred for this work, including excavation and restoration, shall be the responsibility of the owner or applicant. 
Service lines that are deficient in size (less than one inch in diameter) or material (such as type "M" copper) shall be replaced from the public main to the structure by the owner of the premises served whenever any one of the following improvements are made to an existing building: 
1.  The existing building floor area is increased by more than 75 percent. 
2.  The existing building exterior roof and wall area is structurally altered by more than 50 percent. 
3.  The existing building is remodeled with a hard cost of more than $100,000.00. 
(D)  Water service lines greater than one inch in diameter shall be installed based on the demand for water use as determined in the Illinois State Plumbing Code for the structure served. 
(E)  An alternative method to design the service line size employing current engineering practices may be used provided the design is approved in writing by an Illinois licensed professional engineer, an Illinois licensed architect or an individual certified in plumbing engineering (CIPE) by the American Society of Plumbing Engineers and approved in writing by the Utilities Superintendent. 
(Ord. 4581, 4-13-1998, eff. 5-1-1998; Ord. 5996, 1-30-2012, eff. 3-1-2012) 
7-10-21. - Compression stops. 
A compression and waste stop shall be attached to every supply pipe entering the building being served. Such compression stop shall be located inside the building at a point where the pipe enters the building so that water may be shut off at that point. No service pipe shall be laid or used to supply water to more than one building. Where two or more meters serve the same building, a lock type compression stop shall be installed ahead of each meter. 
(Ord. 2732, 2-22-1982) 
7-10-22. - Meters; installation, maintenance. 
(A)  All water furnished to consumers from the water system of the Village shall be supplied through water meters equipped with an outside register. No service line shall have more than one meter. The kind and pattern of such water meters shall be as determined by the utilities superintendent. All water meters shall be sized based on the demand for water use as determined in the Illinois State Plumbing Code for the structure served. All water meters shall be placed inside the building with a conduit installed to the outside location for the outside register wire. The water meter shall be installed in an area making the meter easily accessible for reading, inspection or repair, subject to the review and approval of the utilities superintendent. Accuracy at all flow rates shall meet American Water Works Association (AWWA) standards for water meters of the size and kind approved by the utilities superintendent. No meters shall be installed inside vaults or other areas which are considered a confined space under Illinois Department of Labor Regulations, unless otherwise approved by the Public Works Director. 
(B)  All three-fourths inch and one inch meters shall be installed with a solderless meter holding device which will be supplied by the Village. 
(C)  Where the premises being served is outside the Village limits, a B-box shall be located within the public right-of-way and responsibility for maintenance and repair of the service beyond the B-box shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property or the occupant receiving the service. 
(Ord. 4581, 4-13-1998, eff. 5-1-1998) 
7-10-23. - Access to premises and termination procedures. 
The utilities superintendent, and all persons authorized by him, shall be given ready access to the premises wherein water meters are located for the purpose of reading, examining, testing, repairing, and replacing such meters and appurtenant wires and reading devices; and they may, if necessary, remove or replace meters for such purpose or for testing the consumption, use, and flow of water. Should any person unreasonably refuse to allow entry of a duly authorized representative of the Village for the purpose of reading, examining, testing, repairing, or replacing water meters and appurtenant wires and reading devices, then the Village shall have the right to disconnect and refuse further service to said premises. 
If water meters require removal or replacement and said work cannot be accomplished by the Village due to defects in the interior plumbing of the premises, the owner of said premises shall make the necessary repairs required to allow for the removal or replacement of said water meters. In the event the owner does not complete the required repairs in a reasonable time, as determined by the Utilities Superintendent, then the Village shall have the right to disconnect and refuse further service to said premises until said repairs have been completed. 
(Ord. 4826, 3-27-2000) 
7-10-24. - Interference prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, prevent or obstruct the utilities superintendent, or any authorized person, in the performance of his duties under this chapter. 
(Ord. 2732, 2-22-1982) 
7-10-25. - Waiver of liability. 
All water connections applied for, and all water used, under this chapter shall be upon the express condition that the Village shall not be liable, nor shall any claim be made against it, for damages or injury caused by reason of the breaking of any main, branch, service pipe, apparatus or appurtenance connected with said water system, or for any interruption of the water supply by reason of the breakage of equipment or machinery or by reason of stoppage, alterations, extensions or renewals. 
(Ord. 2732, 2-22-1982) 
7-10-26. - Lawn sprinkling. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sprinkle the lawns of residences or other buildings within the corporate limits of the Village, except in accordance with the following schedule: 
(A)  Odd numbered lots: All persons owning or controlling property bearing an odd numbered street address may sprinkle their lawn on days having an odd numbered calendar date. 
(B)  Even numbered lots: All persons owning or controlling property bearing an even numbered street address may sprinkle their lawn on days having an even numbered calendar date. 
(C)  Hours: The hours of the day when the sprinkling of lawns is permitted shall be governed by the following: 
1.  General hours: Sprinkling shall only be permitted during the hours of 5:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. to 11:00 p.m., except as otherwise may be limited by action of the President and Board of Trustees pursuant to this section. 
2.  Emergency hours: A majority of the President and Board of Trustees may determine that a water emergency may exist, in which event, the sprinkling of lawns shall only occur between the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m. The determination that a water emergency exists shall be made by the passage and approval of an ordinance declaring such emergency and establishing the period during which emergency lawn sprinkling hours shall exist. 
(D)  Exemptions: The local governmental agencies and private golf courses shall be exempt from the above provisions, but the Village President is hereby given the authority to revoke said exemption in times of emergency. 
(E)  New lawns: Notwithstanding the foregoing, freshly planted or newly seeded lawns may be watered daily between 1:00 p.m. and 4:00 p.m. for a period of 30 days. 
(F)  Penalty: Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be subject to fines of not less than $50.00 for the first offense, not less than $75.00 for the second offense and not less than $100.00 for the third and any succeeding offense. 
(G)  Inspection fee: Every applicant installing a new lawn sprinkler system shall pay an inspection fee in the amount of $50.00. 
(H)  Equipment: Pursuant to 17 Illinois Administrative Code 3730.307(c)(4) and subject to the Illinois Plumbing Code (77 Illinois Administrative Code 890) and the Lawn Irrigation Contractor and Lawn Sprinkler System Registration Code (77 Illinois Administrative Code 892), all new irrigation controllers installed after the effective date hereof shall bear the WaterSense label (as designed by the United States Environmental Protection Agency WaterSense Program), when such labeled fixtures are available. 
(Ord. 2732, 2-22-1982; Ord. 3665, 7-24-1989; Ord. 5154, 3-24-2003; Ord. 6488, 3-20-2017) 
7-10-27. - Shutting off service for reasons other than nonpayment of bills. 
When water is furnished to any building, and it is found that: 
(A)  False representations have been made in the application for water service; 
(B)  Water is being used for purposes not set forth in the application; 
(C)  Water is being supplied to persons or buildings other than those for whom the service was introduced; 
(D)  The owner or occupant of the premises being served has failed, after notice, to repair the service pipes or meters; 
(E)  Employees of the Water Division, or anyone duly authorized, has been denied access to the premises for the purpose of examining pipes, meter or connections with the water supply system; or 
(F)  The water meter has been tampered with or the proper recording of the water furnished to the premises has been otherwise unlawfully interfered with. 
The Utilities Superintendent shall have, and is hereby given, authority to promptly shut off the supply of water to such building or premises until proper application is made or the defaults corrected and such additional sum of money paid to the Village Collector as shall be found due for water therefor furnished. 
(Ord. 2732, 2-22-1982) 
7-10-28. - General penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined in a sum not to exceed $500.00 for each offense. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. 2732, 2-22-1982) 
7-10-29. - Cross connection control regulations. 
(A)  All plumbing installed within the Village of Glen Ellyn shall be installed in accordance with the Illinois Plumbing Code, 77 Illinois Administrative Code 890. That, if in accordance with the Illinois Plumbing Code or in the judgment of the Public Works Director, or his /her representative, an approved backflow prevention device is necessary for the safety of the public water supply system, the Public Works Director, or his /her representative, will give notice to the water customer to install such an approved device immediately. The water customer shall, at his own expense, install such an approved device at a location and in a manner in accordance with the Illinois Plumbing Code and all applicable local regulations, and shall have inspections tests, and maintenance performed to such approved devices upon installation and as required by the Illinois Plumbing Code and local regulations. 
(B)  No person, firm or corporation shall establish or permit to be established or maintain or permit to be maintained any connection whereby a private, auxiliary or emergency water supply other than the regular public water supply of the Village of Glen Ellyn enter the supply or distribution system of said Municipality, unless such private, auxiliary or emergency water supply and the method of connection and use of such supply shall have been approved by the Public Works Director, or his /her representative, and the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. 
(C)  It shall be the duty of the Public Works Director, or his /her representative, to cause surveys, inspections, and/or investigations to be made of commercial, industrial and other properties served by the public water supply to determine whether actual or potential hazards to the public water supply may exist. Such surveys, inspections, and/or investigations shall be made a matter of public record and shall be repeated at least every two years, or more often as the Public Works Director, or his /her representative, shall deem necessary. Records of such surveys shall be maintained and available for review for a period of at least five years. 
(D)  After reasonable notice, the approved cross connection control device inspector shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public water supply or distribution system of the Village of Glen Ellyn for the purpose of verifying the presence or absence of cross connections, and that after reasonable notice the Utilities Superintendent or his authorized agent shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public water supply or distribution system of the Village of Glen Ellyn for the purpose of verifying information submitted by the customer regarding the required cross connection control inspection. On demand the owner, lessees or occupants of any property so served shall furnish to the Public Works Director, or his /her representative, any information, which he may request regarding the piping system or systems or water use on such property. The refusal of such information, when demanded, shall, within the discretion of the Public Works Director, or his /her representative, be deemed evidence of the presence of improper connections as provided in this section. 
(E)  The Public Works Director, or his /her representative, of the Village of Glen Ellyn is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue, after reasonable notice to the occupant thereof, the water service to any property wherein any connection in violation of the provisions of this section is known to exist, and to take such other precautionary measures as he may deem necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water supply distribution mains. Water service to such property shall not be restored until such conditions have been eliminated or corrected in compliance with the provisions of this section, and until a minimum reconnection fee of $100.00 is paid to the Village of Glen Ellyn. Immediate disconnection with verbal notice can be effected when the Public Works Director, or his /her representative, is assured that imminent danger of harmful contamination of the public water supply system exists. Such action shall be followed by written notification of the cause of disconnection. Immediate disconnection without notice to any party can be effected to prevent actual or anticipated contamination or pollution of the public water supply, provided that, in the reasonable opinion of the Public Works Director, or his /her representative, or the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, such action is required to prevent actual or potential contamination or pollution of the public water supply. Neither the public water supply, the Public Works Director, or his /her representative, or its agents or assigns shall be liable to any customer for any injury, damages or lost revenues which may result from termination of said customer's water supply in accordance with the terms of this section, whether or not said termination was with or without notice. 
(F)  The customer responsible for back siphoned material or contamination through backflow, if contamination of the potable water supply system occurs through an illegal cross connection or an improperly installed, maintained or repaired device, or a device which has been bypassed, must bear the cost of cleanup of the potable water supply system. 
(Ord. 6214, 2-10-2014) 
Chapter 11 - WATER AND SEWER RATES AND CHARGES 

7-11-1. - Definitions. 
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of the terms used herein shall be the same as defined in section 7-9-1 of this title. 
(Ord. 3168, 1-27-1986, eff. 3-1-1986) 
7-11-2. - Metering required. 
(A)  As required by section 7-10-22 of this title, all water furnished to consumers from the water system of the Village shall be supplied through meters only, except for water used in construction work. 
(B)  If a person discharging wastes into the public sewers procures any part or all of his water from sources other than the Village public waterworks system, all or a part of which is discharged into the public sewers, that person shall install and maintain, at his own expense, water meters of a type approved by the Director for the purpose of determining the volume of water obtained from these other sources. 
(C)  If in the opinion of the Director, the volume of wastewater cannot otherwise be determined from the metered water consumption, he may require devices for measuring the volume of waste discharged into the public sewers. 
(D)  Should wastewater metering devices be required to determine the volume of waste discharged into the public sewers, such metering device shall be installed, owned and maintained by the person discharging wastewater into the public sewers. Following approval and installation, such meters may not be removed without the consent of the Director, unless service is first cancelled. 
(Ord. 3168, 1-27-1986, eff. 3-1-1986) 
7-11-3. - Water for construction purposes. 
(A)  Any person desiring to use water from the water system of the Village during construction pursuant to a validly issued building permit, before a water meter is installed for the premises, will be permitted to do so by making application therefor to the Village. Such construction water permit shall be granted and the water furnished, only upon the conditions that the construction work proceed with all reasonable dispatch, and that a meter be installed as soon as the foundation of the premises under construction has been completed. Until such permanent meter has been installed, the applicant shall pay, in advance, the flat fee established in subsection (B) of this section for all water to be consumed within three months from the date of the permit; and if the permanent meter has not been installed before the expiration of the three months, an additional flat fee per quarter, or part thereof, shall be paid in advance for all water consumed. Water during construction shall not be provided at a location for longer than one year. After the installation of the permanent meter, all water shall be charged and paid for, at the rates provided in this chapter. 
(B)  The flat fee for water consumed during construction shall be based upon the area of the proposed addition or building at the rate of $2.00 per 100 square feet of building or addition, per quarter. 
(Ord. 3168, 1-27-1986, eff. 3-1-1986) 
7-11-4. - Responsibility for charges. 
(A)  Where water or sewer services are provided, directly or indirectly, to any premises, the owner, tenant or occupant of those premises and/or the user of any water or sewer service shall be considered to be a customer of the Village and shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for the services to such premises. Water and/or sewer services are furnished to premises by the Village only upon the condition that the owner of the premises, tenant or occupant thereof and user of the services are jointly and severally liable therefor to the Village. 
(B)  Where water or sewer services are provided to any premises through another municipal corporation or through a private utility regulated by the Illinois Commerce Commission, the other municipal corporation or private utility shall also be liable to the Village for all water or sewer services furnished by the Village for premises served by the other municipal corporation or by the private utility. 
(Ord. 3572, 1-23-1989, eff. 2-1-1989) 
7-11-5. - Charges based upon meter reading. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided herein all fees and charges for water and/or sewer services shall be based upon the flow registered by a water or wastewater flow meter, and no reduction shall be made or rebate allowed, on account of leakage into or from any pipe, tank or other apparatus. 
(Ord. 3168, 1-27-1986, eff. 3-1-1986) 
7-11-6. - Procedure for change in occupancy. 
In the event an owner, tenant or occupant of any premises served by the Village sells or vacates the premises served, he shall notify the Village prior to his selling or vacating the premises. A final bill shall be rendered, which bill shall be due immediately upon receipt. The Village may discontinue service to a premises upon rendering a final bill. When the new owner, new tenant or new occupant acquires or occupies such premises, he shall notify the Village of his desire to have service and make application for service. Any person who is moving to another property which receives water or sewer service from the Village shall not receive water service until the final bill from his previous ownership or occupancy shall have been paid in full. 
(Ord. 3572, 1-23-1989, eff. 2-1-1989) 
7-11-7. - Reading meters. 
(A)  Within constitutional limits, duly authorized representatives of the Village shall have the right to enter, at any reasonable hour, any building, structure or premises which directly or indirectly receives water or sewer services from the Village for the purpose of reading any water or wastewater flow meter. Should any person unreasonably refuse to allow entry of a duly authorized representative of the Village for the purpose of reading a water or wastewater flow meter, then the Village shall have the right to disconnect and refuse further service to said premises. 
(B)  Where another municipal corporation or private utility renders a bill based upon metered flow of water or wastewater to a user of the Village's water and/or sewer service and directly or indirectly uses the Village's water or sewer services to service its customers, then at the request of the Village such municipal corporation or private utility shall certify on a monthly basis to the Village the following information: 
1.  A listing of all water meter readings taken during the previous month; 
2.  The number of individual users, the amount of water flow recorded by each user's meter, an estimate of the water flow through those meters that were not read, an estimate for any nonmetered users, and the total flow, including both metered and nonmetered users; 
3.  Where the municipal corporation or private utility bills one or more of its customers on the basis of wastewater flow, a listing of all wastewater flow meter readings taken and the total flow through said meters, with estimates where a meter reading is not available; 
4.  A list of all locations where service was discontinued, where service was turned on, and/or where new meters were installed; and 
5.  Such other information requested by the Village and pertaining to water flow, wastewater flow or use of the Village's water and/or sewer services. 
(C)  Where the customer is another municipal corporation or private utility, then the Village shall have the right, at all reasonable hours, to audit the books and records of such customer as they pertain to any aspect of meter flow or wastewater flow of such customer or of its end users or customers. 
(Ord. 3168, 1-27-1986, eff. 3-1-1986; Ord. 3572, 1-23-1989, eff. 2-1-1989) 
7-11-8. - Billing frequency. 
(A)  Bills for water and sewer service directly provided to a premises by the Village shall be rendered to the customer monthly. 
(B)  Monthly bills shall be due and payable 20 days after being mailed to the customer. 
(Ord. 4409, 8-26-1996) 
7-11-9. - Estimated bills. 
(A)  Monthly bills will be based upon actual readings whenever possible. If an actual meter reading cannot be obtained for any reason, then an estimated bill will be produced. Adjustments shall be made on the next succeeding bill after an actual meter reading is available to the Village. 
(B)  Each consumer has the obligation to arrange for access to its billing meter for the purpose of allowing the same to be read by the Village as part of the normal route of the person reading meters. Should access to the building or buildings housing any billing meter be inconvenient for any reason, then the Village may require the person receiving sewer and/or water service to provide a meter capable of being read externally of the building housing the meter, at the sole cost and expense of the consumer. 
(C)  Should the Village be unable to obtain access to billing meter for the purpose of reading the same for one year, then the Village may terminate service to that customer. 
(Ord. 3284, 1-12-1987, eff. 2-1-1987; Ord. 3829, 4-22-1991; Ord. 4409, 8-26-1996) 
7-11-10. - Meter failures. 
Whenever any water or sewer flow meter fails to properly register the water or sewage passing through it, the consumer shall be charged with the amount billed for a corresponding time for the previous year. If no record of the previous year exists, then the amount of water consumed or sewage introduced into the public sewer during the time such meter failed to register shall be estimated by the Village, and the consumer shall pay for the amount so estimated. 
(Ord. 2733, 2-22-1982, eff. 5-1-1982) 
7-11-11. - Notices. 
All bills and notices herein provided for may be delivered or served in person or by mail, addressed to the customer or other person liable for the charges, at the last known address contained in the records of the Village. 
(Ord. 3168, 1-27-1986, eff. 3-1-1986) 
7-11-12. - Revenues. 
All revenues and monies derived from the collection of water and sewer rates and charges shall be deposited in an appropriate fund as determined by the Village. All such revenues and monies shall be held by the management services Director and all of said sum, without any deductions whatever, shall be delivered to the management services Director not more than ten days after receipt of the same, or at such more frequent intervals as may from time to time be directed by the President and Board of Trustees. The management services Director shall receive all revenues from the user charge system and all funds and monies incident to the operation of the waterworks and sewage system as the same may be delivered to him and deposit the same in an appropriate fund. The funds shall be administered in every respect in the manner provided by statute. 
(Ord. 2733, 2-22-1982, eff. 5-1-1982) 
7-11-13. - Accounts. 
The management services Director shall establish a proper system of accounts and shall keep proper books, records and accounts in which complete and correct entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the user charge system, and at regular annual intervals he shall cause to be made an audit by an independent auditing concern of the books to show the receipts and disbursements of the user charge system. 
(Ord. 2733, 2-22-1982, eff. 5-1-1982) 
7-11-14. - Outside readers. 
In cases where the inside meter and outside reader do not agree, the customer shall be charged with the amount billed for a corresponding time the previous year. If no record of the previous year exists, then the amount of water consumed or sewage introduced into the public sewer during the time of discrepancy shall be estimated by the Village, and the customer shall pay for the amount so estimated. The account may be adjusted to forgive the remaining difference between an erroneous outside reader and actual inside meter on a one time only basis. After an adjustment is made and the reader and meter adjusted, all water passing through the inside meter will be billed to the customer, and the amount on the inside meter will control the amount that will be billed. 
(Ord. 4409, 8-26-1996) 
7-11-15. - Meter testing. 
If a meter is pulled for testing at the request of the customer and found to be in good working order, the cost of the replacement meter will be charged to the water account. 
(Ord. 4243, 3-27-1995, eff. 5-1-1995) 
7-11-16. - Penalty. 
All accounts will be penalized ten percent of the current amount if not paid on or before the due date. The penalty may be waived once every 12 months, effective May 1, 1995. 
(Ord. 4243, 3-27-1995, eff. 5-1-1995) 
7-11-17. - Delinquency and termination of service. 
(A)  In the event that charges for water and/or sewer services are not paid within the time specified in section 7-11-8 of this chapter, a past due notice will be included with the next monthly bill. If the bill continues to be unpaid ten days after the issuance of the next monthly bill, a final notice will be mailed to the delinquent customer. This notice shall indicate that if the bill is not paid within ten days, or other arrangements have not been made with the Village, service will be terminated. 
(B)  On those occasions where it becomes necessary to terminate service provided directly to a premises by the Village, then the direct customer shall be required to pay a $40.00 service fee for termination of services in addition to payment of all delinquent bills. 
(C)  On those occasions where it becomes necessary to terminate service to a municipal corporation or private utility where services are provided indirectly to the end users of such municipal corporation or private utility, then the municipal corporation or private utility shall be required to pay any and all costs incurred by the Village in terminating service, including reasonable compensation for staff time and out of pocket expenses, in addition to payment of all delinquent bills. 
(Ord. 3168, 1-27-1986, eff. 3-1-1986; amd. Ord. 4677, 1-25-1999)(Ord. 4409, 8-26-1996) 
7-11-18. - No service to delinquent customers. 
No consumer owing water and/or sewer charges who moves to other premises where there are water and sewer connections, or where such connections shall afterwards be made, shall be supplied with water or sewer services until delinquent charges are satisfied. Further, should service be terminated for nonpayment of bills, service will not thereafter be supplied until all delinquent charges, including termination charges and late penalties, are satisfied. 
(Ord. 2733, 2-22-1982, eff. 5-1-1982) 
7-11-19. - Lien for charges. 
In the event water and/or sewer charges are not paid within the time specified in section 7-11-8 of this chapter, after the mailing of the bill for services, such charges shall be deemed delinquent and such delinquency shall constitute a lien upon the real estate to which the service was provided. The Village Clerk shall file a sworn statement showing such delinquency in the office of the County Recorder of Deeds, in the manner provided by statute. The filing of a statement of delinquency shall be deemed notice and demand for the payment of this delinquency. 
(Ord. 3572, 1-23-1989, eff. 2-1-1989) 
7-11-20. - Reserved. 
7-11-21. - Right to change rates. 
Nothing herein shall prohibit the Village from amending the provisions of this chapter, and it shall retain authority to improve the water system, sewage system or wastewater treatment facilities or any part or portion thereof, and to establish new or different rates, regulations or provisions concerning the use of the Village water and sewer service. 
(Ord. 2733, 2-22-1982, eff. 5-1-1982) 
7-11-22. - Filing rates. 
A copy of water and sewer charges set forth in this chapter, and as amended from time to time, shall be certified by the Village Clerk and filed in the office of the County Recorder of Deeds. The filing of these charges shall be notice to an owner of real estate of his liability for the service supplied by the Village through its combined waterworks and sewage system. 
(Ord. 2733, 2-22-1982, eff. 5-1-1982) 
7-11-23. - Combined water and sewer system. 
Pursuant to the powers granted in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-139-1 et seq., the Village has heretofore elected to operate its waterworks and the sewage system as a combined waterworks and sewage system. 
(Ord. 2733, 2-22-1982, eff. 5-1-1982) 
7-11-24. - Basis for water service charges. 
The charge for water service shall consist of a fixed demand charge and a variable charge as follows: 
(A)  Fixed demand charge: The fixed demand charge takes into consideration the cost of providing peak demand capacity for the waterworks system and is dependent upon the size of meter servicing the premises and the use of the premises served by the waterworks. 
(B)  Variable charge: The variable charge shall be based upon water usage as recorded by water meters. 
(Ord. 3168, 1-27-1986, eff. 3-1-1986) 
7-11-25. - Basis for sewer collection and wastewater service charges. 
The charge for sewer services shall consist of a fixed charge for sewer only users, a variable charge for all users and a surcharge dependent upon the concentration of wastes discharged to the sewer system, as follows: 
(A)  Fixed demand: The fixed charge takes into consideration the billing, collection and related administrative costs for sewer only users with such costs for combined water and sewer users being incorporated into the fixed charge for water. Where the Village bills an intermediate user for sewer only service, the fixed charge shall be charged and paid for each end user. 
(B)  Variable charge: The variable charge shall be based upon water usage as recorded by water meters, unless metering of water is impractical, as determined by the Village, in which event the variable charge shall be based on wastewater flows measured by a wastewater flow meter. The variable charge is based upon the wastewater having normal concentrations (as measured as close as possible to the point of discharge to the sewage collection system) as follows: 
1.  A five-day, 20 degree Centigrade biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) of 295 milligrams per liter, and 
2.  A suspended solids (SS) content of 295 milligrams per liter. 
The variable charge is dependent upon the operation and maintenance costs plus replacement costs for the sanitary sewer system, including the Village's proportionate share of the Glenbard Wastewater Authority expenses. 
(C)  Surcharge: A surcharge will be levied to all users whose waters exceed the normal concentrations of BOD 295 milligrams per liter and SS 295 milligrams per liter. The surcharge will be based upon water usage as recorded by a water meter and/or sewage flow meter for all wastes which exceed the normal concentration for either BOD or SS, respectively. The procedure for computing a surcharge is set forth in subsection (D) of this section. 
(D)  Computation of surcharge: The concentration of waste used for computing surcharges shall be established by waste sampling and analyses in conformance with "standard methods". Waste sampling shall be performed as often as may be deemed necessary by the Public Works Director and shall be binding as a basis for surcharges. 
The amount of the surcharge for each billing period shall be computed as follows: 
CS = [(B-Bb) Rb + (S-Sb) Rs] F Where: CS       = Surcharge payment in dollars B       = BOD 5 established by sampling and analysis Bb       = BOD 5 base above which the surcharge applies Rb       = Rate for excess BOD 5 in dollars S       = Suspended solids established by sampling and analysis Sb       = Suspended solids base above which the surcharge applies Rs       = Rate for excess suspended solids in dollars F       = Flow during billing period measured in thousands of gallons  
  
(E)  Computation of wastewater service charge: The wastewater service charge shall be computed by the following formula: 
CW = CF + Q (CV) + CS Where: CW       = Amount of wastewater service charge ($) per billing period CF       = Fixed charge Q       = Water consumption or wastewater volume for the billing period CV       = Variable charge for collection and treatment system CS       = Amount of surcharge  
  
(Ord. 2733, 2-22-1982, eff. 5-1-1982; Ord. 3168, 1-27-1986, eff. 3-1-1986; Ord. 3572, 1-23-1989, eff. 2-1-1989) 
7-11-26. - Measurement of flow. 
The volume of flow used for computing the variable charges or surcharges for the water and sewer service rates shall be the metered water consumption or wastewater flow read to the lowest even increments of 1,000 gallons. 
(Ord. 2733, 2-22-1982, eff. 5-1-1982) 
7-11-27. - Classes of service. 
There shall be two classes of service based upon usage: "residential users" and all "other users", defined as follows: 
(A)  Residential users: Shall include all single-family, multi-family, townhouse or other residential premises where the primary occupancy of the premises is for residential purposes and the premises is served by a separate meter having a size of one inch or less. 
(B)  Other users: Shall include all other water or sewer services that do not fall within the definition of "residential users". 
(Ord. 3168, 1-27-1986, eff. 3-1-1986) 
7-11-28. - Water and sewer rates and charges. 
The rates and charges for the use and services supplied by the combined waterworks and sewage systems of the Village are as follows: 
Effective with bills issued January 1, 2018 Within Village  Water $9.93 per 1,000 gallons  Sewer $7.18 per 1,000 gallons Outside Village  Water $14.87 per 1,000 gallons  Sewer $7.55 per 1,000 gallons  Sewer only $7.55 per 1,000 gallons + $3.25 per month service fee  Non-metered Sewer $45.30  
    In addition, all sewer customers of the Village shall be assessed a flat monthly Drainage Reimbursement Fee of $3.00 for the purpose of funding stormwater improvements and maintenance, the sewer repair reimbursement program, and the clear water removal program. 
(Ord. 6468, 12-12-2016; Ord. 6561, 11-13-2017; Ord. 6687, 4-8-2019) 
7-11-29. - Minimum bill. 
The minimum water bill shall be two times the rate per 1,000 gallons of consumption and shall include the use of up to 2,000 gallons of water. Sewer shall be billed upon actual water consumption for water and sewer customers. 
(Ord. 4409, 8-26-1996) 
7-11-30. - Water connection fees. 
All connections to the water mains shall be made upon the following conditions and subject to the following charges: 
(A)  Service line size; fee: A water connection fee shall depend upon the size of the customer service lines as follows: 
Water Service Size       Connection Fee 
3/4 inch diameter ..... $450.00 
1 inch diameter ..... 800.00 
11/4 inch diameter ..... 1,250.00 
11/2 inch diameter ..... 1,800.00 
2 inch diameter ..... 3,200.00 
3 inch diameter ..... 7,200.00 
4 inch diameter ..... 12,800.00 
6 inch diameter ..... 28,800.00 
The service line size shall be determined in accordance with the Illinois State Plumbing Code. The water flow requirement for fire sprinklers shall not be included when calculating the connection charge. 
(B)  Multiple-family homes; multiple commercial units: Multiple-family homes and multiple commercial units connected to one service line shall pay $400.00 for each additional unit more than one served by the connection. Provided, however, that for any permits issued between April 13, 1998 and December 1, 1998, the connection fee payable under this subsection and subsection (A) of this section for multiple-family homes shall not exceed $60,000.00 without regard to the number of multiple-family homes served by a single connection. 
(C)  Work performed: All work performed by owners shall be in accordance with the State of Illinois Plumbing Code. At least 24 hours' advance notice shall be given to the Village before any water service line work is undertaken. 
(D)  Inspection fees: An inspection fee for the connection, repair, replacement or disconnection of any water service line shall be in the amount of $100.00. Subsequent inspections required due to failure of final inspection shall be charged at $50.00 per inspection. 
(Ord. 4581, 4-13-1998, eff. 5-1-1998; Ord. 5154, 3-24-2003) 
7-11-31. - New subdivisions and annexed land. 
(A)  Connection fee: All persons subdividing or annexing any lot, block, tract or parcel of land of more than one acre which is not serviced by the Village water and sewage system and which has not been previously assessed for such service shall pay, in addition to any and all other charges, a fee of $1,000.00 per acre for connecting the land so subdivided or annexed to the Village water and sewerage system. 
(B)  Less than one acre: All persons subdividing or annexing any lot, block, tract or parcel of land of less than one acre which is not serviced by the Village water and sewage system and which has not been previously assessed for such service shall pay, in addition to any and all other charges, a fee of $250.00 for each residence site to be connected to the Village water and sewage system. 
(C)  Land previously assessed: If the land so subdivided or annexed, as provided in subsections (A) and (B) of this section, has been previously assessed for either water or sewer service, then upon the approval of the plat of subdivision, resubdivision or annexation by the Board of Trustees, it will be assessed the sum of $500.00 per acre or $125.00 per residence site, whichever is smaller, for connecting to the service for which the land was not heretofore assessed. 
(D)  Land involuntarily annexed: By resolution, the Village Board may authorize an extension of time up to and including 20 years from the date of annexation for owners of property involuntarily annexed to connect to the Village water and sewage system and pay the required connection fees and charges upon a finding that such relief is warranted by the circumstances and will not adversely affect the public health and welfare. 
(Ord. 2733, 2-22-1982, eff. 5-1-1982; Ord. 4075, 12-20-1993) 
7-11-32. - Sewer connection fees within the corporate limits. 
No permit allowing use of the Village sewer system, including the Village's portion of the POTW, by a property within the Village corporate limits shall be issued until the following fees are paid in full: 
Sanitary Sewers Residential:  Single-family $1,000.00 Village connection fee plus $278.00 per PE (population equivalent), which will be collected by the Village and passed on to the Glenbard Wastewater Authority.  Multi-family: $1,000.00 plus $278.00 per PE (population equivalent), as described above. Nonresidential: $1,000.00 plus $278.00 per PE (population equivalent), as described above. An additional charge of $400.00 shall be paid for each multiple-family or nonresidential unit more than 1 served by a single sanitary sewer connection. Inspection fee: An inspection fee for the connection, repair, replacement or disconnection of any sanitary service line shall be in the amount of $100.00. Storm Sewers Inspection fee: An inspection fee for the connection, repair, replacement or disconnection of any storm sewer service line shall be in the amount of $100.00.  
(Ord. 5154, 3-24-2003) 
7-11-33. - Sewer connection fees beyond the corporate limits. 
No permit allowing use of the Village sewer system, including the Village's portion of the POTW, by a property beyond the Village corporate limits shall be issued until the following fees are paid in full: 
Sanitary Sewers Residential: $1,000.00 Village connection fee plus $278.00 per PE (population equivalent), which will be collected by the Village and passed on to the Glenbard Wastewater Authority. Nonresidential: $1,000.00 plus $278.00 per PE (population equivalent), as described above. An additional charge of $400.00 shall be paid for each multiple-family or nonresidential unit more than 1 served by a single sanitary sewer connection. Inspection fee: An inspection fee for the connection, repair, replacement or disconnection of any sanitary service line shall be in the amount of $100.00. Storm Sewers Inspection fee: An inspection fee for the connection, repair, replacement or disconnection of any storm sewer service line shall be in the amount of $100.00.  
(Ord. 5154, 3-24-2003) 
7-11-34. - Annexation fee. 
When a property has paid the fees set forth in section 7-11-33 of this chapter, the property shall receive credit on the annexation fee for the sum so paid when the property is annexed to the Village. 
(Ord. 2733, 2-22-1982, eff. 5-1-1982) 
Chapter 12 - WEED CONTROL CODE 

7-12-1. - Short title. 
This chapter of this Code shall be known as and may be called as the Weed Control Code of Glen Ellyn. 
(Ord. 3133, 7-22-1985) 
7-12-2. - Definitions. 
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of the terms used in this chapter shall be as follows: 
PROPERTY: Any real property within the Village. 
WEED: Any uncultivated plant. 
(Ord. 3133, 7-22-1985) 
7-12-3. - Growth of weeds over certain height prohibited. 
Every owner of property within the Village shall cut, chemically treat or otherwise destroy the weeds on his property at all times necessary to prevent the weeds from exceeding eight inches. 
(Ord. 3133, 7-22-1985) 
7-12-4. - Village's right to destroy overgrown weeds. 
If any owner neglects or refuses to cut, chemically treat or otherwise destroy the weeds on his property, the Village may do so, or contract with any other person to perform the services under the authority of the Village. 
(Ord. 3133, 7-22-1985) 
7-12-5. - Collection of expenses from property owner. 
If any property owner neglects or refuses to cut, chemically treat or otherwise destroy the weeds on his property and the Village has elected to do so under the provisions of this chapter, then the owner shall pay to the Village its expenses incurred in cutting or destroying the weeds, including a reasonable amount for services performed by Village employees or for use of Village equipment. If any owner fails or refuses to reimburse the Village for expenses incurred, including reasonable administrative costs in destroying weeds on the owner's property, the Village may collect such amount in an action at law. 
(Ord. 3133, 7-22-1985) 
7-12-6. - Annual publication of notice. 
In the spring of each year, the Village Administrator shall cause to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the Village a notice setting forth the provisions of this chapter. This publication shall be undertaken one time, and no further notice shall be required before the Village may undertake any weed cutting or destruction, if necessary, following the publication of the notice. 
(Ord. 3133, 7-22-1985) 
Chapter 13 - ANTILITTERING CODE 

7-13-1. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known as and may be cited as the Village of Glen Ellyn Antilittering Code. 
(Ord. 3272, 1-26-1987) 
7-13-2. - Purposes. 
The purpose of this chapter is to: 
(A)  Define, prevent and abate littering within the Village as a nuisance; 
(B)  Promote the public health by preventing and abating the accumulation of litter, garbage, refuse, rubbish and debris on the public streets, alleys, sidewalks and upon other public and private property; and 
(C)  Prevent and abate the unwanted and possibly destructive placement of litter, including commercial handbills, upon vehicles, the public streets and other public property and upon private property when and where it is not desired by the owner of such private property. 
(Ord. 3272, 1-26-1987) 
7-13-3. - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise expressly stated or the context clearly indicates a different sense, the following terms shall, for the purpose of this chapter, have the meanings indicated in this section: 
AIRCRAFT: Any contrivance now known or hereafter invented, used or designated for navigation or for flight in the air. The word "aircraft" shall include helicopters and lighter than air dirigibles and balloons. 
AUTHORIZED PRIVATE RECEPTACLE: A container as required and authorized in chapter 6 of this title. 
COMMERCIAL HANDBILL: Any handbill which: 
(A)  Advertises for sale or rent any merchandise, product, commodity or service or any other business activity; or 
(B)  Directs attention to any business or commercial establishment or other activity for the purpose of either directly or indirectly promoting sales; or 
(C)  Directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind for which an admission fee will be charged unless such event is being sponsored by a not for profit organization. 
(D)  A handbill containing a religious, political or other nonbusiness related message shall not be considered a commercial handbill. (See also definition of Handbill.) 
CONTAINER: 
(A)  A "reusable container" is a receptacle made of plastic, metal, or fiberglass with a capacity not to exceed 32 gallons, a loaded weight of no more than 35 pounds, a tightfitting lid, and handles of adequate strength for lifting; 
(B)  A "nonreusable container" is a bag made of plastic with sufficient wall strength to maintain physical integrity when lifted by the top. 
DISTRIBUTE: Give to a person or place upon, affix or attach to any part of a building, structure or vehicle. 
GARBAGE: Putrescible animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, serving or consumption of food and including food containers. 
HANDBILL: Any printed or written matter, sample or device, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other manner of literature with the purpose of making an announcement or otherwise communicating a message, but does not include a newspaper or similar publication. (See also definition of Commercial Handbill.) 
LITTER: "Garbage", "refuse", "rubbish", "commercial handbills" and "newspapers", as defined herein and all other waste material of any kind which if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited tends to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare. 
NEWSPAPER: Any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general law, any newspaper duly entered with the post office department of the United States, in accordance with federal statute or regulation, and any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law; and in addition thereto, shall mean and include any periodical or current magazine regularly published with not less than four issued per year, and sold to the public. 
PARK: A park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or any other public area in the Village, owned or used by the Village and devoted to active or passive recreation. 
PRIVATE PROPERTY OR PREMISES: Any real estate, including any building or other improvement which may be on it, that is owned or controlled by any private person, corporation or entity, whether or not such property is open to the public. 
PUBLIC PROPERTY OR PLACE: Any street, sidewalk, parking lot, parkway, plaza, building or other place owned or controlled by the Village of Glen Ellyn or other governmental body that is open to the public. 
REFUSE: All putrescible and nonputrescible solid waste, except body waste, including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleaning debris, dead animals, abandoned automobiles, solid market, and industrial wastes, in a solid or semiliquid state, and in any combination. 
RUBBISH: Nonputrescible solid waste consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardBoard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials, including yard and garden waste. 
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Ord. 3272, 1-26-1987; amd. Ord. 5196, 10-27-2003) 
7-13-4. - Principles of construction. 
This chapter shall be construed and applied in accordance with the following principles: 
(A)  Words imparting the singular number may extend to and include plural, words imparting the plural number may extend to and include the singular, and words in the masculine gender shall include the female gender; 
(B)  The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely Directory; and 
(C)  The specifications in this section of principles shall not be a limitation to other accepted principles of statutory and ordinance construction. 
(Ord. 3272, 1-26-1987) 
7-13-5. - Litter in public places prohibited. 
No person shall throw or deposit litter or newspapers in any public place within the Village except in public trash receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of any park or upon any street or other public place. Where public trash receptacles are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park, street or public place by the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere, as provided herein. 
(Ord. 3272, 1-26-1987) 
7-13-6. - Placement of litter in receptacles so as to prevent scattering. 
Persons placing litter in public trash receptacles or in authorized private receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent such litter from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon any private premises. 
(Ord. 3272, 1-26-1987) 
7-13-7. - Sweeping litter into gutters prohibited. 
No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the Village, the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. 
(Ord. 3272, 1-26-1987) 
7-13-8. - Duty to keep sidewalks free of litter. 
Owners, occupants and/or operators of private premises within the Village shall keep the sidewalk in front of those private premises free of litter. 
(Ord. 3272, 1-26-1987) 
7-13-9. - Litter thrown by persons in vehicles. 
No person while a driver of or a passenger in a vehicle shall throw or deposit litter upon any street or other public place within the Village, or upon private premises. 
(Ord. 3272, 1-26-1987) 
7-13-10. - Truckloads causing litter. 
No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the Village unless such vehicle is so constructed and/or loaded as to prevent any load, contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley or other public place. 
(Ord. 3272, 1-26-1987) 
7-13-11. - Dropping litter from aircraft. 
No person in an aircraft shall throw out, drop or deposit within the Village any litter, handbill or any other object, nor shall any person knowingly authorize another person to throw out, drop or deposit from an aircraft any litter, handbill or other object. 
(Ord. 3272, 1-26-1987) 
7-13-12. - Litter in lakes and fountains. 
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream, river or any other body of water within the Village. 
(Ord. 3272, 1-26-1987) 
7-13-13. - Distributing handbills. 
(A)  Public property: No person shall distribute any commercial handbill from or on any public street, sidewalk or other public property. 
(B)  Private property: No person shall distribute any handbill from or on any private property without permission from the owner or other person in control of such property. A conspicuous notice posted by the person in control of the property indicating that distribution of handbills is prohibited shall constitute denial of permission to distribute handbills upon the property. 
(C)  Vehicles: No person shall affix, attach or in any way place any handbill on any vehicle which is on any public street or Village owned parking lot nor on any vehicle which is on any private property without permission from the owner of the property. 
(D)  Streets: No person shall distribute any handbill while standing in the traveled portion of any street. 
(Ord. 5196, 10-27-2003) 
7-13-14. - Discarding handbills. 
No person in possession of any handbill shall discard it upon any public or private property except in a proper waste receptacle. Any person who distributes any handbill in any public or private place shall collect any such handbill found littering any such place and dispose of it in a proper waste receptacle. 
(Ord. 5196, 10-27-2003) 
7-13-15. - Delivery of mail and newspapers. 
(A)  Delivery of mail: The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States. 
(B)  Delivery of newspapers: The provisions of this chapter shall not prohibit the delivery of a "newspaper", as defined in section 7-13-3 of this chapter, to private premises or public buildings, provided, however, that the newspaper shall be placed on the private premises or public building to which it is intended to be delivered or on that portion of the public street adjacent thereto and which is not occupied by sidewalk, curb, gutter, drainage facility, ditch or street pavement and shall be placed in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements onto any private premises or public building, other than where it was placed, or onto the sidewalk, curb, gutter, drainage facility, ditch or street pavement. All newspapers, as defined in section 7-13-3 of this chapter, placed for delivery on a public place and not removed within 12 hours of their placement shall be removed from the public place by the distributor or publisher of the newspaper, or the agent of either. A "newspaper", as defined in section 7-13-3 of this chapter, found in a public place at a location not permitted by this chapter shall be presumed to have been delivered in violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 3272, 1-26-1987; amd. Ord. 5196, 10-27-2003) 
7-13-16. - Responsibility for handbill and newspaper distribution. 
(A)  Any person for whose benefit a "commercial handbill" or "newspaper", both as defined in section 7-13-3 of this chapter, is distributed, including any advertiser named in a handbill, or the publisher or the distribution agent of any handbill or newspaper shall be responsible for the proper distribution of the handbill or newspaper. 
(B)  No person shall knowingly authorize or allow another person to distribute a "commercial handbill" or "newspaper", both as defined in section 7-13-3 of this chapter, in violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
(C)  Any "handbill" or "newspaper", both as defined in section 7-13-3 of this chapter, distributed within the Village shall be presumed to be distributed in a manner authorized or allowed by the advertisers or publishers named in the handbill or by the publisher named in the newspaper. 
(Ord. 3272, 1-26-1987; amd. Ord. 5196, 10-27-2003) 
7-13-17. - Posting notices prohibited. 
No person shall post, affix or fasten in any way any notice, poster, or paper or other device, calculated to attract the attention of the public, to any lamppost, public utility pole or shade tree in the public right-of-way or upon any public structure or public building, except as may be authorized or required by law. 
(Ord. 3272, 1-26-1987; amd. Ord. 5196, 10-27-2003) 
7-13-18. - Litter on occupied private premises. 
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private premises within the Village, whether owned by such person or not, except that the owner or person in control of private premises may maintain authorized private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, other public place or upon any other private premises. 
(Ord. 3272, 1-26-1987; amd. Ord. 5196, 10-27-2003) 
7-13-19. - Owner to maintain premises free of litter. 
The owner or person in control of any private premises shall at all times maintain the premises free of accumulated litter, provided, however, that this section shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for collection nor prevent the maintenance of a compost pile for personal use and in an inoffensive manner, with the compost only consisting of yard clippings and leaves. 
(Ord. 3272, 1-26-1987; amd. Ord. 5196, 10-27-2003) 
7-13-20. - Litter on vacant lots. 
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private premises within the Village whether owned by such person or not. 
(Ord. 3272, 1-26-1987; amd. Ord. 5196, 10-27-2003) 
7-13-21. - Public notices of the village. 
(A)  The provisions of this chapter shall not prohibit the Village's placing of public notices on public places. 
(B)  The provisions of this chapter shall not prohibit the Village's distribution, by itself or by its agents, or posting of public notices, including handbills, concerning public emergencies, Public Works projects, maintenance of public facilities or other matters concerning public services, to or on private premises. 
(Ord. 3272, 1-26-1987; amd. Ord. 5196, 10-27-2003) 
Chapter 14 - COST RECOVERY FOR EMERGENCY SERVICES 

7-14-1. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
FACILITY: Any building, structure, installation, equipment, pipe or pipeline, including, but not limited to, any pipe into a sewer or publicly owned treatment works, well, pond, lagoon, impoundment, ditch, landfill, storage container, tank, motor vehicle, truck trailer, rotting stock or aircraft; also, any site or area where a hazardous material has been deposited, stored, disposed of, abandoned, placed, or otherwise come to be located. 
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: As defined by the United States department of transportation, including, but not limited to, any material, substance or mixture of materials or substances which are toxic, flammable, corrosive, explosive, carcinogenic or radioactive. 
PERSON: Any individual, business, firm, partnership, corporation, association, trust, estate, joint venture or other legal entity, or their legal representative, agent or assign. 
RELEASE: Any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, escaping, emptying, discharging, injecting, leaching, dumping or disposing of a hazardous material into or on any land, air, water, well, stream, sewer or pipe so that such hazardous material or any constituent thereof may enter the environment. 
REMEDIAL ACTION: Any action which is consistent with any permanent remedy and which is taken instead of, or in addition to, removal actions in the event of a release or threatened release of a hazardous material into the environment, to prevent or minimize the release of hazardous materials so that they do not migrate to cause a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, property or the environment. The term includes, but is not limited to, such actions at the location of the release as storage, confinement, perimeter protection using dikes, trenches, or ditches, clay cover, neutralization, cleanup of released hazardous materials or contaminated materials, recycling or reuse, diversion, destruction, segregation of reactive wastes, repair or replacement of leaking containers, collection of leachate and runoff, on site treatment or incineration, provision of alternate water supplies, and any monitoring reasonably required to assure that such actions protect the public health and welfare and the environment. 
REMOVAL: The cleanup or removal of released hazardous materials from the environment; such actions as may be necessary or appropriate to monitor, assess, and evaluate the release or threat of release of hazardous materials; the disposal of removed material; or the taking of such action as may be necessary to prevent, minimize, or mitigate damage to the public health or welfare of the environment. The term includes, but is not limited to, security fencing, provision of alternative water supplies, and temporary evacuation of threatened individuals. 
RESPONSE: Any removal or remedial action or special rescue services. 
RESPONSIBLE PERSON: Any person who is deemed by the Village of Glen Ellyn to have caused or contributed to causing the incident or circumstances giving rise to the necessity of emergency response or such person who is responsible as defined or established by any statute or regulation of the State of Illinois or of the United States of America. 
SPECIAL RESCUE INCIDENT(S): Those incidents arising where vehicles or personnel of the Glen Ellyn Volunteer Fire Department or any other agency acting at the request of or in cooperation with the Village of Glen Ellyn provide special rescue services for the purposes of providing rescue services or support. 
SPECIAL RESCUE SERVICE(S): Services in high angle rescue, trench rescue, confined space rescue, and other rescue services performed by the Village of Glen Ellyn Volunteer Fire Company or any other agency at the request of or in cooperation with the Village of Glen Ellyn. 
(Ord. 5610, 9-24-2007) 
7-14-2. - Response authority. 
(A)  The Fire Chief or his /her designee shall have authority to respond to any incident requiring special rescue services or involving release or threatened release of hazardous materials within or into the Village or affecting the air or public water supply, wells or sewage treatment works serving the Village. This authority includes, but is not limited to, remedial action and removal or any special rescue services. 
(B)  The Fire Chief or designee, during such time as response authority is given to him /her, shall be authorized to utilize all department personnel and equipment and may in his /her sole discretion order any special rescue service or take such remedial or removal action as he /she may deem necessary or appropriate to respond to the incident or release or threatened release of hazardous material. 
(C)  All Village personnel shall cooperate with and operate under the direction of the Fire Chief or designee or response authority under this chapter until such time as the person exercising such response authority has determined that the response is complete or responsibility for response is assumed by the federal, state, or local public health, safety, or emergency agency having primary jurisdiction over the release or threatened release or special rescue incident. 
(D)  The person exercising response authority under this chapter shall coordinate and/or cooperate with other federal, state, or local public health, safety, or emergency agencies involved in response to the release or threatened release of hazardous materials or special rescue incident. 
(Ord. 5610, 9-24-2007) 
7-14-3. - Liability for costs. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions or rule of law, the Village of Glen Ellyn may charge the responsible party for hazardous materials removal or remediation and special rescue incident responses to the extent that such charges exceed the sum of $50.00 as follows: 
(A)  For each fire or ambulance vehicle responding to the scene: At a per vehicle, per hour rate as determined by the Village for the time that the presence of such vehicle was deemed necessary by the officer in charge of each response, with the time computed from dispatch to return to the station; 
(B)  For each firefighter or other emergency service personnel responding to the scene: At a per person, per hour rate as determined by the Village for the time that the presence of such person was deemed necessary by the officer in charge of each response, with the time computed from dispatch to return to the station; 
(C)  For expended materials other than fuel of vehicles: The actual costs incurred by the Village or other service provider for such materials or, if a portion of a unit of material is used, the cost to replace the unit of material; and 
(D)  For damaged or destroyed vehicles, portable equipment, or personal protection clothing or gear: The actual costs to repair such item or, if deemed unsafe or not feasible to repair such item, then for the full current cost of replacement of such item. This shall include personal fire protection equipment contaminated by any hazardous material or substance if deemed unsafe for further use in firefighting or rescue operations. 
(Ord. 5610, 9-24-2007) 
7-14-4. - Failure of responsible party to pay costs; collection proceedings. 
(A)  In the event that the responsible party fails to provide payment within 30 days of receipt of Village or Fire Department invoice or take requested actions related to a release or special rescue incident within the time limit directed by the Fire Chief or his /her designee, the Village may take actions pursuant to law to collect such amounts due, including all Village attorney fees and related legal costs. 
(B)  Charges for special rescue incident or removal or remedial action when rendered by the Village or a mutual aid company shall be as provided by those agencies. 
(Ord. 5610, 9-24-2007) 
Chapter 15 - ILLICIT DISCHARGE DETECTION AND ELIMINATION REGULATIONS 

7-15-1. - Authority and purpose. 
(A)  Statutory authority: 
1.  This chapter shall be known and cited as the Illicit Discharge Detection and Elimination Regulations of the Village of Glen Ellyn. 
2.  The Glen Ellyn Village Board promulgates these regulations pursuant to their authority to adopt ordinances regulating the quality of all stormwater runoff in channels, streams, and basins in Glen Ellyn, in accordance with the stormwater and floodplain regulations (stormwater regulations) of the Village of Glen Ellyn as adopted and amended from time to time. The stormwater regulations embody the Village's policy for management of stormwater quantity and quality. 
3.  The Village may promulgate and enforce these regulations pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5 /1-2-1, 5 /11-12-12, 5 /11-30-2, 5 /11-30-8 and 5 /11-31-2 and such other authority as applicable. 
(B)  Purposes: 
1.  The purpose of this chapter is to protect and enhance water quality within the Village in a manner pursuant to and consistent with the federal water pollution control act (33 USC section 1251 et seq.) through the regulation of nonstormwater discharges to the storm drainage system. This chapter establishes methods for controlling the introduction of discharges other than those occurring as a direct result of precipitation and snowmelt into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) and the storm drainage system in order to comply with requirements of the national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) phase II permit process. Other purposes of this chapter include: 
(a)  To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the MS4 and the storm drainage system by nonstormwater discharges; and 
(b)  To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the MS4 and the storm drainage system. 
2.  The purposes of this chapter are consistent with the stormwater regulations and advance the following objectives: 
(a)  Protect and enhance the quality, quantity, and availability of surface and ground water resources. 
(b)  Preserve and enhance existing aquatic and riparian environments and encourage restoration of degraded areas. 
(c)  Promote equitable, acceptable, and legal measures for stormwater management. 
(Ord. 5804, 10-26-2009) 
7-15-2. - Definitions. 
The following words and terms shall have the meanings set forth except where otherwise specifically indicated. Words and terms not defined shall have the meanings indicated by common dictionary definition. 
(A)  Interpretation of terms and words: The terms and words used herein shall be interpreted as follows: 
1.  Words used in the present tense include the future tense; and 
2.  Words used in the singular number include the plural number and words used in the plural number include the singular number; and 
3.  The words "shall", "will", and "must" are mandatory, not permissive; and 
4.  The phrase "Director" refers to the individual responsible for the enforcement. 
BUILDING: A structure that is constructed or erected partially or wholly aboveground and is enclosed by walls and a roof. The term "building" includes manufactured homes and includes both the aboveground and the belowground portions of the structure. 
CLEAN WATER ACT (CWA): The federal water pollution control act (33 USC section 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
COMMITTEE: The stormwater management committee of the DuPage County Board, authorized by 55 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5 /5-1062. 
COMMUNITY: Any municipality, or the unincorporated county, within DuPage County acting as a unit of local government. 
COUNTY: The County of DuPage, Illinois. 
DEPARTMENT: The Public Works Department of the Village of Glen Ellyn, Illinois. 
DIRECTOR: The Public Works Director of the Village of Glen Ellyn or successor position or his or her designee. 
DIVISION: The DuPage County Stormwater Management Division or successor agency. 
DRAIN: Piping and appurtenances for conveying a fluid. 
FACILITY: Something that is built, installed, or established to serve a particular purpose. 
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any material which may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment. 
ILLICIT CONNECTIONS: An illicit connection is defined as either of the following: 
1.  Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface that allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drainage system including, but not limited to, any conveyances that allow any nonstormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drainage system and any connections to the storm drainage system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by the community, or 
2.  Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm drainage system that has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by the community. 
ILLICIT DISCHARGE: Any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to the storm drainage system, except as exempted in subsection 7-15-5(A)3. of this chapter. 
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY: Activities subject to an industrial NPDES stormwater permit, as defined in 40 CFR, section 122.26(b)(14). 
LINE: A hollow conduit through which fluids are transported between two or more points. 
MS4 DISCHARGES: Discharges from municipal separate storm sewer systems, as are further defined within the general national pollution discharge elimination system. 
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4): A conveyance or system of conveyances (including, but not limited to, sidewalks, roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, and storm sewers) owned or operated by a governmental entity and designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater, and that is not used for collecting or conveying sewage. 
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) PERMIT: A permit issued by Illinois environmental protection agency (IEPA) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general areawide basis. 
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE: Any discharge to the storm drainage system that is not the direct result of precipitation and/or snowmelt in the tributary drainage basin. 
NOTICE OF INTENT (NOI): Illinois Environmental Protection Agency notice of intent to participate in coverage under the general permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity. 
PARCEL: Contiguous land under single ownership or control. 
PERSON: Any individual, association, partnership, public or private corporation, municipality, political subdivision, government agency, or any other legal entity, including heirs, successors, agents, officers, and assigns of such entity. 
pH NEUTRAL: pH value between six and one-half and nine standard units. 
PLAN: The DuPage County stormwater management plan, adopted by the DuPage County Board in September 1989, as amended from time to time. 
POLLUTANT: Anything that causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, wastewater, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
PREMISES: Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
RUNOFF: The waters derived from precipitation and/or melting snow within a tributary drainage basin that exceeds the infiltration capacity of that basin. 
SEWAGE: Polluted stormwater, wastewater, or other refuse liquids usually conveyed by sewers. 
SEWER: An artificial conduit to carry off sewage and/or surface water (as from rainfall), including sanitation, stormwater, and/or combined sewers. 
SEWERAGE: A system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection, transportation, pumping, and treatment of sewage. 
STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM: A facility by which stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including, but not limited to, any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and humanmade or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures. 
STORMWATER: Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation. 
STRUCTURE: Anything that is erected or constructed. The term "structure" includes, without limitation: buildings, manufactured homes, tanks, dams, sewers, constructed channels, outfalls, parking lots, driveways, roads, sidewalks, and concrete patios. 
VILLAGE: The Village of Glen Ellyn, Illinois. 
WASTEWATER: Water that has been used and is not for reuse unless treated by a wastewater treatment facility. 
WATERS OF THE UNITED STATES: As defined in the CWA, "waters of the United States" applies only to surface waters, rivers, lakes, estuaries, coastal waters, and wetlands. Not all surface waters are legally "waters of the United States". Generally, those waters include the following: all interstate waters; intrastate waters used in interstate and/or foreign commerce; tributaries of the aforementioned; territorial seas at the cyclical high tide mark; and wetlands adjacent to all the aforementioned. 
(Ord. 5804, 10-26-2009) 
7-15-3. - General provisions. 
(A)  Applicability: This chapter shall apply to all water entering the storm drainage system from any developed or undeveloped lands within the jurisdiction of the Village, unless explicitly exempted by subsection 7-15-5(A)3. of this chapter including any amendments or revisions thereto. 
(B)  Interpretation: 
1.  The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, prosperity, and general welfare and the environment of the residents of the Village, and to effectuate the purposes of this chapter and enabling legislation. 
2.  Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this chapter are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other applicable statute, law, ordinance, regulation, or rule, the provision that is most restrictive or imposes the higher standards or requirements shall apply. 
3.  The provisions of this chapter shall be interpreted to be cumulative of, and to impose limitations in addition to, all other ordinances, laws, codes, and regulations, in existence or which may be passed governing any subject matter of this chapter. To the greatest extent possible, the provisions of this chapter shall be construed to be consistent with, and not in conflict with, the provisions of such other ordinances, laws, codes, and regulations, and with each other, to the end that all such provisions may be given their fullest application. 
(Ord. 5804, 10-26-2009) 
7-15-4. - Administration. 
(A)  Level of participation: The Village shall promulgate and enforce this chapter as a full participant community with the county. The participation level shall be codified through the adoption of an intergovernmental agreement. 
1.  Village duties as a full participant community: 
(a)  Completion of an intergovernmental agreement for full participation in the illicit discharge detection and elimination program. 
(b)  Provide the division with a current storm sewer atlas. An updated storm sewer atlas shall be provided to the division annually. 
(c)  Provide assistance to the division in acquiring access to the storm drainage system as mutually deemed necessary. 
(d)  Provide timely prosecution of persons found to be in violation of this chapter when necessary per section 7-15-8 of this chapter. 
(e)  Provide the division with documentation of any enforcement action or prosecution from the previous one year for inclusion in the IEPA annual facility inspection report. 
2.  County responsibilities: 
(a)  The county agrees to undertake the monitoring of outfalls and tracing of illicit discharges within the municipal limits of the Village utilizing county personnel and equipment. 
(b)  The county agrees to prepare, at its sole expense, plans, processes, and procedures for the program meeting the requirements of the NPDES permit to monitor and trace illicit discharges into the MS4 on behalf of the Village. 
(c)  The county agrees to obtain copies of the notice of intent (NOI) for each facility within the jurisdiction of the county and the Village having an individual NPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity through the IEPA for the purposes of fair and accurate monitoring and tracing. 
(d)  The county agrees to monitor MS4 outfalls within the jurisdiction of the Village, and to the extent it is so authorized, trace all discharges determined to be illicit with the objective of identifying the source of such illicit discharge. 
(e)  The county agrees to notify the Village within a reasonable time prior to the county conducting dye testing as part of tracing procedures. 
(f)  The county agrees to notify the Village within 24 hours of detecting an illicit discharge within the municipal limits of the Village. Promptly upon completion of the county's investigation, the county shall inform the Village of the location of the illicit discharge, the time(s) and date(s) of the discharge, and any additional information that would be necessary or prudent for the Village to have in order to carry out enforcement proceedings. 
(g)  The county agrees to provide the Village with any information required for enforcement action and prosecution by the Village and produce county personnel in court, as necessary and upon adequate notice. 
(h)  The county agrees to create and manage a countywide hotline for reporting illicit discharges. 
(i)  The county agrees to prepare the illicit discharge detection and elimination section of the annual report on behalf of the Village. The annual report is required by the IEPA and is due by June 1 of each year in accordance with general NPDES permit no. ILR40. The county will submit a copy of the illicit discharge detection and elimination section of the annual report to both the IEPA and the Village. 
(B)  Responsibility for administration: The department shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the department may be delegated in writing by the Director to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest, or in the employ of, the department as representatives, contractors, designees and/or assigns. 
(C)  Duties of director: The duties and functions of the Director shall include: 
1.  Determining policy related to and directing the enforcement of this chapter, as applicable. 
2.  Supervising the execution of this chapter and 
3.  Notifying the county and the IEPA of any modifications to this chapter. 
(D)  Representative Capacity: In all cases when any action is taken by the Director, or his or her duly appointed designee, to enforce the provisions of this chapter, such action shall be taken in the name of and on behalf of the Village, and neither the Director nor his or her designee, in so acting for the Village shall be rendered personally liable. 
(Ord. 5804, 10-26-2009) 
7-15-5. - Discharge prohibitions. 
(A)  Prohibition of illicit discharges: 
1.  No person shall place, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under their control to place, drain, or otherwise discharge into the storm drainage system or MS4 any pollutants or waters containing any pollutants, other than normal stormwater unless specifically exempted in subsection (A)3. of this section. 
2.  The following discharges into the MS4 or the storm drainage system shall be prohibited: 
(a)  Discharges that are not a direct result of precipitation and/or snowmelt within the drainage area of the MS4. 
(b)  Discharges from an illicit connection. 
3.  The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions established herein provided they do not cause an adverse effect on water quality as determined by the Director: 
(a)  Discharges caused by governmental Public Works and stormwater management units as part of their standard operations in compliance with all applicable regulations. 
(b)  Discharges required by law or authorized by permit, including any nonstormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered by the USEPA and/or IEPA. 
(c)  Water line and fire hydrant flushing. 
(d)  Landscape irrigation water. 
(e)  Rising groundwaters. 
(f)  Groundwater infiltration. 
(g)  Pumped groundwater. 
(h)  Discharges from potable water sources. 
(i)  Foundation drains. 
(j)  Air conditioning condensate. 
(k)  Irrigation water (except for wastewater irrigation). 
(l)  Springs. 
(m)  Water from crawl space pumps. 
(n)  Footing drains. 
(o)  Storm sewer cleaning water. 
(p)  Water from any outdoor residential car wash. 
(q)  Routine external building washdown which does not use detergents. 
(r)  Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands. 
(s)  Dechlorinated pH neutral swimming pool discharges. 
(t)  Residual street wash water. 
(u)  Discharges or flows from firefighting activities. 
(v)  Dechlorinated water reservoir discharges. 
(w)  Pavement wash waters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous materials have not occurred (unless all spilled material has been removed). 
(x)  Discharges associated with dye testing of water line, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, private drains or septic systems; however, this activity shall not take place until the discharger, or tester, has provided notification to the department at least two full business days prior to the test date, unless an emergency situation does not allow time for such notification. 
(y)  Other discharges approved by the department as being substantially like any of the discharge types enumerated in this subsection (A)3. 
(B)  Prohibition of illicit connections: 
1.  The construction, use, maintenance, or continued existence of illicit connections to the storm drainage system or MS4 is prohibited. 
2.  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
3.  A person is considered to be in violation of this chapter if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the storm drainage system or MS4, or allows such a connection to continue. 
4.  Connections in violation of this chapter must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved wastewater management system or the sanitary sewer system upon approval of the department and the appropriate wastewater treatment facility. 
5.  Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer system or MS4, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written notice of violation from the department requiring that such locating be completed. Such notice shall specify a reasonable time period within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be determined, that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and that the outfall location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, 
MS4, sanitary sewer system, or other discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations are to be documented and provided to the department. 
(Ord. 5804, 10-26-2009) 
7-15-6. - Industrial activity discharges. 
(A)  Submission of notice of intent (NOI) to the department and division: 
1.  Any person operating a facility subject to the IEPA's general permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity shall submit a copy of the notice of intent (NOI) to the department and division at the same time the operator submits the original notice of intent to the IEPA as applicable. 
2.  The copy of the notice of intent may be delivered to the department and the division either in person or by mailing it to: 
Department: 
NOI to Discharge Stormwater 
Glen Ellyn Public Works 
30 South Lambert Road 
Glen Ellyn, IL 60137 
Division: 
NOI to Discharge Stormwater 
DuPage Co. Stormwater Management Div. 
421 North County Farm Road 
Wheaton, IL 60187 
3.  A person commits an offense if the person operates a facility that is discharging stormwater associated with industrial activity without having submitted a copy of the notice of intent to do so to the department. 
(Ord. 5804, 10-26-2009) 
7-15-7. - Compliance monitoring. 
(A)  Notification of spills: 
1.  Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person owning, leasing or exercising control over a property, or responsible for emergency response for a property, has information of any known or suspected spill of materials which are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into the MS4 or the storm drainage system, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such spill. 
(a)  In the event of such a spill, said person shall immediately notify local emergency dispatch services and act in accordance with Illinois emergency management agency (IEMA) and IEPA regulations. 
(b)  Said person shall notify the department and the division of the spill in person or by phone, facsimile, or e-mail no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the department and the division within three business days of the phone notice. 
(c)  If the spill emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on site written record of the spill and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least five years. 
2.  Proper notice, including containment and cleanup as outlined in this subsection (A), shall exempt the notifying parties from applicable fines set forth in subsection 7-15-8(F) of this chapter. 
3.  Failure to provide notification of a release as provided above is a violation of this chapter. 
4.  Notwithstanding the language of subsection (A)2. of this section, a party causing a spill that contaminates or harms a storm sewer system shall not be relieved of liability for damages resulting from such act. 
(Ord. 5804, 10-26-2009) 
7-15-8. - Violations, enforcement, and penalties. 
(A)  Enforcement; violations: 
1.  The Director shall have primary responsibility for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
2.  A person violates this chapter when that person: 
(a)  Performs any act expressly prohibited by any provision of this chapter; or 
(b)  Disobeys, neglects, or fails to carry out or comply with any provision of this chapter or of any order or notice issued by the Director; or 
(c)  Allows any condition or act that violates any provision of this chapter to continue unabated on property owned, leased, managed, or under the control of such person; or 
(d)  Directs, orders, permits, or allows a second person to do any act expressly prohibited by any provision of this chapter, or to maintain or continue unabated any condition or act that violates any provision of this chapter on property owned, leased, managed or under the control of the first person. 
(B)  Notice to correct violations; director may take action: 
1.  The Director may issue a notice of violation ordering a person to take action to achieve compliance with the provisions of this chapter and/or to cease and desist from any action conducted in violation of this chapter. Failure to comply with the terms and conditions of a notice of violation and/or order to cease and desist shall constitute a violation of this chapter. 
(a)  The Director shall set forth the form and content of any notices issued under this chapter. 
(b)  The Director may issue a warning of violation ordering a person to take action to achieve compliance with the provisions of this chapter. If a person fails to comply with the terms and conditions of a warning, the Director may, thereafter, issue a notice of violation. 
(c)  The Director may issue a warning of violation and disburse educational materials outlining appropriate measures to minimize the discharge of pollutants. 
2.  If a person fails to comply with an order issued under this section, the Director may direct the appropriate legal counsel to commence any legal proceeding authorized by this chapter, under the law or equity, necessary to enforce any provision of this chapter and/or to protect public health and safety. Any legal action brought under this chapter shall be in the name of the Village of Glen Ellyn. 
(C)  Emergency cease and desist orders: 
1.  The department may obtain an emergency order in the event of the following: 
(a)  Any person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter or any order issued hereunder, or that the person's past violations are likely to recur; and 
(b)  That the person's violation has caused or contributed to an actual or threatened discharge to the MS4 or storm drainage system and an imminent threat of violation is present. 
2.  The department may issue the emergency order to the violator directing that the violator: 
(a)  Immediately cease and desist all such violations; 
(b)  Immediately comply with all chapter requirements; and 
(c)  Take such appropriate preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including immediately halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. 
3.  Any person notified of an emergency order under this subsection shall immediately comply and stop or eliminate its endangering discharge. In the event of a discharger's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the emergency order, the department may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize harm to the MS4, storm drainage system, or waters of the United States, and/or endangerment to persons or to the environment, including immediate termination of a facility's water supply, sewer connection, or other municipal utility services. The department may allow the person to recommence its discharge when it has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the department that the period of endangerment has passed, unless further termination proceedings are initiated against the discharger under this chapter. A person that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful discharge and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the department within 15 days of receipt of the emergency order. Issuance of an emergency cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the violator. 
(D)  Violations deemed a public nuisance: Any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a threat to public health and safety and is declared and deemed a public nuisance. 
(E)  Nuisance abatement: Whenever a nuisance shall be found to exist on any premises, the Director may order such nuisance to be abated upon determination that the nuisance constitutes a threat to public health or safety. 
1.  In the event of an emergency situation, as determined by the Director, involving an immediate threat to public health and safety, the Director may direct legal counsel to immediately commence any legal or equitable proceeding necessary to restrain, abate, and/or remedy said situation. The Director may take such action without having to first issue a notice of violation to the person(s) having control of, or acting as agent for, such premises where the nuisance is located, or, waiting for such person(s) to abate or remove such nuisance as previously ordered by the Director. 
2.  In all other cases, the Director may notify, in writing, the person(s) having control of, or acting as agent for, such premises where the nuisance is located and directing such person(s) to abate or remove such nuisance within such time as is stated on the notice. Upon the failure or refusal of such person(s) to comply with the notice, the Director may direct that appropriate proceeding commence to compel the abatement, or removal, of such a nuisance in any manner allowed by law, equity, or this chapter and/or authorizing the department to act to abate, or remove, such nuisance. The person(s) having control of such premises, in addition to the other remedies provided by this chapter, shall be liable to the department for any costs incurred by the department to effect such abatement, or removal, including reasonable attorney fees and other costs of enforcement, to be recovered by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(F)  Fines: Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a petty offense. Such violation shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 each day, or any portion of a day, during which such violation is committed, continued, or permitted shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. 
(G)  Remedies not exclusive: The remedies listed in this chapter are not exclusive of any other remedy available under this chapter or under any applicable federal, state, or local law and do not supersede or limit, any and all other penalties provided by law. The Director may seek, at his discretion, cumulative remedies. 
(Ord. 5804, 10-26-2009) 
7-15-9. - Suspension of MS4 access. 
(A)  Suspension of MS4 access due to detection of illicit discharges: 
1.  Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this chapter may have their MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The department shall notify a violator of the proposed termination of its MS4 access. The violator may petition the department for a reconsideration and hearing. A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior approval of the department. 
2.  In emergency situations, the department may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge, which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4, storm drainage system, or waters of the United States. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the department may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4, storm drainage system, or waters of the United States, or to minimize danger to public health and safety. The department shall obtain an emergency court order authorizing such termination. 
(Ord. 5804, 10-26-2009) 
7-15-10. - Appeals. 
(A)  Right to appeal: 
1.  Every request for an appeal shall be made, in writing, to the Director. The Director may delegate the hearing of appeals to the Glen Ellyn Village Board in the manner provided for below. 
2.  Any person aggrieved by any decision, ruling, or determination by the Director, or by any interpretation or application of any provision of this chapter may appeal such matter. An appeal of any decision made by the Director shall be made within seven days of the decision contested, excepting an appeal involving the assessment charge or calculation of any fine or penalty in which cases which an appeal shall be brought before said amount becomes 30 days past due. 
(a)  The appeal procedure shall commence when the person aggrieved notifies the Director, in writing, of the intent to appeal the decision of the Director. Such notice shall contain a short, clear, statement stating the following: 
(1)  Identifying the decision of the Director which such person is appealing and how this chapter has been misread, misinterpreted, or misapplied in this instance and/or any mistakes of fact the aggrieved believes the Director to have relied upon. 
(2)  The name and both a mailing address and a telephone number of the person making the request, which contact information shall be used for giving notices related to the appeal. The person making the request shall attach all written materials on which he or she intends to rely upon in support of the request. 
(b)  The Director may, without conducting a hearing, grant relief sought by the appeal, or may set the matter over for a hearing in the manner provided in subsection (A)2.(c) of this section. 
(c)  Upon receipt of such notice of appeal, if relief is not granted by the Director in accordance with subsection (A)2.(b) of this section, the Director shall set a date for a hearing. Such hearing shall take place no fewer than 14 days nor more than 30 days from the date that the Director receives such notice of appeal unless the Director and party requesting the hearing agree to a different schedule. The Director shall notify the person making the appeal of the date of such hearing. 
(d)  At the hearing the person making the appeal may appear in person or represented by counsel, or submit his case in writing. The decision concerning the appeal shall be in writing, shall be communicated to the person making the appeal, and shall state a finding upon which the decision is based. 
3.  The Village Board shall have the authority to reverse, modify, or affirm any decision, ruling, or determination by the Director made pursuant to this chapter upon appeal. The Village Board shall not act in a manner that would violate or in any way conflict with any federal or state standard or requirement. The Village Board may adopt such additional rules and procedures, as it deems appropriate for performing such matters. 
(B)  Enforcement Measures After Appeal: If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within seven days of the decision of the Director or Village Board upholding the decision of the department, then representatives of the department are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. In no case shall an appeal stay or bar the county from commencing a legal action seeking emergency relief. 
(Ord. 5804, 10-26-2009) 
7-15-11. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
(A)  Severability: The provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable. If any provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this chapter or the application thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this chapter. 
(B)  Most restrictive provisions apply: 
1.  The provisions of this chapter shall be interpreted to be cumulative of, and to impose limitations in addition to, all other ordinances, laws, codes, and regulations in existence or which may be passed governing any subject matter of this chapter. To the greatest extent possible, the provisions of this chapter shall be construed to be consistent with, and not in conflict with, the provisions of such other ordinances, laws, codes, and regulations, and with each other, to the end that all such provisions may be given their fullest application. 
2.  This chapter is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law. Where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(C)  Ultimate responsibility: The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this chapter are minimum standards; therefore, this chapter does not intend or imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, or unauthorized discharge of pollutants. 
(Ord. 5804, 10-26-2009) 
TITLE 8 - PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY 
  
Chapter 1 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS 

8-1-1. - Bench mark. 
For the purpose of indicating the elevation of levels and grades in the Village, the datum plane is hereby set at a USGS monumented bench mark located at the southeast corner of the intersection of Bryant and Hill Avenues. Said monument is recorded as being 713 feet above sea level. 
(Ord. 2069, 4-12-1976) 
8-1-2. - Street division. 
(A)  Creation: There is hereby created the street division within the Public Works Department of the Village, which shall consist of a Superintendent and such employees as may be assigned thereto. 
(B)  The Superintendent: The Superintendent of Streets shall be appointed by the Village administrator. 
(C)  Functions of the division: It shall be the function of the street division, and the duty of each employee assigned thereto, to see that the streets, alleys, sidewalks and other public ways in the Village are kept in good repair and are cleaned at regular intervals, or so often as may be necessary. 
(D)  The responsibility of the Superintendent: The Superintendent of Streets shall be responsible for the supervision of the street division and charged with the efficient management thereof. All employees assigned to the street division shall observe the orders and instructions of the Superintendent. 
(Ord. 2336, 3-27-1978) 
8-1-3. - Street construction. 
(A)  Permit: No person shall construct or pave any public street, sidewalk, alley or other public way without first obtaining a permit therefor. Applications for such permits shall be made to the Village Collector, and shall conform to the provisions relating to applications for licenses and permits. 
(B)  Establishment of grade: No person shall construct or pave any public street, sidewalk, alley or other public way without first obtaining, from the Public Works Director, a grade therefor, and such grade shall not be changed without obtaining permission so to do from the Board of Trustees. 
(C)  Work done by the Village: The provisions of this section pertaining to the construction of pavements or sidewalks do not apply to work done by the Village, or any agency thereof. 
(Ord. 2336, 3-27-1978) 
8-1-4. - Injury to any pavement. 
No person shall walk upon, or drive any vehicle upon, any newly laid street or sidewalk pavement while it is guarded by a warning sign or barricade. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 19.03) 
8-1-5. - Repairs. 
Repairs to sidewalks, whether done by the Village or the abutting property owner, shall be done under the supervision of the Superintendent of Streets. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 19.04) 
8-1-6. - Defects in streets, sidewalks. 
It shall be the duty of any Village employee or officer becoming cognizant of any defect in any street, alley or sidewalk, or any obstruction thereof, to report the same to the Superintendent of Streets immediately. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 19.05) 
8-1-7. - Trees, shrubbery in parkways. 
(Repealed by Ordinance 4670, December 14, 1998) 
8-1-8. - House numbering. 
(A)  Number required; baseline: All buildings located on any street within the Village shall be numbered by the owner or occupant thereof according to the following plan: For the purpose of said numbering, there are hereby established two baselines: a north and south baseline coinciding with the west line of sections 2, 11, 14 and 23 of township 39 north, range 10 east of the third principal meridian, and an east and west baseline coinciding with Roosevelt Road. 
House numbers on the east and west streets shall begin at the north and south baseline with the number 400 and increase to the easterly corporate limits and decrease to the westerly corporate limits of the Village on a unit basis of 26.4 feet per number, measured at right angles to said north and south baseline, the odd numbers to be placed on the south side and even numbers on the north side of the streets. 
House numbers on the north and south streets shall begin at the centerline of Roosevelt Road with zero and increase to the northerly corporate limits and to the southerly corporate limits of the Village on a unit basis of 26.4 feet per number measured at right angles to said east and west baseline, the odd numbers to be placed on the east side and even numbers on the west side of the streets. 
All numbers on the streets shall bear the prefix "N" for North or "S" for South, according to their location with respect to Roosevelt Road. 
As used in this section, the term "east and west streets" means all streets running easterly and westerly, and the term "north and south streets" means all streets running northerly and southerly. 
(B)  Assignment of numbers: For the purpose of facilitating a correct enumeration, the Village Clerk shall obtain plats of all streets and public ways within the Village, showing the proper numbers of all lots or houses fronting thereon; and it shall be the duty of the Building Division of Department of Community Development to assign to each house its proper number, deliver to the owner or occupant a certificate designating such number and adjust all mistakes and errors in numbering. No number shall be placed in any premises except that contained in the certificate issued by the Chief Building and Zoning Official. 
(C)  Size and placement of numbers: Each of the numbers shall be of such height, width and color, and so placed, that they will be plainly visible from the street. 
(D)  Changing number: Whenever any premises has been assigned a street number as herein provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to change or alter such number. 
(E)  Failure to number: Whenever the owner or occupant of a building neglects to number such building for a period of 30 days, he shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 19.07; Ord. 2336, 3-27-1978; Ord. 4458, 1-13-1997; Ord. 6674, 2-25-2019) 
8-1-9. - Driveways and sidewalks. 
(A)  Permit required: No person shall construct a driveway or sidewalk across any parkway in the Village without first obtaining a permit therefor. Applications for such permits shall be submitted to the Community Development Department and shall be accompanied by a fee. See subsection 4-1-4(A) of this Code. 
(B)  Grade; surface: No driveway shall be so constructed or graded as to leave a steep, sharp depression, or other obstruction, in the sidewalk. The grade shall be, as nearly as possible, the same as that of the adjoining sidewalk. 
It shall be unlawful to have a driveway, at its intersection with the sidewalk, constructed of materials which will render it slippery and hazardous for pedestrians. 
(C)  Materials: Driveways crossing sidewalks and parkways shall be constructed of concrete or bituminous pavement. If bituminous pavement is used, it shall extend from the street side of the sidewalk to the street pavement. All sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete. 
(D)  Repairs: It shall be the duty of every person maintaining a driveway to keep the same in good repair and free from obstructions and openings where it crosses the sidewalk. 
(E)  Inspection fee: All new or replacement driveway or sidewalk permit applications shall be accompanied by an inspection fee in the amount of $50.00. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 19.08; Ord. 5154, 3-24-2003; Ord. 6674, 2-25-2019) 
8-1-10. - Injury to streets. 
(A)  No person shall damage or cause damage to any area of the public right-of-way including any sidewalk, street, parkway or alley in the Village. 
(B)  No person shall discharge any water from sump pumps, gutters, roof drains or similar drainage devices in a concentrated manner onto or over a public sidewalk or street. 
(C)  No person shall install, or maintain if previously installed, any private posts, columns, stanchions, supports or other similar devices or structures or decorative rock on or in any area of the public right-of-way including any sidewalk, street, parkway or alley. 
(D)  Any person: 1) discharging any water onto or over a public sidewalk or street in a prohibited manner, 2) installing or maintaining a previously installed private post, column, stanchion, support or other similar device or decorative rock in any area of a public right-of-way, including, any sidewalk, street, parkway or alley, or 3) otherwise damaging or causing damage to any area of the public right-of-way, including any sidewalk, street, parkway or alley in the Village, shall immediately cease such prohibited activity upon receipt of notice to do so from the Village. If any person damaging, causing damage or maintaining any discharge, supporting device or decorative rock in any area of the public right-of-way in violation of this section shall not immediately abate such nuisance after being notified to do so, then the Village shall proceed to abate such nuisance without further notice and, in addition to any penalty or fine, the expense of such abatement shall be collected from the person who it is determined to have created, continued or suffered such nuisance or damage to exist. 
(E)  No part of any mailbox or appurtenance thereto shall be located or maintained closer than eight inches to the back of the curb or edge of pavement on streets without curbs on the parkways. Support structures that hold the mailboxes shall be 40 inches in height from the ground to the bottom of the mailboxes. Support structures for mailboxes shall be constructed of breakaway material, either four inch by four inch lumber or two inches in diameter, thin wall steel pipe with a wall thickness of less than 0.155 inch. The support structure shall be buried no more than 24 inches into the ground. Any other mailbox support structure is not acceptable. 
Unacceptable support structures include, but are not limited to, brick, block, stone or concrete masonry columns, wagon wheels, steel pipes in excess of the previously defined two-inch diameter and 0.155 inch thickness, and lumber posts in excess of four inches by four inches. 
Any mailbox or any appurtenance thereto which does not conform with this subsection and is in existence at the time of its enactment is exempt from this provision; but when any such mailbox, support structure, or any appurtenance is removed and replaced for any reason, the new structure shall conform with the provisions of this subsection. 
The Village will not be responsible for any damage or destruction done to any such mailbox constructed contrary to the provisions of this subsection due to work performed by the Village to maintain the right-of-way or Village utility systems in the right-of-way. 
(Ord. 3829, 4-22-1991; Ord. 4861, 8-14-2000) 
8-1-11. - Street obstructions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct any area of a public right-of-way, including any sidewalk, street, parkway or alley, and the Superintendent of Streets is authorized to remove, or cause the removal of, any obstruction, unless a license agreement for a business to place tables and chairs, vestibules, vendor carts, or other similar structures on the public sidewalk in the downtown has been approved by the Village Manager or Village Board. 
The licensee shall be required to adhere to all elements of the agreement and pay the applicable fee set forth in section 4-1-4 of this Code. 
(Ord. 6143, 6-24-2013) 
8-1-12. - Merchandise on street. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use any sidewalk, street or other public place for the display or sale of goods, wares, food, beverage or merchandise. This shall not apply to charitable organizations which have obtained waivers from the Village Board of Trustees to solicit contributions or unless a license agreement has been approved by the Village Manager or Village Board. 
(Ord. 6301, 2-23-2015) 
8-1-13. - Encroachments on public ways. 
(A)  No person shall erect, maintain or continue any private building or private structure which encroaches on or into any public street, way or grounds, except an awning securely affixed to a building abutting a public street and constructed in full compliance with all Village codes and ordinances, unless a license agreement for a business to place tables and chairs, vestibules, vendor carts, or other similar structures on the public sidewalk in the downtown has been approved by the Village Manager or Village Board. 
(B)  Any encroachment, except an awning, presently maintained or continued in the future shall be immediately abated and terminated upon notice, either written or oral, from the Village. 
(C)  Any awning heretofore or hereafter erected and otherwise maintained in full compliance with all Village codes and ordinances, shall be immediately terminated and removed if it interferes with, impedes or hinders any public use or public improvement of the public street or way. Any awning permitted hereby shall be considered to be an encroachment into the public street which may be terminated at any time by the Village. Maintenance of any awning in the public street or way, with or without express permission, shall confer no rights upon the owner, or anyone else, in and to a continued right to maintain the awning encroaching into the public way. 
(D)  No person shall place, maintain or continue any temporary private obstruction which encroaches on or into any public street, way, or sidewalk for construction related purposes without first obtaining a right-of-way obstruction permit from the Village. Applicable fees are indicated within section Q of the schedule of fees and deposits in Section 4-1-4(A). 
(Ord. 3264, 10-27-1986; Ord. 6143, 6-24-2013; Ord. 6603, 5-29-2018) 
8-1-14. - Barricades. 
Any person laying, repairing or excavating the pavement of a street, sidewalk or other public place shall maintain suitable barricades to prevent injury to persons by reason of the work, and shall have the barricades lighted at night. 
Whenever any road, street, bridge or culvert is being built or repaired, the public officials having charge of such work shall erect suitable barriers, with signs thereon stating that the roadway is closed during construction. 
Whenever a road, street, sidewalk or public way has been barricaded and closed, as above provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to remove, deface or injure such barrier or signs, or to walk, ride, drive or enter upon any part of the road, street, sidewalk or public way so closed. 
(1965 Code § 19.13) 
8-1-15. - Debris in streets. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit on any street, alley or other improved roadway, any dirt, clay, black dirt, sand, gravel, cement, brick, rubbish, waste material or any material or things which might cause injury to persons or vehicles using such street. 
(B)  It shall be unlawful to deposit upon any Village street, alley or other improved roadway snow or ice in quantities sufficient to create a hazard or impede Village snow removal efforts. 
(C)  No vehicle shall be operated on any street, alley or other improved roadway within the Village when the condition of said vehicle is such that soil, clay, mud, stone, potentially harmful and dangerous material, or any of its load spills, drops or falls from the tires or its other parts onto Village streets. 
(D)  Materials may be deposited in the street preparatory to delivery, with the permission of the Superintendent of Streets, and 24 hours' notice thereof to the Police Department and the Building and Zoning Division; provided such deposit does not reduce the usable width of the roadway at that point to less than 18 feet, and provided such materials shall not be permitted to remain on the street for a period longer than three hours. 
If such material remains on any street between sunset and sunrise, proper warning lights must be maintained thereon. 
(E)  Muddy tire tracks, or lumps of mud and debris leading to or from a parcel of property shall be considered to be prima facie evidence of violation of this section by the owner or developer of said property. 
(F)  If it becomes necessary for the Village to remove such deposits, the violator shall not be deemed to have complied with this section and shall remain liable for the fine provided for violation of this section. 
Said violator shall be subject to a fine of up to $500.00 per violation. 
(G)  The Police Department and the Building and Zoning Division are hereby authorized to administer this section in coordination with and at the final approval of the Superintendent of Streets. 
(Ord. 2395, 10-11-1978; Ord. 6143, 6-24-2013) 
8-1-16. - Restoration deposits. 
In order to guarantee the protection of public property and to ensure the restoration of streets, parkways, driveway approaches and sidewalks, any contractor having a permit for the construction of a new building, or the repairing of a water or sewer connection, shall be required to make the deposits hereinafter provided. 
A.  New construction: Any contractor, owner or agent obtaining a permit for the erection of a new building shall deposit with the Finance Department cash or cashier's check in an amount equal to $8.00 per front foot of the lot on which such building is to be constructed. 
This deposit shall be returned to the depositor by the Finance Director, without interest, upon written notice from the Building and Zoning Official that: 
1.  The street or parkway has not been damaged, or has been satisfactorily repaired; 
2.  A public sidewalk has been installed to connect with an existing sidewalk on contiguous property; 
3.  The sidewalk existing at the time of the issuance of the building permit is in safe condition; and 
4.  A hard surfaced, all weather driveway approach serves the premises for which the building permit was issued. 
If, at the time the Building and Zoning Official is required to issue a certificate of final inspection, he finds that a street or parkway has been damaged, or a public sidewalk has not been installed to connect with an existing sidewalk, or an existing sidewalk is not in safe condition, or a proper driveway approach has not been installed, he shall mail to the depositor written notice of such defect; and if the defect is not remedied within 30 days from the date of such notice (except that such work need not be done between November 1 and March 31), the Building and Zoning Official shall give written notice to the Finance Director to forfeit said deposit and transfer the same to the street and sidewalk rehabilitation fund of the Village. 
B.  Repairs: Any contractor, owner or agent of either obtaining a permit to repair a water service or sewer connection shall deposit with the Finance Department cash or a cashier's check in the sum of $1,000.00, which deposit shall be returned to the depositor by the Finance Director, without interest, upon written notice from the Building and Zoning Official that the street, parkway, or sidewalk is not damaged or has been satisfactorily repaired. 
All repairs provided for in this subsection must be made with the use of no. 9 or equivalent stone. 
In the event the street, parkway or sidewalk has been damaged as a result of repairing such water or sewer connection, the Building and Zoning Official shall send to the depositor written notice of the extent of such damage; and if it is not repaired within 30 days of the date of such notice (except that such work need not be done between November 1 and March 31), the Building and Zoning Official shall give written notice to the Finance Director to forfeit said deposit and transfer the same to the street and sidewalk rehabilitation fund of the Village. 
C.  Unless noted otherwise, the required restoration deposits are included within the deposit amount indicated in the permit fee and zoning application fee in Section 4-1-4(C) of this Code. 
(Ord. 2336, 3-27-1978; amd. Ord. 2615, 12-8-1980; Ord. 4094, 2-28-1994, eff. 5-1-1994; Ord. 5154, 3-24-2003; Ord. 6603, 5-29-2018) 
8-1-17. - Openings in sidewalks. 
(A)  Construction: All permanent openings maintained in public sidewalks shall be securely covered at all times when not open for use and securely guarded or barricaded when open for use. The cover for such openings shall be constructed of nonslippery material, and shall not cause an obstruction or defect in the sidewalk. 
(B)  Bond required: Any person maintaining an opening of any kind in a public sidewalk shall file with the Village Clerk a bond in the sum of $5,000.00, conditioned to indemnify the Village for any loss, damage or liability resulting from the existence or use of the sidewalk opening. 
(1965 Code § 19.16) 
8-1-18. - Barbed wire fence. 
It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain any fence of which barbed wire forms a part, or which is dangerous to persons who might come in contact with it, along the line, or within six feet, of any public way in the Village. 
(1965 Code § 19.17) 
8-1-19. - Games. 
(Repealed by Ordinance 3209, May 27, 1986) 
8-1-20. - Duty to install sidewalks. 
(A)  On a lot or tract having no abutting sidewalks, the owner of such lot or tract shall install sidewalks on the sides of all streets abutting such lot or tract, including, for corner lots, sidewalk extensions up to the curb line at the nearest street intersection for a maximum distance of 150 linear feet for each side of each residential parcel (commercial property owner shall pay for all linear feet) when any one of the following improvements are made on a lot: 
1.  A new principal building or structure is constructed. 
2.  An existing building floor area is increased by more than 75 percent. 
3.  An existing building exterior roof and wall structure area is altered by more than 50 percent. 
(B)  The applicant for such building permit shall deposit with the Village Collector cash equal to $20.00 per linear foot of such required sidewalk to assure the construction and maintenance of such sidewalk. The Public Works Department shall be notified that the deposit has been made. In the event an obstacle or multiple obstacles prevent a sidewalk from being constructed at specific locations along a property owner's frontage, that portion of sidewalk that cannot be constructed will not be calculated in the cost to the property owner. The portion of the frontage where sidewalk can be constructed leading to the obstacle will be charged to the resident. Once a sidewalk is constructed, according to the duty to install sidewalks, no refunds will be granted. 
(C)  All sidewalks shall be constructed of Portland cement concrete and shall be laid to a line and grade established by the Public Works Department of Glen Ellyn. Such sidewalks shall be five feet in width whenever possible and shall be constructed in conformity with the "Specifications for Public Pedestrian Walks" approved by the Village Board of Trustees. 
(D)  If such sidewalks are constructed by the owner in accordance with the requirements of this Code, such deposit shall be returned upon completion if such construction, without interest by order of the Public Works Department communicated to the finance department for the return of funds. 
(E)  If such sidewalks shall not be so constructed within 60 days of the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the Public Works Director will be notified by the Community Development Department that sidewalks have not been constructed and Public Works shall have the right to construct such sidewalks and apply the deposit to the cost thereof. 
(F)  In instances where such sidewalks cannot be constructed within 60 days of the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for such building construction by reason of the season of the year, or for other reasons making it impractical to build such sidewalk in an acceptable manner at such time, the construction of such sidewalk may be postponed to a future date agreed upon between the owner of such premises and the Public Works Director to be no longer than six months from the date of the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(G)  The owner of a lot or tract required to install sidewalks under this section may apply to the Village Board for a waiver of this requirement. Such a waiver request will be reviewed in light of the criteria for sidewalk installation adopted by the Village Board under resolution 01-12, dated April 9, 2001. The waiver request will be considered based on a review of the various criteria relating to the proposed sidewalk installation. In the process of review of the waiver request, a notice will be provided to all interested parties affected by the proposed waiver offering the opportunity for them to present to the Village Board their position relative to the waiver request. 
(H)  In the event the Village Board grants a waiver from the requirement to install new sidewalk, the property owner shall pay to the Village a sum of money equal to $20.00 per linear foot of sidewalk included under the waiver for a maximum distance of 150 linear feet for each side of each residential parcel. These funds will be used by the Village of Glen Ellyn for improvement of the public sidewalk system including the repair and replacement of defective squares and installation of new sidewalk at a location within one mile of the property owner's lot for which the waiver was granted. Funds generated from the Village Board waiver process shall be deposited in the capital projects fund when acquired and become an annual expenditure for the improvement of the public sidewalk system. 
(I)  In the event the Village Board grants a waiver from the requirement to install new sidewalk, and at any time in the future decides to install a new sidewalk at the same location the waiver was granted, the Village Board shall have the right to install the sidewalk. Residents that paid for a waiver will not receive a refund. This applies when other locations on the block have sidewalks installed by the Village at no cost to the other residents. 
(Ord. 6057, 7-23-2012; Ord. 6674, 2-25-2019) 
Chapter 2 - WATER AND SEWER SERVICE 
(Repealed by Ordinance 2733, February 22, 1982) 
Chapter 3 - DUMPING AND LANDFILLING 

8-3-1. - Harmful deposits unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit the deposit on any street or public way in the Village of any dirt, debris or any materials which may be harmful to the pavement or surface thereof, or any material such as waste material or glass or other articles which may do injury to any person, animal or property. No person may operate a truck or other vehicle upon the streets of the Village in a manner which would permit the deposit or scattering of dirt, debris or other articles upon such streets or public property. 
(Ord. 2030, 1-26-1976) 
8-3-2. - Nuisance declared. 
No person shall dump or deposit anywhere within the Village any garbage, ashes, miscellaneous waste, manure or other substance that may contain disease germs, or be scattered by the wind, or decompose or become filthy, noxious, or unhealthful. Such dumping is hereby declared to be a nuisance. It shall also be unlawful to dump or deposit any waste matter upon private property unless the written consent of the owner or his authorized agent shall first be obtained and filed with the Village, and a permit obtained from the Village. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the dumping of material on private property by the owner thereof. 
(Ord. 2030, 1-26-1976) 
8-3-3. - Removal of refuse. 
(A)  Refuse accumulated from the operation of lot cleaning or lot clearing, and building contractors' refuse caused by building, rebuilding or otherwise altering a building or structure shall be removed by the person or building contractor performing such work, except that a scavenger service approved by the Village may remove such waste materials at a charge based upon an agreement between the parties. 
(B)  If, after notice, the person or building contractor responsible for the removal of refuse refuses to remove such refuse, the Village may go upon the property involved and remove such refuse and charge the owner of the property for the cost of such removal. Such cost, if not paid upon demand, may be made a lien against such property. 
(C)  If the Village should remove such refuse in accordance with subsection (B) of this section and charge the owner for such removal, such removal and charge shall not constitute compliance with this section and the violator shall be subject to the fine provided in addition to the charge for removal. 
(Ord. 2030, 1-26-1976) 
8-3-4. - Landfill; permit, fee required. 
(A)  Any dumping to provide landfill, shall be with clean dirt which is free of concrete, broken blacktop or other similar building materials. 
(B)  A permit issued by the Village shall be required before a landfilling operation may be started. The application for such a permit shall include a topographic survey of the area indicating the existing watershed and the proposed final grades as well as any other pertinent data and information which may be required to ensure that the filling operation will not increase the flood hazards either upstream or downstream from the site. The guidelines adopted and set forth in the storm water control ordinance shall be consulted in preparation of the application for conformance. 
(C)  The fee for such a permit shall be $25.00. 
(D)  Upon completion of a landfilling operation, the area shall be leveled off and graded to conform to Village drainage and water runoff control requirements. Following grading, the area shall be seeded with grass to provide ground cover and to prevent soil erosion. 
(Ord. 2030, 1-26-1976) 
8-3-5. - Deposit required. 
Any person to whom a permit is issued shall make a deposit of $200.00 per acre or portion thereof for each permit that is issued to ensure the proper performance and restoration. 
In lieu of the deposit required herein, the Village may accept a bond or other guarantee to ensure proper performance and restoration. 
(Ord. 2030, 1-26-1976) 
8-3-6. - Penalty. 
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not more than $500.00 for each such offense. 
(Ord. 2030, 1-26-1976) 
Chapter 4 - FORESTRY MANAGEMENT 

8-4-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to enhance the public property portion of the community forest by assuring the preservation, protection, planting, and proper maintenance of parkway trees. Title 4, chapter 8, "Tree Preservation", of this Code is applicable to the private property portion of the community forest. These chapters complement each other to enhance the total community forest in Glen Ellyn. 
(Ord. 5962, 9-26-2011) 
8-4-2. - Definitions. 
As used within this chapter and title 4, chapter 8 of this Code, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth in this section: 
ARBORICULTURAL SPECIFICATIONS MANUAL: A manual prepared and updated by the Village Forester and incorporated into an ordinance passed and amended from time to time by the Village Board, which more specifically carries out the enforcement provisions and intent of this Code and contains regulations and standards for the preservation, planting, maintenance, and removal of trees, shrubs, and other plants upon Village property and regulated trees on private property. 
COMMUNITY FOREST: The entire tree population in the Village of Glen Ellyn, including trees on private and public property. 
COMPREHENSIVE FORESTRY MANAGEMENT PROGRAM: The five year plan for the improvement of the Village of Glen Ellyn community forest and approved by the Village Board. 
CRITICAL ROOT ZONE: The area inscribed by an imaginary line on the ground beneath a tree having its center point at the center of the trunk of the tree and having a radius equal to one foot for every inch of dbh but not less than six feet from the trunk of the tree. 
CROWN: Parts of a tree above the trunk including leaves, branches, and scaffolds. 
DEVELOPMENT: All new planned unit developments and subdivisions in the Village of Glen Ellyn. Any manmade change to improved or unimproved property including, but not limited to, the construction, addition, alteration, or replacement of buildings or structures, excavation, fill, grading, paving, underground irrigation, or utility work on the property that exceeds 300 square feet of disturbed site area except the following: 
(A)  Replacement pavement in the same footprint as existing pavement, 
(B)  Decks supported on individual spaced concrete piers, 
(C)  Fences supported on spaced posts, 
(D)  Replacement detached garages in the same footprint as the existing garage with no more than an additional 20 percent of garage area, or 
(E)  Grading on private property that disturbs less than 1,500 square feet of site area. 
DIAMETER BREAST HEIGHT (Hereinafter Called dbh): The diameter of the trunk of the tree measured in inches at a point four and one-half feet above ground line. This point of measurement is used for established and mature trees. 
DRIP LINE: A line drawn on the ground surface directly beneath and perpendicular to the maximum radius of the crown of an existing tree but not less than six feet from the trunk, whichever is greater. 
LANDSCAPE: Any shrubs, flowers, grass, or ground covers. 
LOT: A zoning lot as defined in the Glen Ellyn Zoning and Subdivision Code. 
PUBLIC NUISANCE: Any tree, shrub, or other plant, or breeding place which harbors infectious insects or diseases which reasonably may be expected to injure or harm other trees or which could cause a safety hazard affecting the general public. 
PUBLIC TREE REMOVAL OR WORK PERMIT: The permit required by this Code issued in order to remove or do any work on any public tree within the corporate limits of the Village or a Village parkway. 
REGULATED PUBLIC UTILITY: Any utility certified by the Illinois Commerce Commission to provide service to any customer within the corporate limits of the Village of Glen Ellyn or any other entity with a franchise issued by the Village or any other entity which has the right to extend pipes, wires, cables or lines on public property within the Village. The effect of this chapter with regard to any public utility is intended to be the maximum regulation permitted by law or under the terms of a franchise or similar agreement. 
REMOVE OR REMOVAL: The causing or accomplishing of the actual physical removal of a tree or the effective removal through damaging, poisoning, or other direct or indirect action resulting in, or likely to result in, the death of a tree. 
SCAFFOLDS: Primary structural branches of the crown. 
TREE: Any self-supporting, woody plant with its root system, growing upon the earth usually with one trunk or a multistemmed trunk system supporting a definitely formed crown, achieving a minimum of at least eight feet in height. 
TREE, ADJACENT PROPERTY: Any tree with a four inch dbh or greater on an adjoining private property and located within 15 feet of the lot line. These trees are protected trees unless the owner of the tree designates them as nonprotected. 
TREE, BORDER: Any tree, the trunk of which lies at least one-fourth on Village owned property and three-fourths on private property, determined as the distance of the diameter measured at right angles to the public right-of-way, determined by the Village Forester. These trees are protected trees unless the Village Forester designates them as nonprotected. 
TREE, IMPACTED: Any tree shown on a tree preservation plan, that would otherwise be a protected tree, that will be adversely affected by construction. This tree is not a removed tree or a protected tree. 
TREE PRESERVATION PLAN: A written plan having text and/or graphic illustrations indicating the methods which are to be used to preserve a public tree, significant tree, adjacent property tree, impacted tree, or protected tree during construction and shall include a tree survey, application, plan submittal checklist, and action plan. The document shall be coordinated with and, if possible, made a part of a site grading plan or drainage plan. 
TREE, PRIVATE: Any tree on privately owned property within the Village. 
TREE, PROTECTED: Any tree in the Village shown on a tree preservation plan as being retained after development with a ten inch dbh or greater, or a multibranch tree which has an aggregate diameter of 16 inches dbh or greater. 
TREE, PUBLIC: Any tree or border tree on public property or within a public right-of-way in the Village. These trees are protected trees unless the Village Forester or his/her designee designates them as nonprotected. 
TREE, REMOVED: Any tree shown on a tree preservation plan that would otherwise be a protected tree, as being removed after development. 
TREE, REPLACEMENT: A nursery grown certified tree properly balled and burlapped and satisfying the standards established for nursery stock and installation thereof set forth by the American Association of Nurserymen. 
TREE, SIGNIFICANT: All hickory, oak, or walnut species in the Village measuring five inches dbh or greater. These trees are protected trees unless the owner of the tree designates them as nonprotected. 
TREE SURVEY: A graphic display of all protected, border, public, significant, impacted, removed, and adjacent property trees including their location, condition, species and size. All existing trees that are required to be shown on the tree survey must be identified by number. The survey shall show the location of protective fencing and other protective measures to be placed on the lot. The survey shall also show the location of any tree, which would otherwise be a protected tree, which was removed in the prior one year period. 
TREES, SHRUBS, AND OTHER PLANTS: All vegetation, woody or otherwise, except lawn and flowers less than 24 inches high. 
(Ord. 5962, 9-26-2011) 
8-4-3. - Village forester. 
The Village Forester shall be appointed by the Village Manager. The Village Forester shall be responsible for the enforcement of the "Forestry Management" and "Tree Preservation" chapters of this Code. 
(Ord. 5962, 9-26-2011) 
8-4-4. - Registered tree contractor. 
Any person, firm, or corporation which is employed to prune or remove any public tree, protected tree, or significant tree shall be required to register with the Public Works Department. There shall be no charge for the registration, but the registration form shall include information regarding at least the name, address and telephone number of the contractor, and the number of years the contractor has been in business. Registration forms will be filed on or before May 1 of each year and shall be annually updated if listed information should change. 
A registered contractor shall report to the Village any tree removed within seven days after the removal. This report shall contain the address of the lot from which the tree was removed, the reason for removal, the species, and dbh. 
It shall be a violation of the ordinances of the Village for any person, firm, or corporation to perform the aforesaid work within the Village without having filed a registration form either initially or on an annual basis or having failed to disclose full and accurate information required on that registration form. In addition to instituting an action to seek fines for the failure to register or providing inaccurate information in the registration forms, the Village President may suspend or revoke the registration if a tree contractor fails to comply with the requirements of the Village ordinances. 
A suspension or revocation shall only take place after the Village President has held a hearing upon not less than five days' written notice. The tree contractor shall be provided with a written statement of the provisions of the Village ordinances which the tree contractor is alleged to have violated. At such hearing, the tree contractor shall be entitled to be represented by counsel who shall be permitted to present witnesses and cross examine any other witnesses that appear at the hearing. A suspension may be for a period of up to six months; a revocation shall be for a period of two years. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any registered tree contractor to employ within the Village a person who was employed by a tree contractor whose permit was suspended or revoked during the period of the suspension or revocation. 
(Ord. 5962, 9-26-2011) 
8-4-5. - General regulations; public property. 
(A)  Work on public trees: Work on public trees may only be carried on by a registered tree contractor with a valid current registration selected or approved by the Village Forester, or his/her designee, and issued a permit to carry out such work. This provision shall not prohibit owners of property adjacent to Village owned property from watering or fertilizing any tree, shrub, or other plant on Village owned property. 
(B)  Damage to trees, shrubs, or other plants prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to injure, prune, remove, destroy, attach any rope, wire, nail, or other contrivance; place any compacted stone, cement, or other impervious matter or substance as may obstruct the free access of air and water to the roots (i.e., landscape fabric), improper mulching techniques (volcano mulching); or remove any device set for the protection of any tree, shrub, or other plants on Village owned property without approval from the Village Forester or his/her designee. 
(C)  Care of public property when working on private property: It shall be unlawful for the person working on private or public property to leave any public tree that may be affected by building, structure, or other work without proper tree preservation methods as stated by the Village Forester or his/her designee per the "Arboricultural Specifications Manual". 
(D)  Work standards on public trees must be followed: Work done on public trees shall follow the standards outlined in the "Arboricultural Specifications Manual". A copy of the "Arboricultural Specifications Manual" is on file and may be reviewed at the office of the Village Forester, viewed on our website, or may be purchased at the Civic Center. 
(E)  Damage to public trees causing removal (payment or replacement): Any person that damages a public tree so severely that the public tree dies or requires removal shall compensate the Village for the loss of the public tree. The amount paid shall be based on the following schedule: 
1.  If the damaged public tree is less than eight inches in diameter (measured at 12 inches above ground level), the amount paid shall be determined by using the replacement cost method of evaluating trees found in the latest edition of the Council of Tree and Landscape Appraisers guide (CTLA) for plant appraisal, which guide is adopted by reference by the Village as if it were a part of this chapter. 
2.  For public trees larger than an eight inch trunk diameter, the amount paid shall be determined by using the trunk formula method of evaluating trees found in the latest edition of CTLA's guide. 
3.  Added to the costs established under subsections (E)1. and (E)2. of this section shall be the cost of the removal and stump grinding of the public tree. 
4.  In addition to the prosecution for a business offense, in accordance with subsection (F) of this section, the Village may seek to recover the cost of the damaged public tree, in the amount computed under subsections (E)1., (E)2. and (E)3. of this section, through a civil action. 
(F)  Damage to public trees causing removal (civil fine): Any person that damages a public tree so severely that the public tree dies or requires removal shall be guilty of a business offense and, upon a conviction thereof, shall pay a fine which shall not be less than $1,000.00 nor more than that established under the formula set out in subsections (E)1. and (E)2. of this section, and in addition to the cost of the removal of the tree. 
(G)  Injury to public trees not requiring removal (payment): Any person that causes injury to a public tree that requires treatment may avoid a civil fine by paying the actual cost to treat the tree. 
(H)  Injury to public trees not requiring removal (civil fine): Any person that causes injury to a public tree so that the tree requires treatment shall be guilty of a business offense. 
The fine upon conviction shall be equal to the actual cost incurred by the Village in treating the tree for the injury. 
(I)  Time for bringing an action and damage or injury: The Village shall not prosecute any person for causing damage or injury to public trees when the action of such person was limited to lawn mowing using a nonriding lawn mower or a "weed whacker" unless the person was notified of the problem and continued to cause damage to the tree. Nor shall a person be liable for fines or reimbursement when damage is done by regulated public utility unless that person has specifically directed the location and manner of work performed by the utility which caused the damage, however the person that has specifically caused damaged will be liable. Any action by the Village seeking fines or reimbursements for costs relating to damage or injury to public trees must be commenced within three years of the date of the refund of deposit. 
(Ord. 5962, 9-26-2011) 
8-4-6. - Access to a public right-of-way over a public parkway which cannot reasonably be accomplished except through the removal of a public tree. 
In determining whether reasonable access can be gained to the public right-of-way, the Village Forester may require the applicant seeking access to choose alternate methods of access to the public right-of-way which shall not require damage or removal to a public tree. The Village shall determine the point of access which will provide an opening to the public right-of-way. Where, however, public access can only be reasonably granted through the removal of a public tree, the permit, if otherwise proper, shall be granted; and the property owner shall not be required to reimburse the Village for the value of the tree but only for the cost of removal of tree and stump and replacement four inch dbh tree. 
(Ord. 5962, 9-26-2011) 
8-4-7. - Permits required. 
(A)  Permits required to do work on public trees: Except for work performed by an employee or independent contractor of the Village, none of the following acts relating to public trees may be carried out except by a registered tree contractor who has first secured a written permit from the Village Forester, or his/her designee. The Village shall determine those registered tree contractors who shall be allowed to perform work on public trees. No person except the Village Forester, an agent of the Village Forester, or a contractor hired by the Village under the supervision of the Village Forester may do any of the following acts related to public trees without first securing a written permit from the Village Forester, or his/her designee: 
1.  Plant, transplant, treat, prune, or remove any public tree (excludes watering and fertilization). 
2.  Place in a public right-of-way, either above or below ground level, a container for trees, shrubs, or other plants. 
(B)  Permits required to do tunneling or excavation near public trees: Except for work performed by an employee or an independent contractor of the Village, none of the following acts relating to public trees may be carried out except by a person, including a regulated public utility, who has first secured a written permit from the Village Forester: dig a tunnel, trench, or other excavation; install a driveway approach; plant within the critical root zone for flower boxes, etc.; or rototill or dig within the critical root zone of any public tree. 
(C)  Permit: Applications for permits must be made at the office of the Building and Zoning Official not less than ten working days before the time the work is to be done. Notice of completion of the work authorized by the permit shall be given within five days to the Village Forester for inspection. The issue of the permit and the inspection shall be accomplished within a reasonable period of time provided, however, that the work may not be performed without the issuance of a permit. 
The Village may also require a permit in situations where development will take place in such a manner as to cause stress to public trees even if no removal is contemplated. 
This permit shall not be construed to exempt any person from the requirements of obtaining additional permits required by law. 
If the request includes removal of a public tree where the Village consents to the removal where another access to the public right-of-way could have been reasonably provided, a fee reflecting the value of the tree, plus the cost of removal of tree and stump, shall be paid to the Village before the issuance of any permit. The fee shall be calculated according to subsection 8-4-5(E) of this chapter. If the request includes removal of a public tree where no other access to the property was available, a fee reflecting the cost of removal of tree and stump and all costs associated with the purchase and planting of a four inch tree and a one year guarantee shall be paid to the Village before the issuance of any permit. Tree removal shall be done by a contractor hired by the Village of Glen Ellyn. 
(Ord. 5962, 9-26-2011) 
8-4-8. - Enhancement of tree population; private property owners required to plant new public trees. 
Any contractor, owner, or agent obtaining a building permit for residential construction greater than 1,500 square feet, or business, industrial, or other nonresidential construction or additions to such structures increasing the bulk thereof by greater than 1,500 square feet shall be required, as part of the permit, to assure that a public tree(s) following the "Arboricultural Specifications Manual", is planted at a location on an adjacent public parkway as selected by the Village Forester. If the public parkway adjacent to the lot has public trees that meet the standards found in the "Arboricultural Specifications Manual", as determined by the Village Forester, no new trees need be planted. The contractor, owners, or agents shall pay to the Village a fee to pay of $500.00 per tree to pay for the total cost of purchasing and planting the required trees and provide a one year guarantee. 
(Ord. 5962, 9-26-2011; Ord. 6603, 5-29-2018) 
8-4-9. - Restoration deposits. 
Restoration deposits shall be required for: a) development on private property which requires access to the private property from the public right-of-way on which any public tree exists or b) work in the public right-of-way requiring a work permit. The deposit provides financial assurance that any public tree damaged during the development, or under a work permit, will be restored by the permit holder. The deposit will be available for any cost the Village incurs to correct damage to public trees caused by the work. 
(A)  New construction, additions, or alterations: Any contractor, owner, or agent obtaining a permit for development on private property or a work permit on public property shall deposit with the finance department the landscape value of all public trees that may be affected or $2,000.00, whichever is less. This deposit shall be returned by the Finance Director, without interest, upon written notice from the Village Forester that the work has been completed and that the existing public trees have not been damaged or have been satisfactorily repaired. 
(B)  Deposit uses by Village to replace damaged public trees: If, at the time of final inspection for a development, or work in the parkway permit, it is determined that public trees within the parkway have been damaged, the Village Forester or designee shall mail a written notice to the contractor, owner, or agent, or identify deficiency on permit, advising them of such defects along with a demand that the defects must be remedied. The defects shall be remedied by a contractor hired by the Village Forester or designee at the appropriate time. The Building and Zoning Official shall give written notice to the Finance Director to forfeit said deposit and transfer the same to a forestry escrow account as determined by the Village Forester, or designee. If the damage is of such magnitude that the cost of correction exceeds the amount of the deposit, the applicant shall deposit sufficient additional funds to pay for the required work or the Village shall be permitted to act pursuant to section 8-4-5 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 5962, 9-26-2011) 
8-4-10. - Public nuisances. 
(A)  Nuisances declared: The following are hereby declared public nuisances under this section: 
1.  Any tree, shrub, or other plant, breeding places, or portion thereof, whether on Village owned property or on private property, which harbors insects or diseases which reasonably may be expected to injure or harm any tree, shrub, or other plant; i.e., Dutch elm disease, oak wilt, emerald ash borer, Asian longhorned beetle and any other insect/disease deemed a public nuisance by the Village Forester, or his/her designee. 
2.  To mitigate the spread of oak wilt and Dutch elm disease, the pruning of elms or oaks on public and private property from April through August is prohibited unless a hazardous situation arises. If elms or oaks are pruned between April and November, the wounds must be painted with nontoxic tree wound dressing. 
3.  Any tree, shrub, or other plant or portion thereof, whether on Village owned property or on private property, which overhangs or because of its deteriorated condition may fall onto the Village right-of-way and constitutes an imminent danger to the health, safety, or welfare of the public. 
4.  Any tree, shrub, or other plant or portion thereof, whether on Village owned property or on private property, which obstructs or interferes with the free and safe passage of pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(B)  Unlawful to maintain public nuisances: It shall be unlawful for the owner of any lot or parcel of land or a tenant upon the land in the Village of Glen Ellyn to permit or maintain on any such lot or parcel of land a public nuisance as set out in subsection (A) of this section. It shall be the duty of such owners to promptly remove, or otherwise provide remedy for any such nuisance. 
(C)  Inspection of public nuisance: To carry out the purpose of this chapter and to implement the enforcement thereof, the Village Forester, or his/her designee, is hereby authorized and empowered to request permission from the property owner or person in apparent possession to enter upon any land in the Village at all reasonable hours to inspect any public nuisance. The Village Forester, or his/her designee, is hereby empowered to seek from any court of competent jurisdiction an order permitting a search of private property in the event that the Village has a reasonable basis to believe that a public nuisance exists on the property or that the ordinances of the Village are being otherwise violated. Either with permission or pursuant to a court order, the Village Forester or a duly authorized representative may remove specimens from any trees, shrubs, or other plants for the purpose of laboratory analysis or for evidentiary purposes. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to hinder the Village Forester or a representative in the performance of any duties performed under the provisions of this chapter. 
(D)  Abatement of public nuisance: When the public nuisance represents an imminent threat to the health or safety of persons or property, the Village may, through its officers, employees, or independent contractors, enter upon the private property and abate the nuisance. The Village may also seek a court order to enter the property, abate the nuisance, and collect such cost of abatement and other fines as the court may grant. The cost to remove or otherwise treat border trees shall be fully borne by the Village. 
(Ord. 5962, 9-26-2011) 
8-4-11. - Violation and penalty. 
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, upon being found guilty of violation, shall, except as to violations for which a different fine is established, be subject to a maximum fine of not to exceed $750.00, depending on severity of violation, for each separate offense. Each day during which any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall occur or continue shall be a separate offense. 
In addition to the issuance of a fine, the Village may also request the court, upon a determination that any provision of this chapter has been violated, to enjoin the person through an affirmative or mandatory injunction, to cease a violation of this chapter, or to require the actions mandated within this chapter to be performed. 
(Ord. 5962, 9-26-2011) 
Chapter 5 - NEWSPAPER DISPENSING DEVICES 

8-5-1. - Definition. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
NEWSPAPER DISPENSING DEVICE: A container constructed of metal or other material of substantially equivalent strength and durability that is used for the dispensing of newspapers, fliers, handbills, or other similar printed materials at a cost or free of charge, but does not mean a container used for the home delivery of a single copy of a newspaper purchased by subscription. 
(Ord. 5074, 6-24-2002) 
8-5-2. - Application and permit. 
(A)  No newspaper dispensing device shall be placed or located within a public right-of-way, along the streets, thoroughfares, parkways or sidewalks within the Village unless a permit has been issued therefor by the Village in conformance with provisions of this chapter. This chapter does not prohibit newspaper dispensing devices located on private property. 
(B)  Applications for a permit under this section shall be made on forms approved by the Village Manager. The Village Clerk immediately upon request shall provide the applications. The application submittal must include a site plan and must expressly state the exact location where the applicant wishes to install a newspaper dispensing device. The application must also include a description of and the specifications for the intended newspaper dispensing device. 
(C)  Within 14 business days of receipt of an application for a permit under this section, the Village Manager shall either: 1) grant the application and instruct the Village Clerk to issue the permit provided that the conditions contained in section 8-5-3 of this chapter are, where applicable, complied with or, 2) if the terms and conditions of section 8-5-3 of this chapter, where applicable, are not complied with, deny the application and state the reasons in writing for such denial. 
(Ord. 5074, 6-24-2002) 
8-5-3. - Permit conditions. 
A permit allowing the placement of newspaper dispensing devices on public property shall be subject to, and granted upon, the following conditions, restrictions, and requirements: 
(A)  A newspaper dispensing device shall be placed so its "back side", defined as the opposite side of the dispensing end, is not less than 18 inches and not more than 24 inches distant from the curb; and the "back side" of the newspaper dispensing device, as defined herein, shall face the street and shall be placed parallel to the curb. 
(B)  No more than six newspaper dispensing devices may be located at any one location, no two newspaper dispensing devices at the same location may contain the same publication, and no other newspaper dispensing devices shall be located within 250 feet of any existing location. 
(C)  No newspaper dispensing device shall project onto any part of the roadway or public street. 
(D)  No newspaper dispensing device shall be placed in a manner so that its installation, use or maintenance endangers the safety of persons or property by interfering with or impeding the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, ingress or egress to any residence, business or legally parked vehicle. 
(E)  No newspaper dispensing device shall be placed in a manner so that it interferes with the use of poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants, mailboxes or other objects permitted at or near such placement. 
(F)  To prevent theft, up to three newspaper dispensing devices may be chained, bolted or otherwise attached together but not to any property not owned by the owner of the newspaper dispensing device, to any tree, pole, post, bench, traffic signal, hydrant, mailbox or other object or structure in the public right-of-way, or to another newspaper dispensing device not owned by said owner. 
(G)  No newspaper dispensing device shall be placed, installed, used or maintained in any of the following locations: 
1.  Within three feet of a marked crosswalk; 
2.  Within three feet of a fire hydrant or other emergency facility; 
3.  Within 30 feet of any driveway or alleyway; 
4.  Within 30 feet of any fire station driveway; 
5.  Adjacent to parallel or angle parking spaces; 
6.  At any location where the width of paved clear space in any direction for the passage of pedestrians is reduced to less than five feet; 
7.  On or within any median within any public right-of-way; 
8.  Within three feet ahead of and 15 feet to the rear of any sign marking a designated bus stop; 
9.  Within three feet of any bus bench or park bench; 
10.  Within three feet of any area improved with lawn, flowers, shrubs, planter or trees; 
11.  Within three feet of any light pole. 
(H)  No newspaper dispensing device shall be located within an area of sidewalk stretching from a doorway or entranceway of a building to the curb, and that area shall be defined as a rectangle perpendicular to the curb with a width the measure of the opening of the relevant doorway or entranceway. 
(I)  No newspaper dispensing device shall be placed within a sight triangle formed by the edges of pavement lines of two intersecting streets and a straight line connecting said edges of pavement lines at points a minimum of 30 feet distant from the point of intersection. 
(J)  No newspaper dispensing device shall be placed within a sight triangle of three feet of any handicapped access ramp. 
(K)  All newspaper dispensing devices permitted to be located on public property within the Village must display the name, address and telephone number of the owner of the newspaper dispensing device in a place on the newspaper dispensing device where it can readily be seen. 
(L)  All newspaper dispensing devices shall be constructed from materials which are weather resistant and which either have sufficient weight or are weighted to assure the stability of the newspaper dispensing device in a 50-mile per hour wind. 
(M)  All newspaper dispensing devices shall not exceed 50 inches in height, 18 inches in depth and 24 inches in width. 
(N)  The permittee shall pay an administrative processing fee of $25.00 for each location where a newspaper dispensing device is installed. The initial administrative processing fee shall be applicable to the initial license year or any part thereof. The permittee shall pay a renewal administrative processing permit fee of $25.00 per year for each location where a newspaper dispensing device is installed. 
(O)  Permits shall be for a term of one year and shall not be assignable. Permits shall expire on April 30 of each year; applications for the renewal of permits shall be filed with the Village Manager no later than April 1 of each year. 
(P)  The permittee shall maintain the device in good working order, in a safe and clean condition, in such a matter that: 
1.  It is reasonably free of dirt and grease; 
2.  It is reasonably free of chipped, faded, peeling and cracked paint in the visible painted areas thereof; 
3.  It is reasonably free of rust and corrosion in the visible unpainted metal areas thereon; 
4.  The clear plastic or glass parts thereof, if any, through which the publications therein are viewed are unbroken and reasonably free of cracks, dents, blemishes and discoloration; 
5.  The papers or cardboard parts or inserts thereof are reasonably free of tears, peeling or fading; 
6.  The structural parts thereof are not broken or unduly disfigured; 
7.  The device shall display a telephone number for refund in case of malfunctioning of the device; 
8.  The device shall be free of litter and foreign debris in and around the newspaper dispensing device. 
(Q)  The permittee shall not use a newspaper dispensing device for advertising signs or publicity purposes other than that dealing with the display, sale or purchase of the materials contained therein. 
(R)  A permit shall allow the installation of a newspaper dispensing device only at the exact location described in the application for the permit. The permit shall contain a description of the authorized location. Permits shall not be transferable from one location to another. 
(S)  A permittee, upon removal of the newspaper dispensing device, shall restore the property of the Village to the same condition as when the device was initially installed, ordinary wear and tear excepted. 
(T)  As an express condition of the acceptance of a permit hereunder, the permittee thereby agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the Village, its officials, both elected and appointed, its employees and agents against any loss or liability or damage, including attorney fees and costs for bodily or personal injury, and for property damage sustained by any person as the result of negligent installation, use or maintenance of a device within the Village, and shall maintain insurance sufficient to protect the Village against any loss or claim, and shall provide a certificate of insurance to the Village showing that such insurance is in place. 
(Ord. 5074, 6-24-2002) 
8-5-4. - Appeal of denial of permit. 
The decision of the Village Manager in refusing to grant a permit under this chapter shall be appealable to the Village Board of Trustees, provided that the applicant files a written notice of appeal, including a statement of the grounds of appeal, with the Village Clerk within 15 calendar days after notice of the decision of the Village Manager. The Village Board of Trustees shall set a hearing on the appeal at its next regularly scheduled board meeting, and notice of such time and place shall be given within ten days of such meeting. The Village Board of Trustees shall have the power to reverse, affirm, or modify the decision of the Village Manager. In making its determination, the Village Board of Trustees shall only consider the standards set forth in this chapter. Its decision shall be rendered within 30 days. The decision of the Village Board of Trustees shall be final. 
(Ord. 5074, 6-24-2002) 
8-5-5. - Revocation of permit. 
The Village Manager shall revoke any permit issued under the terms of this chapter after a hearing, for any of the following causes: 
(A)  Fraud, misrepresentation or any false statement contained in the application for permit; 
(B)  Violation of any term of the permit granted to the permittee; 
(C)  Violation of any term of this chapter. 
(Ord. 5074, 6-24-2002) 
8-5-6. - Removal of newspaper dispensing device. 
(A)  If any newspaper dispensing device is placed or remains in any public right-of-way, street, thoroughfare, parkway, or sidewalk without a permit therefor being issued, or after the expiration or revocation of a previously issued permit, or in violation of any provision of this chapter, the Village Manager shall send, by certified mail, with return receipt requested, a written notice to the address of the owner of the newspaper dispensing device. The notice shall state the address and telephone number of the Village Manager; a description of why the newspaper dispensing device is in violation of the requirements of this chapter; that the owner or user is ordered to cause immediate removal of the newspaper dispensing device from the public property; and that the newspaper dispensing device shall be removed by the Village after a date designated in the notice no less than ten calendar days after the date the notice is mailed or first posted on the newspaper dispensing device in the form of a ticket, as the case may be, unless the owner or user requests a hearing before the Village Board of Trustees by filing written appeal with the Village Manager on or before the designated removal date. 
(B)  When an appeal is filed pursuant to this section, the Village Board of Trustees shall set a hearing on the appeal at its next regularly scheduled board meeting and notice of such time and place shall be given in the manner as specified in this section. Any newspaper dispensing device may remain in place during the appeal period. In making its determination, the Village Board shall only consider the standards set forth in this chapter. The decision of the Village Board of Trustees shall be final. 
(C)  If any newspaper dispensing device is still on public property after the ten-day period described in subsection (A) of this section, or if an appeal is made and denied after a hearing before the Village Board of Trustees, the Village Manager shall cause removal of the newspaper dispensing device. 
(D)  The owner of any newspaper dispensing device removed in accordance with the terms of this chapter shall be responsible for all the expenses of the removal, storage and disposal of such newspaper dispensing device and material therein. Should the newspaper dispensing device or materials fail to be claimed or should the owner fail to pay any money due the Village, such newspaper dispensing device or materials shall be unclaimed property and may be disposed of pursuant to law. 
(E)  Any newspaper dispensing device may be summarily removed in exigent circumstances. 
(Ord. 5074, 6-24-2002) 
8-5-7. - Penalties. 
Any person or entity who shall be guilty of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less than $50.00 and not more than $750.00. A separate offense shall be deemed committed for every day a violation continues. 
(Ord. 5074, 6-24-2002) 
8-5-8. - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 5074, 6-24-2002) 
Chapter 6 - CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN RIGHTS-OF-WAY 

8-6-1. - Purpose and scope. 
(A)  Purpose : The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and procedures for constructing facilities on rights-of-way within the Village's jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit consistent with the preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the Village rights-of-way and the Village as a whole. 
(B)  Intent : In enacting this chapter, the Village intends to exercise its authority over the rights-of-way in the Village and, in particular, the use of the public ways and property by utilities, by establishing uniform standards to address issues presented by utility facilities, including, without limitation: 
1.  Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys, parkways and other public ways and places; 
2.  Prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions and other conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic; 
3.  Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the Village's utilities and of other utilities lawfully located in rights-of-way or public property; 
4.  Protect against environmental damage, including damage to trees, from the installation of utility facilities; 
5.  Protect against increased storm water runoff due to structures and materials that increase impermeable surfaces; 
6.  Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which facilities are installed; 
7.  Preserve open space, particularly the tree lined parkways that characterize the Village's residential neighborhoods; 
8.  Prevent visual blight from the proliferation of facilities in the rights-of-way; and 
9.  Assure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties adjacent to utility facilities locations. 
(C)  Facilities subject to this chapter : This chapter applies to all facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights-of-way within the jurisdiction of the Village. A facility lawfully established prior to the effective date of this chapter may continue to be maintained, repaired and operated by the utility as presently constructed and located, except as may be otherwise provided in any applicable franchise, license or similar agreement. 
(D)  Franchises, licenses, or similar agreements: The Village, in its discretion and as limited by law, may require utilities to enter into a franchise, license or similar agreement for the privilege of locating their facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the Village rights-of-way. Utilities that are not required by law to enter into such an agreement may request that the Village enter into such an agreement. In such an agreement, the Village may provide for terms and conditions inconsistent with this chapter. 
(E)  Effect of franchises, licenses, or similar agreements : 
1.  Utilities other than telecommunications providers : In the event that a utility other than a telecommunications provider has a franchise, license or similar agreement with the Village, such franchise, license or similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof. 
2.  Telecommunications providers : In the event of any conflict with, or inconsistency between, the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of any franchise, license or similar agreement between the Village and any telecommunications provider, the provisions of such franchise, license or similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof. 
(F)  Conflicts with other chapters : This chapter supersedes all chapters or parts of chapters adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the extent of such conflict. 
(G)  Conflicts with state and federal laws : In the event that applicable federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this chapter, the utility shall comply with the requirements of this chapter to the maximum extent possible without violating federal or state laws or regulations. 
(H)  Sound engineering judgment : The Village shall use sound engineering judgment when administering this chapter and may vary the standards, conditions, and requirements expressed in this chapter when the Village so determines. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability of the Village to regulate its rights-of-way for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. 5621, 10-22-2007; Ord. 6494, 6-26-2017) 
8-6-2. - Definition. 
    As used in this chapter and unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the words and terms listed shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section. Any term not defined in this section shall have the meaning ascribed to it in 92 Illinois Administrative Code Section 530.30, unless the context clearly requires otherwise. 
AASHTO: American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials. 
ANSI: American National Standards Institute. 
ASTM: American Society for Testing and Materials. 
APPLICANT: A person applying for a permit under this chapter. 
BACKFILL: The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a trench or pit. 
BORE OR BORING: To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the insertion of a pipe or electrical conductor. 
CABLE OPERATOR: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(5). 
CABLE SERVICE: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(6). 
CABLE SYSTEM: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(7). 
CARRIER PIPE: The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be transported. 
CASING: A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such as: carrier pipes, electrical conductors, and fiber optic devices. 
CLEAR ZONE: The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may consist of a shoulder, a recoverable slope, a nonrecoverable slope, and a clear run out area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and speeds, and on the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO "Roadside Design Guide". 
COATING: Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for protection against external corrosion. 
CODE: The municipal code of the Village of Glen Ellyn. 
COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY: A Utility facility consisting of wireless communication equipment and antennas for the purpose of providing wireless communication service. 
CONDUCTOR: Wire carrying electrical current. 
CONDUIT: A casing or encasement for wires or cables. 
CONSTRUCTION OR CONSTRUCT: The installation, repair, maintenance, placement, alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification or abandonment in place of facilities. 
COVER: The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or conductor. 
CROSSING FACILITY: A facility that crosses one or more right-of-way lines of a right-of-way. 
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS: The Village Director of Public Works or his or her designee. 
DISRUPT THE RIGHT-OF-WAY: For the purposes of this chapter, any work that obstructs the right-of-way or causes a material adverse effect on the use of the right-of-way for its intended use. Such work may include, without limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting; placement (whether temporary or permanent) of materials, equipment, devices, or structures; damage to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil, and shall not include the parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not materially obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway. 
EMERGENCY: Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the safety of the public using or in the vicinity of the right-of-way or immediate maintenance required for the health and safety of the general public served by the utility. 
ENCASEMENT: Provision of a protective casing. 
ENGINEER: The Village Engineer or his or her designee. 
EQUIPMENT: Materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other items used to facilitate construction of facilities. 
EXCAVATION: The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or laying bare by digging. 
EXTRA HEAVY PIPE: Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation. 
FACILITY: All structures, devices, objects, and materials (including, but not limited to, track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable, antennas, vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, cabinets, pedestals, poles, conduits, grates, covers, pipes, cables, and appurtenances thereto) located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights-of-way under this chapter. For purposes of this chapter, the term "facility" shall not include any facility owned or operated by the Village. 
FREESTANDING FACILITY: A facility that is not a crossing facility or a parallel facility, such as an antenna, transformer, pump, or meter station. 
FRONTAGE ROAD: Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land adjacent to the highway where it is precluded by control of access to a highway. 
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any substance or material which, due to its quantity, form, concentration, location, or other characteristics, is determined by the Village Director of Public Works to pose an unreasonable and imminent risk to the life, health or safety of persons or property or to the ecological balance of the environment, including, but not limited to, explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum products or gases, poisons, etiology (biological) agents, flammables, corrosives or any substance determined to be hazardous or toxic under any federal or state law, statute or regulation. 
HIGHWAY: A specific type of right-of-way used for vehicular traffic including rural or urban roads or streets. "Highway" includes all highway land and improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges, drainage structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and appurtenances necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic. 
HIGHWAY CODE: The Illinois Highway Code, 605 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-101 et seq., as amended from time to time. 
HOLDER: A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the ICC pursuant to the Illinois cable and video competition law, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401. 
ICC: Illinois Commerce Commission. 
IDOT: Illinois Department of Transportation. 
JULIE: The joint utility locating information for excavators' utility notification program. 
JACKING: Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical means with or without boring. 
JETTING: Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to create a cavity ahead of the pipe. 
JOINT USE: The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two or more utilities. 
MAJOR INTERSECTION: The intersection of two or more major arterial highways. 
OCCUPANCY: The presence of facilities on, over or under right-of-way. 
PARALLEL FACILITY: A facility that is generally parallel or longitudinal to the centerline of a right-of-way. 
PARKWAY: Any portion of the right-of-way not improved by street or sidewalk. 
PAVEMENT CUT: The removal of an area of pavement for access to a facility or for the construction of a facility. 
PERMITTEE: That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to sections 8-6-4 and 8-6-5 of this chapter. 
PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PIPELINES: Pipelines carrying crude or refined liquid petroleum products including, but not limited to, gasoline, distillates, propane, butane, or coal slurry. 
PRACTICABLE: That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather than that which is simply convenient. 
PRESSURE: The internal force acting radially against the walls of a carrier pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig). 
PROMPT: That which is done within a period of time specified by the Village. If no time period is specified, the period shall be 30 days. 
PUBLIC ENTITY: A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the government, whether at local, state or federal level. 
RESTORATION: The repair of a right-of-way, highway, roadway, or other area disrupted by the construction of a facility. 
RIGHT-OF-WAY OR RIGHTS-OF-WAY: Any street, alley, other land or waterway, dedicated or commonly used for pedestrian or vehicular traffic or other similar purposes, including utility easements, in which the Village has the right and authority to authorize, regulate or permit the location of facilities other than those of the Village. "Right-of-way" or "rights-of-way" shall not include any real or personal Village property that is not specifically described in the previous two sentences and shall not include Village buildings, fixtures and other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in the right-of-way. 
ROADWAY: That part of the highway that includes the pavement and shoulders. 
SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying, or furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not for sale. 
SECURITY FUND: That amount of security required pursuant to section 8-6-10 of this chapter. 
SHOULDER: A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing lateral support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency vehicular stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement. 
SOUND ENGINEERING JUDGMENT: A decision(s) consistent with generally accepted engineering principles, practices and experience. 
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: This term includes, but is not limited to, messages or information transmitted through use of local, toll and wide area telephone service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer exchange service, private line services, mobile radio services, cellular mobile telecommunications services, stationary two-way radio, paging service and any other form of mobile or portable one-way or two-way communications, and any other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or similar facilities. "Private line" means a dedicated nontraffic sensitive service for a single customer that entitles the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications channel, or a group of such channels, from one or more specified locations to one or more other specified locations. "Telecommunications" shall not include value added services in which computer processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code and protocol of the information for purposes other than transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not include purchase of telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a component part of the service provided by such provider to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the end to end communications. "Telecommunications" shall not include the provision of cable services through a cable system as defined in the cable communications act of 1984 (47 USC section 521 and following), as now or hereafter amended, or cable or other programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to the Village through an open video system as defined in the rules of the federal communications commission (47 CFR section 76.1500 and following), as now or hereafter amended. 
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER: Any person that installs, owns, operates or controls facilities in the right-of-way used or designed to be used to transmit telecommunications in any form. 
TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER: Means and includes every person engaged in making sales of telecommunications at retail as defined herein. 
TRENCH: A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an underground facility. 
UTILITY: The individual or entity owning or operating any "facility" as defined in this chapter. 
UTILITY POLE: A post structure owned or operated by a public utility or a municipality that is designed specifically to support overhead lines, cables or wires for the distribution of electricity, telecommunications, cable, fiber optics, and related equipment such as transformers, and street lights. 
VENT: A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or vapors from an underground casing. 
VIDEO SERVICE: That term as defined in Section 21-201 (v) of the Illinois Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 21-201(v). 
VILLAGE: The Village of Glen Ellyn. 
WATER LINES: Pipelines carrying raw or potable water. 
WET BORING: Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to soften the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material. 
(Ord. 5621, 10-22-2007; Ord. 6494, 6-26-2017) 
8-6-3. - Annual registration required. 
Every utility that occupies right-of-way within the Village shall register on January 1 of each year with the Director of Public Works, providing the utility's name, address and regular business telephone and telecopy numbers, the name of one or more contact persons who can act on behalf of the utility in connection with emergencies involving the utility's facilities in the right-of-way and a 24 hour telephone number for each such person, and evidence of insurance as required in section 8-6-8 of this chapter, in the form of a certificate of insurance. 
(Ord. 5621, 10-22-2007; Ord. 6494, 6-26-2017) 
8-6-4. - Permit required; applications and fees. 
(A)  Permit required : No person shall construct (as defined in this chapter) any facility on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within any Village right-of-way which: 1) changes the location of the facility, 2) adds a new facility, 3) disrupts the right-of-way (as defined in this chapter), or 4) materially increases the amount of area or space occupied by the facility on, over, above, along, under, across or within the right-of-way, without first filing an application with the Village Director of Public Works and obtaining a permit from the Village therefor, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. No permit shall be required for installation and maintenance of service connections to customers' premises where there will be no disruption of the right-of-way. 
1.  In the case of construction of a communications facility: 
(a)  Building, electric and work in parkway or right-of-way permit applications shall be filed with the Village Community Development Department. A single application shall propose work, new or modification, to no more than one communications facility. 
(b)  A permit shall be required for any tree trimming required for the installation or maintenance of a communications facility. 
(c)  In the event that an existing utility pole is to be replaced as part of the construction of a communications facility, the owner of the existing utility pole shall provide written authorization for the communications facility licensee to perform the work or secure a separate permit to perform work within the public right-of-way. 
(d)  In the event that new utility wires or cables need to be routed to the existing utility pole to service the communications facility, that work must be included on the permit submittal drawings or a separate permit to perform work within the public right-of-way must be secured. 
(e)  Modifications performed to an existing communications facility shall require new permits to be issued by the Village. 
(f)  Modifications performed to an existing communications facility that result in additional dead load of equipment or antennas, an increase in the number of antennas, or an increase in the exposed surface area of equipment and/or antennas shall require a structural analysis of the utility pole subjected to the modifications to be submitted to the Village for review and approval. 
(B)  Permit application : All applications for permits pursuant to this chapter shall be filed on a form provided by the Village and shall be filed in such number of duplicate copies as the Village may designate. The applicant may designate those portions of its application materials that it reasonably believes contain proprietary or confidential information as "proprietary" or "confidential" by clearly marking each page of such materials accordingly. 
(C)  Minimum general application requirements : The application shall be made by the utility or its duly authorized representative and shall contain, at a minimum, the following: 
1.  The utility's name and address and telephone and telecopy numbers; 
2.  The applicant's name and address, if different than the utility, its telephone and telecopy numbers, e-mail address, and its interest in the work; 
3.  The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers and e-mail addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with respect to the application; 
4.  A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will be put. The scope and detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature and character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on those matters likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed; 
5.  Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the Village: 
(a)  A written traffic control plan demonstrating the protective measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the "Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices," to prevent injury or damage to persons or property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular traffic; and 
(b)  An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of potential emergencies, including, without limitation, construction and hazardous materials emergencies, and the intended response by the applicant. The intended response shall include notification to the Village and shall promote protection of the safety and convenience of the public. Compliance with ICC regulations for emergency contingency plans constitutes compliance with this section unless the Village finds that additional information or assurances are needed; 
6.  Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed, including the certification of an engineer that such drawings, plans, and specifications comply with applicable codes, rules, and regulations; 
7.  Evidence of insurance as required in section 8-6-8 of this chapter; 
8.  Evidence of posting of the security fund as required in section 8-6-10 of this chapter; 
9.  Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of this chapter (see section 8-6-21 of this chapter); and 
10.  Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the Village. 
(D)  Supplemental application requirements for specific types of utilities : In addition to the requirements of subsection (C) of this section, the permit application shall include the following items, as applicable to the specific utility that is the subject of the permit application: 
1.  In the case of the installation of a new electric power, communications, telecommunications, cable television service, video service or natural gas distribution system, evidence that any "certificate of public convenience and necessity" or other regulatory authorization that the applicant is required by law to obtain, or that the applicant has elected to obtain, has been issued by the ICC or other jurisdictional authority; 
2.  In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size, design, construction class, and operating pressures; 
3.  In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the Illinois environmental protection agency, division of public water supplies, have been satisfied; 
4.  In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land and water pollution requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Water Pollution Control and the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District or other local or state entities with jurisdiction, have been satisfied; or 
5.  In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or types of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure, and the design standard to be followed. 
6.  In the case of communications facilities the following minimum items of information shall be submitted as an attachment to the permit application. Additional information may be required to be submitted as deemed necessary upon completion of the initial plan review. 
(a)  Indication of pole ownership. 
(b)  Letter of authorization from the utility that owns the pole, if pole is not owned by the Village. 
(c)  Letter of authorization from the electric utility approving location of the equipment and antennas with respect to location of existing power lines. 
(d)  List of other utility services to be installed or connected to which are required to support the facility. 
(e)  Drawings prepared by an appropriate licensed design professional to indicate the following information: 
(1)  Geographic coordinates of the proposed facility; 
(2)  Ground elevation at base of utility pole; 
(3)  Site plan indicating all structures, surface features and trees within 100 feet of the utility pole location; 
(4)  Equipment and antenna plans, elevations and details as required to fully describe all equipment, equipment cabinets, equipment shelters, antennas, wiring, cabling, conduits, cable covers, etc. that comprise the communications facility; 
(5)  Elevation views of utility pole, all equipment and antennas; 
(6)  Proposed color of exposed surfaces of equipment, cable covers and antennas; 
(7)  Grounding system design; 
(8)  Lightning protection design, if provided; 
(9)  Pole design and specification for replacement pole, if required; 
(10)  Utility pole extension system, if required; 
(11)  point of utility demarcation(s); 
(12)  Proximity of other utilities supported by utility pole to proposed equipment and antennas; 
(13)  Radio frequency safety signage; 
(14)  Single-line electric distribution diagram; 
(15)  Structural supports for equipment and antennas; 
(16)  Utility connection requirements including point of connection to each; 
(17)  Vertical height from grade to top of antennas; 
(18)  Vertical height from grade to top of existing or replacement utility pole; 
(19)  Vertical height from grade to underside of all equipment supported by utility pole; 
(20)  Tree protection measures in accordance with the Village of Glen Ellyn Arboricultural Specifications Manual; 
(21)  Provisions for landscaping and site restoration. 
(f)  Photograph of the existing utility pole and surrounding site taken from the street and facing the nearest residential structures on same side of the street as the utility pole. 
(g)  Specifications of all equipment and antennas. 
(h)  Structural analysis of existing or replacement pole. 
(i)  Coverage gap maps indicating the location of all nearby communications facilities, areas of coverage and lack thereof, location of proposed site, location of alternative site(s), number of customers anticipated to be served by the proposed facility versus those served by adjacent facilities and any other information deemed necessary to prove a need for a facility at the proposed location. 
(j)  For existing communications facilities, proof that the proposed work does not substantially change the physical dimensions of the facility. 
(E)  Applicant's duty to update information : Throughout the entire permit application review period and the construction period authorized by the permit, any amendments to information contained in a permit application shall be submitted by the utility in writing to the Village within 30 days after the change necessitating the amendment. 
(F)  Application fees : Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar agreement, all applications for permits pursuant to this chapter shall be accompanied by a fee based on the existing right-of-way permit fee schedule. No application fee is required to be paid by any electricity utility that is paying the municipal electricity infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the electricity infrastructure maintenance fee act. 
(Ord. 5621, 10-22-2007; Ord. 6494, 6-26-2017; Ord. 6674, 2-25-2019) 
8-6-5. - Action on permit application. 
(A)  Village review of permit applications : Completed permit applications, containing all required documentation, shall be examined by the Village Director of Public Works within a reasonable time after filing. If the application does not conform to the requirements of applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the Village Director of Public Works shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the Village Director of Public Works is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this chapter and applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the Village Director of Public Works shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable. In all instances, it shall be the duty of the applicant to demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the Village Director of Public Works, that the construction proposed under the application shall be in full compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(B)  Additional Village review of applications of telecommunications retailers : 
1.  Pursuant to Section 4 of the Telephone Company Act, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 65/4, a telecommunications retailer shall notify the Village that it intends to commence work governed by this chapter for facilities for the provision of telecommunications services. Such notice shall consist of plans, specifications, and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the purpose and intent of the facilities, and shall be provided by the telecommunications retailer to the Village not less than ten days prior to the commencement of work requiring no excavation and not less than 30 days prior to the commencement of work requiring excavation. The Village Director of Public Works shall specify the portion of the right-of-way upon which the facility may be placed, used and constructed. 
2.  In the event that the Village Director of Public Works fails to provide such specification of location to the telecommunications retailer within either: a) ten days after service of notice to the Village by the telecommunications retailer in the case of work not involving excavation for new construction or b) 25 days after service of notice by the telecommunications retailer in the case of work involving excavation for new construction, the telecommunications retailer may commence work without obtaining a permit under this chapter. 
3.  Upon the provision of such specification by the Village, where a permit is required for work pursuant to section 8-6-4 of this chapter the telecommunications retailer shall submit to the Village an application for a permit and any and all plans, specifications and documentation available regarding the facility to be constructed. Such application shall be subject to the requirements of subsection (A) of this section. 
(C)  Additional Village review of applications of holders of state authorization under the Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007 : Applications by a utility that is a holder of a state issued authorization under the cable and video competition law of 2007 shall be deemed granted 45 days after submission to the Village, unless otherwise acted upon by the Village, provided the holder has complied with applicable Village codes, ordinances, and regulations. 
(Ord. 5621, 10-22-2007; Ord. 6494, 6-26-2017) 
8-6-6. - Effect of permit. 
(A)  Authority granted; no property right or other interest created : A permit from the Village authorizes a permittee to undertake only certain activities in accordance with this chapter on Village rights-of-way, and does not create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to impinge upon the rights of others who may have an interest in the rights-of-way. 
(B)  Duration : No permit issued under this chapter shall be valid for a period longer than six months unless construction is actually begun within that period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion. 
(C)  Preconstruction meeting required : No construction shall begin pursuant to a permit issued under this chapter prior to attendance by the permittee and all major contractors and subcontractors who will perform any work under the permit at a preconstruction meeting. The preconstruction meeting shall be held at a date, time and place designated by the Village with such Village representatives in attendance as the Village deems necessary. The meeting shall be for the purpose of reviewing the work under the permit, and reviewing special considerations necessary in the areas where work will occur, including, without limitation, presence or absence of other utility facilities in the area and their locations, procedures to avoid disruption of other utilities, use of rights-of-way by the public during construction, and access and egress by adjacent property owners. 
(D)  Compliance with all laws required : The issuance of a permit by the Village does not excuse the permittee from complying with other requirements of the Village and applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations. 
(Ord. 5621,10-22-2007; Ord. 6494, 6-26-2017 
8-6-7. - Revised permit drawings. 
In the event that the actual locations of any facilities deviate in any material respect from the locations identified in the plans, drawings and specifications submitted with the permit application, the permittee shall submit a revised set of drawings or plans to the Village within 90 days after the completion of the permitted work. The revised drawings or plans shall specifically identify where the locations of the actual facilities deviate from the locations approved in the permit. If any deviation from the permit also deviates from the requirements of this chapter, it shall be treated as a request for variance in accordance with section 8-6-21 of this chapter. If the Village denies the request for a variance, then the permittee shall either remove the facility from the right-of-way or modify the facility so that it conforms to the permit and submit revised drawings or plans therefor. 
(Ord. 5621, 10-22-2007; Ord. 6494, 6-26-2017) 
8-6-8. - Insurance. 
(A)  Required coverages and limits : Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar agreement, each utility occupying right-of-way or constructing any facility in the right-of-way shall secure and maintain the following liability insurance policies insuring the utility as named insured and naming the Village, and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents, and employees as additional insureds on the policies listed in subsections (A)1 and (A)2 of this section: 
1.  Commercial general liability insurance, including premises-operations, explosion, collapse, and underground hazard (commonly referred to as "X", "C", and "U" coverages) and products-completed operations coverage with limits not less than: 
(a)  Five million dollars for bodily injury or death to each person; 
(b)  Five million dollars for property damage resulting from any one accident; and 
(c)  Five million dollars for all other types of liability; 
2.  Automobile liability for owned, nonowned and hired vehicles with a combined single limit of $1,000,000.00 for personal injury and property damage for each accident; 
3.  Workers' compensation with statutory limits; and 
4.  Employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than $1,000,000.00 per employee and per accident. 
If the utility is not providing such insurance to protect the contractors and subcontractors performing the work, then such contractors and subcontractors shall comply with this section. 
(B)  Excess or umbrella policies : The coverages required by this section may be in any combination of primary, excess, and umbrella policies. Any excess or umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying insurance on a following form basis such that when any loss covered by the primary policy exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella policy becomes effective to cover such loss. 
(C)  Copies required : The utility shall provide copies of any of the policies required by this section to the Village within ten days following receipt of a written request therefor from the Village. 
(D)  Maintenance and renewal of required coverages : The insurance policies required by this section shall contain the following endorsement: 
It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the intention not to renew be stated until 30 days after receipt by the Village, by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested, of a written notice addressed to the Village President of such intent to cancel or not to renew. 
Within ten days after receipt by the Village of said notice, and in no event later than ten days prior to said cancellation, the utility shall obtain and furnish to the Village evidence of replacement insurance policies meeting the requirements of this section. 
(E)  Self-insurance : A utility may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance coverage and limit requirements required by subsection (A) of this section. A utility that self-insures is not required, to the extent of such self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of additional insureds under subsection (A) of this section, or the requirements of subsections (B), (C) and (D) of this section. A utility that elects to self-insure shall provide to the Village evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the insurance coverage and limit requirements required under subsection (A) of this section, such as evidence that the utility is a "private self-insurer" under the workers' compensation act. 
(F)  Effect of insurance and self-insurance on utility's liability : The legal liability of the utility to the Village and any person for any of the matters that are the subject of the insurance policies or self-insurance required by this section shall not be limited by such insurance policies or self-insurance or by the recovery of any amounts thereunder. 
(G)  Insurance companies : All insurance provided pursuant to this section shall be effected under valid and enforceable policies, issued by insurers legally able to conduct business with the licensee in the state of Illinois. (All insurance carriers and surplus line carriers shall be rated "A-" or better and of a class size "X" or higher by A.M. Best Company.) 
(Ord. 5621, 10-22-2007; Ord. 6494, 6-26-2017) 
8-6-9. - Indemnification. 
By occupying or constructing facilities in the right-of-way, a utility shall be deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and hold the Village and its elected and appointed officials and officers, employees, agents and representatives harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of or result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the utility or its affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors in the construction of facilities or occupancy of the rights-of-way, and in providing or offering service over the facilities, whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this chapter or by a franchise, license, or similar agreement; provided, however, that the utility's indemnity obligations hereunder shall not apply to any injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses or expenses arising out of or resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach of this chapter by the Village, its officials, officers, employees, agents or representatives. 
(Ord. 5621, 10-22-2007; Ord. 6494, 6-26-2017) 
8-6-10. - Security. 
(A)  Purpose : The permittee shall establish a security fund in a form and in an amount as set forth in this section. The security fund shall be continuously maintained in accordance with this section at the permittee's sole cost and expense until the completion of the work authorized under the permit. The security fund shall serve as security for: 
1.  The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements of this chapter; 
2.  Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the Village occasioned by the permittee's failure to comply with any codes, rules, regulations, orders, permits and other directives of the Village issued pursuant to this chapter; and 
3.  The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims, costs, or expenses that the Village may pay or incur by reason of any action or nonperformance by permittee in violation of this chapter including, without limitation, any damage to public property or restoration work the permittee is required by this chapter to perform that the Village must perform itself or have completed as a consequence solely of the permittee's failure to perform or complete, and all other payments due the Village from the permittee pursuant to this chapter or any other applicable law. 
(B)  Form : The permittee shall provide the security fund to the Village in the form, at the permittee's election, of cash, a surety bond in a form acceptable to the Village, or an unconditional letter of credit in a form acceptable to the Village. Any surety bond or letter of credit provided pursuant to this subsection shall, at a minimum: 
1.  Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice to the Village and the permittee; 
2.  Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by the Village of any amounts covered by it; and 
3.  Shall provide a location convenient to the Village and within the state of Illinois at which it can be drawn. 
(C)  Amount : The dollar amount of the security fund shall be sufficient to provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the right-of-way to at least as good a condition as that existing prior to the construction under the permit, as determined by the Village Director of Public Works, and may also include reasonable, directly related costs that the Village estimates are likely to be incurred if the permittee fails to perform such restoration. Where the construction of facilities proposed under the permit will be performed in phases in multiple locations in the Village, with each phase consisting of construction of facilities in one location or a related group of locations, and where construction in another phase will not be undertaken prior to substantial completion of restoration in the previous phase or phases, the Village Director of Public Works may, in the exercise of sound discretion, allow the permittee to post a single amount of security which shall be applicable to each phase of the construction under the permit. The amount of the security fund for phased construction shall be equal to the greatest amount that would have been required under the provisions of this subsection for any single phase. 
(D)  Withdrawals : The Village, upon 14 days' advance written notice clearly stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise withdrawal rights under this subsection, may withdraw an amount from the security fund, provided that the permittee has not reimbursed the Village for such amount within the 14 day notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the permittee: 
1.  Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee hereunder; 
2.  Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and unpaid; 
3.  Fails to reimburse the Village for any damages, claims, costs or expenses which the Village has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of any action or nonperformance by the permittee; or 
4.  Fails to comply with any provision of this chapter that the Village determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the security fund. 
(E)  Replenishment : Within 14 days after receipt of written notice from the Village that any amount has been withdrawn from the security fund, the permittee shall restore the security fund to the amount specified in subsection (C) of this section. 
(F)  Interest : The permittee may request that any and all interest accrued on the amount in the security fund be returned to the permittee by the Village, upon written request for said withdrawal to the Village, provided that any such withdrawal does not reduce the security fund below the minimum balance required in subsection (C) of this section. 
(G)  Closing and return of security fund: Upon completion of the work authorized under the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the return of the security fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit, within a reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to compensate the Village for failure by the permittee to comply with any provisions of this chapter or other applicable law. In the event of any revocation of the permit, the security fund, and any and all accrued interest therein, shall become the property of the Village to the extent necessary to cover any reasonable costs, loss or damage incurred by the Village as a result of said revocation, provided that any amounts in excess of said costs, loss or damage shall be refunded to the permittee. 
(H)  Rights not limited : The rights reserved to the Village with respect to the security fund are in addition to all other rights of the Village, whether reserved by this chapter or otherwise authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said security fund shall affect any other right the Village may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Village shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery with respect to any of its rights which may be infringed or otherwise violated. 
(Ord. 5621, 10-22-2007; Ord. 6494, 6-26-2017) 
8-6-11. - Permit suspension and revocation. 
(A)  Village right to revoke permit : The Village may revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this chapter for one or more of the following reasons: 
1.  Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially incomplete statements in the permit application; 
2.  Noncompliance with this chapter; 
3.  Permittee's physical presence or presence of permittee's facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights-of-way presents a direct or imminent threat to the public health, safety, or welfare; or 
4.  Permittee's failure to construct the facilities substantially in accordance with the permit and approved plans. 
(B)  Notice of revocation or suspension : The Village shall send written notice of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this chapter stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension and the alternatives available to permittee under this section. 
(C)  Permittee alternatives upon receipt of notice of revocation or suspension : Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from the Village, the permittee shall have the following options: 
1.  Immediately provide the Village with evidence that no cause exists for the revocation or suspension; 
2.  Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the Village, the deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof of such correction to the Village within five working days after receipt of the written notice of revocation; or 
3.  Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights-of-way and restore the rights-of-way to the satisfaction of the Village providing written proof of such removal to the Village within ten days after receipt of the written notice of revocation. 
The Village may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend the time periods provided in this subsection. 
(D)  Stop work order : In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation or suspension, the Village may issue a stop work order immediately upon discovery of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within subsection (A) of this section. 
(E)  Failure or refusal of the permittee to comply : If the permittee fails to comply with the provisions of subsection (C) of this section, the Village or its designee may, at the option of the Village: 1) correct the deficiencies; 2) upon not less than 20 days' notice to the permittee, remove the subject facilities or equipment; or 3) after not less than 30 days' notice to the permittee of failure to cure the noncompliance, deem them abandoned and property of the Village. The permittee shall be liable in all events to the Village for all costs of removal. 
(Ord. 5621, 10-22-2007; Ord. 6494, 6-26-2017) 
8-6-12. - Change of ownership or owner's identity or legal status. 
(A)  Notification of change : A utility shall notify the Village no less than 30 days prior to the transfer of ownership of any facility in the right-of-way or change in identity of the utility. The new owner of the utility or the facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed by the former owner under the permit, if any, and applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, including this chapter, with respect to the work and facilities in the right-of-way. 
(B)  Amended permit : A new owner shall request that any current permit be amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a new or amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to have accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions of the permit if the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the Village's right-of-way. 
(C)  Insurance and bonding : All required insurance coverage or bonding must be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer. 
(Ord. 5621, 10-22-2007; Ord. 6494, 6-26-2017) 
8-6-13. - General construction standards. 
(A)  Standards and principles : All construction in the right-of-way shall be consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and regulations, and commonly recognized and accepted traffic control and construction principles, sound engineering judgment and, where applicable, the principles and standards set forth in the following IDOT publications, as amended from time to time: 
1.  "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction"; 
2.  "Supplemental Specifications And Recurring Special Provisions"; 
3.  "Highway Design Manual"; 
4.  "Highway Standards Manual"; 
5.  "Standard Specifications For Traffic Control Items"; 
6.  "Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices" (92 III. Adm. Code Section 545); 
7.  "Flagger's Handbook"; and 
8.  "Work Site Protection Manual For Daylight Maintenance Operations". 
(B)  Interpretation of municipal standards and principles : If a discrepancy exists between or among differing principles and standards required by this chapter, the Village Director of Public Works shall determine, in the exercise of sound engineering judgment, which principles apply and such decision shall be final. If requested, the Village Director of Public Works shall state which standard or principle will apply to the construction, maintenance, or operation of a facility in the future. 
(C)  Communications facilities : In addition to all other provisions in this chapter, communications facilities shall be subject to the requirements below. A utility shall have the right to request a variation or exception to the general construction standards. Such request shall be submitted in writing to the Director of Community Development for review and determination. The Director of Community Development shall have the authority to grant a variation or exception to the general construction standards upon the utility's demonstration of good cause for granting such request. 
1.  Ground-mounted equipment, where approved by the Village, shall be screened from view from the public right-of-way. 
2.  Pole-mounted equipment shall be mounted not less than seven feet above grade at the base of the pole. 
3.  No portion of any antenna, cabling or equipment shall be mounted over a sidewalk, private driveway or public street. 
4.  No equipment cabinet service door shall swing over a sidewalk, private driveway or public street. 
5.  No air mechanically discharged from equipment cabinets shall be directed toward a sidewalk or driveway. 
6.  The overall dimension of any individual piece of equipment or antenna shall not exceed four feet in any horizontal or vertical dimension. 
7.  Size of antenna: The overall dimensions of any individual antenna, including panel, whip, dish or other configuration, shall not produce a volume of more than three cubic feet. 
8.  Size of equipment: The total combined volume of all above-ground equipment and appurtenances comprising a communications facility, exclusive of the antennas themselves, shall not exceed 32 cubic feet. 
9.  The outer diameter of an imaginary line encircling any antenna array shall not exceed four feet. 
10.  The height of any replacement utility pole or wireless support structure on which small wireless facilities are collocated shall be limited to the higher of: 
(a)  Ten feet in height above the tallest existing utility pole, other than a utility pole supporting only wireless facilities, that is in place on the date of application is submitted to the Village, that is located within 300 feet of the existing or replacement utility pole or wireless support structure and that is in the same right-of-way within the jurisdiction boundary of the Village, provided the Village may designate which intersecting right-of-way within 300 feet of the proposed utility pole or wireless support structures shall control the height limitation for such facility, or 
(b)  Forty-five feet above ground level at the base of the utility pole to be used to support the small wireless facility. 
11.  The overall height of an extended existing utility pole, including antennas or equipment mounted thereto, shall not be greater than ten feet higher than the top of the existing utility pole. 
12.  The use of guy wires or other supplemental supports shall not be used to stabilize or strengthen existing utility poles. 
13.  The exposed finish of all equipment, antennas and antenna mounting brackets and components shall have a color that blends with the surroundings of the existing utility pole as determined by the Village. 
14.  All cabling, conduit and wiring attached to the utility pole shall be covered with an appropriate cover or cable shield. 
(Ord. 5621, 10-22-2017, Ord. 6494, 6-26-2017; Ord. 6608, 6-25-2018; Ord. 6674, 2-25-2019) 
8-6-14. - Traffic control. 
(A)  Minimum requirements : The Village's minimum requirements for traffic protection are contained in IDOT's "Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices" and this code. 
(B)  Warning signs, protective devices, and flaggers : The utility is responsible for providing and installing warning signs, protective devices and flaggers, when necessary, meeting applicable federal, state, and local requirements for protection of the public and the utility's workers when performing any work on the rights-of-way. 
(C)  Interference with traffic : All work shall be phased so that there is minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic. 
(D)  Notice when access is blocked : At least 48 hours prior to beginning work that will partially or completely block access to any residence, business or institution, the utility shall notify the resident, business or institution of the approximate beginning time and duration of such work; provided, however, that in cases involving emergency repairs pursuant to section 8-6-20 of this chapter the utility shall provide such notice as is practicable under the circumstances. 
(E)  Compliance : The utility shall take immediate action to correct any deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought to the utility's attention by the Village. 
(Ord. 5621, 10-22-2007; Ord. 6494, 6-26-2017) 
8-6-15. - Location of facilities. 
(A)  General requirements : In addition to location requirements applicable to specific types of utility facilities, all utility facilities, regardless of type, shall be subject to the general location requirements of this subsection. A utility shall have the right to request a variation or exception to the general requirements. Such request shall be submitted in writing to the Director of Community Development for review and determination. The Director of Community Development shall have the authority to grant a variation or exception to the general requirements upon the utility's demonstration of good cause for granting such request. 
1.  No interference with Village facilities : No utility facilities shall be placed in any location if the Village Director of Public Works determines that the proposed location will require the relocation or displacement of any of the Village's utility facilities or will otherwise interfere with the operation or maintenance of any of the Village's utility facilities. 
2.  Minimum interference and impact : The proposed location shall cause only the minimum possible interference with the use of the right-of-way and shall cause only the minimum possible impact upon, and interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin said right-of-way. 
3.  No interference with travel : No utility facility shall be placed in any location that interferes with the usual travel on such right-of-way. 
4.  No limitations on visibility : No utility facility shall be placed in any location so as to limit visibility of or by users of the right-of-way. 
5.  Size of utility facilities : The proposed installation shall use the smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, power pedestals, and/or cabinets then in use by the facility owner, regardless of location, for the particular application. 
6.  Additional requirements for communications facilities : In addition to all other provisions in this chapter, communications facilities shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(a)  No new poles or transmission towers shall be permitted in the public right-of-way. Communications facilities shall be located on existing utility poles, or replacement poles installed in the same location as the existing pole to be replaced. 
(b)  If the existing utility pole selected for installation of a communications facility does not have any overhead wires attached to it, all new wires and cables required to service the facility shall be routed underground to the utility pole. 
(c)  No above ground communications facility shall be permitted in any public right-of-way that is contiguous to and having a physical border with the front yard or corner side yard of any residential corner lot property. 
(d)  Horizontal separation requirements: 
(1)  There shall be no limitation for the placement of a communications facility that is mounted on a utility pole. 
(2)  No communication facility with ground-mounted equipment shall be installed within 300 feet of an existing communications facility or within 300 feet of a site specific location for a communications facility already issued a building permit by the Village. 
(e)  No more than one communications facility shall be installed on any existing utility pole. 
(f)  No communications facility shall be permitted on any existing pole that supports traffic signal lights. 
(g)  The Village may choose to adjust the location of a communications facility based on tree obstructions, location to existing utilities, and pedestrian or traffic safety. 
(h)  Communications facility equipment shall not obstruct traffic sight lines as determined by the Village. 
(B)  Parallel facilities located within highways: 
1.  Overhead parallel facilities : An overhead parallel facility may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if: 
(a)  Lines are located as near as practicable to the right-of-way line and as nearly parallel to the right-of-way line as reasonable pole alignment will permit; 
(b)  Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable from the curb with a minimum distance of two feet (0.6 meters) behind the face of the curb, where available; 
(c)  Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement edge as practicable with minimum distance of four feet (1.2 meters) outside the outer shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear zone; 
(d)  No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and 
(e)  Any ground mounted appurtenance is located within one foot (0.3 meters) of the right-of-way line or as near as possible to the right-of-way line. 
2.  Underground parallel facilities : An underground parallel facility may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if: 
(a)  The facility is located as near the right-of-way line as practicable and not more than eight feet (2.4 meters) from and parallel to the right-of-way line; 
(b)  A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a highway only if other locations are impracticable or inconsistent with sound engineering judgment (e.g., a new cable may be installed in existing conduit without disrupting the pavement); and 
(c)  In the case of an underground power or communications line, the facility shall be located as near the right-of-way line as practicable and not more than five feet (1.5 meters) from the right-of-way line and any above grounded appurtenance shall be located within one foot (0.3 meters) of the right-of-way line or as near as practicable. 
(C)  Facilities crossing highways : 
1.  No future disruption : The construction and design of crossing facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of Village highways may require the incorporation of materials and protections (such as encasement or additional cover) to avoid settlement or future repairs to the roadbed resulting from the installation of such crossing facilities. 
2.  Cattle passes, culverts, or drainage facilities : Crossing facilities shall not be located in cattle passes, culverts, or drainage facilities. 
3.  Ninety degree crossing required : Crossing facilities shall cross at or as near to a 90 degree angle to the centerline as practicable. 
4.  Overhead power or communication facility: An overhead power or communication facility may cross a highway only if: 
(a)  It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ICC's rules entitled, "construction of electric power and communication lines" (83 III. Adm. Code 305); 
(b)  Poles are located within one foot (0.3 meters) of the right-of-way line of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and 
(c)  Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided. 
5.  Underground power or communication facility : An underground power or communication facility may cross a highway only if: 
(a)  The design materials and construction methods will provide maximum maintenance free service life; and 
(b)  Capacity for the utility's foreseeable future expansion needs is provided in the initial installation. 
6.  Markers : The Village may require the utility to provide a marker at each right-of-way line where an underground facility other than a power or communication facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall identify the type of facility, the utility, and an emergency phone number. Markers may also be eliminated as provided in current federal regulations (49 CFR Section 192.707 (1989)). 
(D)  Facilities to be located within particular rights-of-way: The Village may require that facilities be located within particular rights-of-way that are not highways, rather than within particular highways. 
(E)  Freestanding facilities : 
1.  The Village may restrict the location and size of any freestanding facility located within a right-of-way. 
2.  The Village may require any freestanding facility located within a right-of-way to be screened from view. 
(F)  Facilities installed aboveground : Aboveground facilities may be installed only if: 
1.  No other existing facilities in the area are located underground; 
2.  New underground installation is not technically feasible; and 
3.  The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest protection of aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed without adversely affecting safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to, self-supporting armless, single pole construction with vertical configuration of conductors and cable. Existing utility poles and light standards shall be used wherever practicable; the installation of additional utility poles is strongly discouraged. 
(G)  Facility attachments to bridges or roadway structures : 
1.  Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway structures only where the utility has demonstrated that all other means of accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means shall include, but are not limited to, underground, underwater, independent poles, cable supports and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from the bridge or roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are volatile, flammable, corrosive, or energized, especially those under significant pressure or potential, present high degrees of risk and such installations are not permitted. 
2.  A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a facility installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data demonstrating the impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or disapproval of an application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway structure will be based upon the following considerations: 
(a)  The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and property in the event of damage to or failure of the facility; 
(b)  The type, length, value, and relative importance of the highway structure in the transportation system; 
(c)  The alternative routings available to the utility and their comparative practicability; 
(d)  The proposed method of attachment; 
(e)  The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the proposed facility; 
(f)  The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting; 
(g)  The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and 
(h)  The public benefit expected from the utility service as compared to the risk involved. 
(H)  Appearance standards : 
1.  The Village may prohibit the installation of facilities in particular locations in order to preserve visual quality. 
2.  A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features visible to the right-of-way user or to adjacent residents and property owners, and if it does not impair the aesthetic quality of the lands being traversed. 
(Ord. 5621, 10-22-2007; Ord. 6494, 6-26-2017; Ord. 6608, 6-25-2018; Ord. 6674, 2-25-2019) 
8-6-16. - Construction methods and materials. 
(A)  Standards and requirements for particular types of construction methods : 
1.  Boring or jacking : 
(a)  Pits and shoring : Boring or jacking under rights-of-way shall be accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance specified by the Village Director of Public Works from the edge of the pavement. Pits for boring or jacking shall be excavated no more than 48 hours in advance of boring or jacking operations and backfilled within 48 hours after boring or jacking operations are completed. While pits are open, they shall be clearly marked and protected by barricades. Shoring shall be designed, erected, supported, braced, and maintained so that it will safely support all vertical and lateral loads that may be imposed upon it during the boring or jacking operation. 
(b)  Wet boring or jetting : Wet boring or jetting shall not be permitted under the roadway. 
(c)  Borings with diameters greater than six inches : Borings over six inches (0.15 meters) in diameter shall be accomplished with an auger and following pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the outside diameter of the following pipe by more than one inch)(25 millimeters). 
(d)  Borings with diameters six inches or less : Borings of six inches or less in diameter may be accomplished by either jacking, guided with auger, or auger and following pipe method. 
(e)  Tree preservation : Any facility located within the drip line of any tree designated by the Village to be preserved or protected shall be bored under or around the root system. 
2.  Trenching : Trenching for facility installation, repair, or maintenance on rights-of-way shall be done in accord with the applicable portions of section 603 of IDOT's "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction". 
(a)  Length : The length of open trench shall be kept to the practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipe/line testing. Only one-half of any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless special permission is obtained from the Village Director of Public Works. 
(b)  Open trench and excavated material : Open trench and windrowed excavated material shall be protected as required by chapter 6 of the "Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices". Where practicable, the excavated material shall be deposited between the roadway and the trench as added protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the paved portion of the roadway. Where right-of-way width does not allow for windrowing excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated material shall be hauled to an off road location. 
(c)  Drip line of trees : The utility shall not trench within the drip line of any tree designated by the Village to be preserved. 
3.  Backfilling : 
(a)  Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the installation of facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth, and length using methods and materials in accordance with IDOT's "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction". When excavated material is hauled away or is unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be used. 
(b)  For a period of three years from the date construction of a facility is completed, the utility shall be responsible to remove and restore any backfilled area that has settled due to construction of the facility. If so ordered by the Director of Public Works, the utility, at its expense, shall remove any pavement and backfill material to the top of the installed facility, place and properly compact new backfill material, and restore new pavement, sidewalk, curbs, and driveways to the proper grades, as determined by the Director of Public Works. 
4.  Pavement cuts : Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair shall be permitted on a highway only if that portion of the highway is closed to traffic. If a variance to the limitation set forth in this subsection (A)4 is permitted under section 8-6-21 of this chapter, the following requirements shall apply: 
(a)  Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled and compacted as soon as practicable with granular material of CA-6 or CA-10 gradation, as designated by the Director of Public Works. 
(b)  Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as soon as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous mixture shall be provided immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the Village. 
(c)  All saw cuts shall be full depth. 
(d)  For all rights-of-way which have been reconstructed with a concrete surface/base in the last seven years, or resurfaced in the last three years, permits shall not be issued unless such work is determined to be an emergency repair or other work considered necessary and unforeseen before the time of the reconstruction or unless a pavement cut is necessary for a JULIE locate. 
5.  Encasement : 
(a)  Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be continuous either by one piece fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by the Village. 
(b)  The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one foot (0.3 meters) of the right-of-way line. No aboveground vent pipes shall be located in the area established as clear zone for that particular section of the highway. 
(c)  In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement shall be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or Village approved jointed pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be omitted only if pipe is installed prior to highway construction and carrier pipe is continuous or mechanical joints are of a type approved by the Village. Bell and spigot type pipe shall be encased regardless of installation method. 
(d)  In the case of gas pipelines of 60 psig or less, encasement may be eliminated. 
(e)  In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines with installations of more than 60 psig, encasement may be eliminated only if: 1) extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future maintenance or repair and 2) cathodic protection of the pipe is provided. 
(f)  If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that construction does not disrupt the right-of-way. 
6.  Minimum cover of underground facilities : Cover shall be provided and maintained at least in the amount specified in the following table for minimum cover for the type of facility: 
Type Of Facility Minimum Cover Electric lines 30 inches (0.8 m) Communication, cable or video service lines 24 inches (0.6 m, as determined by Village) Gas or petroleum products 30 inches (0.8 m) Water line Sufficient cover to provide freeze protection Sanitary sewer, storm sewer, or drainage line Sufficient cover to provide freeze protection  
(B)  Standards and requirements for particular types of facilities : 
1.  Electric power or communication lines : 
(a)  Code compliance : Electric power or communications facilities within Village rights-of-way shall be constructed, operated, and maintained in conformity with the provisions of 83 Illinois Administrative Code Part 305 (formerly General Order 160 of the Illinois Commerce Commission) entitled "Rules for Construction of Electric Power and Communication Lines", and the National Electrical Safety Code. 
(b)  Overhead facilities : Overhead power or communication facilities shall use single pole construction and, where practicable, joint use of poles shall be used. Utilities shall make every reasonable effort to design the installation so guys and braces will not be needed. Variances may be allowed if there is no feasible alternative and if guywires are equipped with guy guards for maximum visibility. 
(c)  Underground facilities : 
(1)  Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing, provided that special consideration is given to boring in order to minimize damage when crossing improved entrances and side roads. 
(2)  If a crossing is installed by boring or jacking, encasement shall be provided between jacking or bore pits. Encasement may be eliminated only if: a) the crossing is installed by the use of "moles", "whip augers", or other approved methods which compress the earth to make the opening for cable installation or b) the installation is by the open trench method which is only permitted prior to roadway construction. 
(3)  Cable shall be grounded in accordance with the national electrical safety code. 
(d)  Burial of drops : All temporary service drops placed between November 1 of the prior year and March 15 of the current year, also known as snow drops, shall be buried by May 31 of the current year, weather permitting, unless otherwise permitted by the Village. Weather permitting, utilities shall bury all temporary drops, excluding snow drops, within ten business days after placement. 
2.  Underground facilities other than electric power or communication lines : Underground facilities other than electric power or communication lines may be installed by: 
(a)  The use of "moles", "whip augers", or other approved methods which compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe; 
(b)  Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between the ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway; 
(c)  Open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway construction; or 
(d)  Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is not possible by other means. 
3.  Gas transmission, distribution and service : Gas pipelines within rights-of-way shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in a Village approved manner and in conformance with the Federal Code of the Office of Pipeline Safety Operations, Department of Transportation, Part 192 - Transportation of Natural and Other Gas by Pipeline: Minimum Federal Safety Standards (49 CFR Section 192), IDOT's "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction", and all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations. 
4.  Petroleum products pipelines : Petroleum products pipelines within rights-of-way shall conform to the applicable sections of ANSI standard code for pressure piping (liquid petroleum transportation piping systems ANSI-B 31.4). 
5.  Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm water sewer lines or drainage lines : Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, and drainage lines within rights-of-way shall meet or exceed the recommendations of the current "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer Main Construction In Illinois." 
6.  Ground mounted appurtenances : Ground mounted appurtenances to overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a right-of-way, shall be provided with a vegetation free area extending one foot (305 millimeters) in width beyond the appurtenance in all directions. The vegetation free area may be provided by an extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy duty plastic or similar material approved by the Director of Public Works. With the approval of the Director of Public Works, shrubbery surrounding the appurtenance may be used in place of vegetation free area. The housing for ground mounted appurtenances shall be painted a neutral color to blend with the surroundings. 
(C)  Materials : 
1.  General standards: The materials used in constructing facilities within rights-of-way shall be those meeting the accepted standards of the appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT's "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction", the requirements of the Illinois commerce commission, or the standards established by other official regulatory agencies for the appropriate industry. 
2.  Material storage on right-of-way: No material shall be stored on the right-of-way without the prior written approval of the Village Director of Public Works. When such storage is permitted, all pipe, conduit, wire, poles, cross arms, or other materials shall be distributed along the right-of-way prior to and during installation in a manner to minimize hazards to the public or an obstacle to right-of-way maintenance or damage to the right-of-way and other property. If material is to be stored on right-of-way, prior approval must be obtained from the Village. 
3.  Hazardous materials : The plans submitted by the utility to the Village shall identify any hazardous materials that may be involved in the construction of the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities. 
(D)  Operational restrictions : 
1.  Construction operations on rights-of-way may, at the discretion of the Village, be required to be discontinued when such operations would create hazards to traffic or the public health, safety, and welfare. Such operations may also be required to be discontinued or restricted when conditions are such that construction would result in extensive damage to the right-of-way or other property. 
2.  These restrictions may be waived by the Director of Public Works when emergency work is required to restore vital utility services. 
3.  Unless otherwise permitted by the Village, the hours of construction are those set forth in section 4-1-5 of this Code. 
(E)  Location of existing facilities : Any utility proposing to construct facilities in the Village shall contact JULIE and ascertain the presence and location of existing aboveground and underground facilities within the rights-of-way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The Village will make its permit records available to a utility for the purpose of identifying possible facilities. When notified of an excavation or when requested by the Village or by JULIE, a utility shall locate and physically mark its underground facilities within 48 hours, excluding weekends and holidays, in accordance with the Illinois underground facilities damage prevention act 1 . 
(Ord. 5621, 10-22-2007; Ord. 6494, 6-26-2017) 
8-6-17. - Vegetation control. 
(A)  Electric utilities; compliance with state laws and regulations : An electric utility shall conduct all tree trimming and vegetation control activities in the right-of-way in accordance with applicable Illinois laws and regulations, and additionally, with such local franchise or other agreement with the Village as permitted by law. 
(B)  Other utilities; tree trimming permit required: Tree trimming that is done by any other utility with facilities in the right-of-way and that is not performed pursuant to applicable Illinois laws and regulations specifically governing same, shall not be considered a normal maintenance operation, but shall require the application for, and the issuance of, a permit, in addition to any other permit required under this chapter. 
1.  Application for tree trimming permit : Applications for tree trimming permits shall include assurance that the work will be accomplished by competent workers with supervision who are experienced in accepted tree pruning practices. Tree trimming permits shall designate an expiration date in the interest of assuring that the work will be expeditiously accomplished. 
2.  Damage to trees : Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for cancellation of the tree trimming permit and for assessment of damages. The Village will require compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees removed without authorization. The formula developed by the International Society of Arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the compensation for damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The Village may require the removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical pruning would leave them in an unacceptable condition. 
(C)  Specimen trees or trees of special significance : The Village may require that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of special significance. The required measures may consist of higher poles, side arm extensions, covered wire or other means. 
(D)  Chemical use : 
1.  Except as provided in the following subsection, no utility shall spray, inject or pour any chemicals on or near any trees, shrubs or vegetation in the Village for any purpose, including the control of growth, insects or disease. 
2.  Spraying of any type of brush killing chemicals will not be permitted on rights-of-way unless the utility demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works that such spraying is the only practicable method of vegetation control. 
(Ord. 5621, 10-22-2007; Ord. 6494, 6-26-2017) 
8-6-18. - Removal, relocation, or modifications of utility facilities. 
(A)  Notice : Within 90 days following written notice from the Village, a utility shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily or permanently disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any utility facilities within the rights-of-way whenever the corporate authorities have determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration, is reasonably necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance, or installation of any Village improvement in or upon, or the operations of the Village in or upon, the rights-of-way. 
(B)  Removal of unauthorized facilities : Within 30 days following written notice from the Village, any utility that owns, controls, or maintains any unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the rights-of-way shall, at its own expense, remove all or any part of such facilities or appurtenances from the rights-of-way. A facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in the following circumstances: 
1.  Upon expiration or termination of the permittee's license or franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law; 
2.  If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant of a license or franchise, if required; 
3.  If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance of a required permit in violation of this chapter; or 
4.  If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not permitted by the permittee's license or franchise. 
(C)  Emergency removal or relocation of facilities : The Village retains the right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within the rights-of-way of the Village, as the Village may determine to be necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If circumstances permit, the municipality shall attempt to notify the utility, if known, prior to cutting or removing a facility and shall notify the utility, if known, after cutting or removing a facility. 
(D)  Abandonment of facilities : Upon abandonment of a facility within the rights-of-way of the Village, the utility shall notify the Village within 90 days. Following receipt of such notice the Village may direct the utility to remove all or any portion of the facility if the Village Director of Public Works determines that such removal will be in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare. In the event that the Village does not direct the utility that abandoned the facility to remove it, by giving notice of abandonment to the Village, the abandoning utility shall be deemed to consent to the alteration or removal of all or any portion of the facility by another utility or person. 
(E)  Relocation of Village utilities : In the event that the Village decides to relocate underground all of the overhead utilities supported by a utility pole upon which a communications facility is located, the licensee of the communications facility shall decommission and remove all associated equipment, equipment cabinets, equipment shelters, antennas, wiring, cabling, conduits, cable covers, etc. that comprise the communications facility within 30 days written notice from the Village. All utility lines, cables or wiring, or portions thereof that service the affected communications facility and will be abandoned due to the decommissioning of the communications facility shall be removed by the licensee of the communications facility. 
(F)  Interference with public project improvements : In the event the Village undertakes a public improvement requiring the moving a utility pole on which a communications facility is located, all such relocation work and expenses shall be borne by the utility pole user including, but not limited to the Licensee of the communications facility. 
(Ord. 5621, 10-22-2007; Ord. 6494, 6-26-2017) 
8-6-19. - Cleanup and restoration. 
    The utility shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and terrain and other property within ten days after any portion of the rights-of-way are disturbed, damaged or destroyed due to construction or maintenance by the utility, all to the satisfaction of the Village. This includes restoration of entrances and side roads. Restoration of roadway surfaces shall be made using materials and methods approved by the Village Director of Public Works. Such cleanup and repair may be required to consist of backfilling, regrading, reseeding, resodding, or any other requirement to restore the right-of-way to a condition substantially equivalent to that which existed prior to the commencement of the project. The time period provided in this section may be extended by the Village Director of Public Works for good cause shown. 
(Ord. 5621, 10-22-2007; Ord. 6494, 6-26-2017) 
8-6-20. - Maintenance and emergency maintenance. 
(A)  General : Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights-of-way are to be maintained by or for the utility in a manner satisfactory to the Village and at the utility's expense. 
(B)  Emergency maintenance procedures : Emergencies may justify noncompliance with normal procedures for securing a permit: 
1.  If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the right-of-way, the utility shall take immediate steps to provide all necessary protection for traffic on the highway or the public on the right-of-way including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If a hazard does not exist on the traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is such as to require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in repair operations, adequate signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on the shoulder in such an emergency will only be permitted when no other means of access to the facility is available. 
2.  In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible, notify the Village Director of Public Works or his or her duly authorized agent of the emergency, informing him or her as to what steps have been taken for protection of the traveling public and what will be required to make the necessary repairs. If the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere with the free movement of traffic, the Village police shall be notified immediately. 
3.  In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand to complete repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least inconvenience to the traveling public. 
(C)  Emergency repairs : The utility must file in writing with the Village a description of the repairs undertaken in the right-of-way within 48 hours after an emergency repair. 
(D)  Communications sites and facilities including, but not limited to all landscaping, fencing and related transmission equipment shall be maintained in accordance with the approved plans and conditions for approval, and in accordance with the Village's building, structural, electrical, and safety codes and with other laws codifying objective standards reasonably related to health and safety, and structurally sound and in good repair to prevent deterioration of the pole, peeling paint, loose structural or electrical connections or attachments, and unwarranted equipment noise. 
(E)  Within 30 days of the communications facility's first receipt or transmission of communications signals, and annually thereafter, the licensee of the communications facility shall submit to the Village a written report from a consultant approved by the Village of Glen Ellyn which indicates that the level of total electronic transmissions from the communications facility does not exceed the maximum permitted electronic transmission exposure limit for general population/uncontrolled permitted by any federal [or] state regulatory agency at the time of issuance of the permit. 
1.  Radiofrequency field testing shall be performed at and around the site of the communications facility in accordance with the current edition of the Federal Communications Commission Office of Engineering and Technology (OET) Bulletin 65 for on-site testing. Points of interest shall be selected to measure the power density at the following locations: 
(a)  Persons passing by the communications facility. 
(b)  At the closest exterior wall of the nearest residential dwelling unit to the communications facility, taken at two meters above the first floor level and one meter above any second or third floor level. 
(F)  If the total transmission level is found to be in excess of the applicable limits, the communications facility licensee will be required take corrective action within 90 days after receipt of the report. 
(G)  The communications facility licensee shall remove any graffiti on the facility at the Licensee's sole expense within 72 hours of receipt of a written notice to remove the graffiti. 
(Ord. 5621, 10-22-2007; Ord. 6494, 6-26-2017) 
8-6-21. - Variances. 
(A)  Request for variance : A utility requesting a variance from one or more of the provisions of this chapter must do so in writing to the Village Director of Public Works as a part of the permit application. The request shall identify each provision of this chapter from which a variance is requested and the reasons why a variance should be granted. 
(B)  Authority to grant variances : The Village Director of Public Works shall decide whether a variance is authorized for each provision of this chapter identified in the variance request on an individual basis. 
(C)  Conditions for granting of variance : The Village Director of Public Works may authorize a variance only if the utility requesting the variance has demonstrated that: 
1.  One or more conditions not under the control of the utility (such as terrain features or an irregular right-of-way line) create a special hardship that would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable, given the public purposes to be achieved by the provision; and 
2.  All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that would conform with the provision from which a variance is requested are impracticable in relation to the requested approach. 
(D)  Additional conditions for granting of a variance : As a condition for authorizing a variance, the Village Director of Public Works may require the utility requesting the variance to meet reasonable standards and conditions that may or may not be expressly contained within this chapter but which carry out the purposes of this chapter. 
(E)  Right to appeal : Any utility aggrieved by any order, requirement, decision or determination, including denial of a variance, made by the Village Director of Public Works under the provisions of this chapter shall have the right to appeal to the Village board, or such other board or commission as it may designate. The application for appeal shall be submitted in writing to the Village clerk within 30 days after the date of such order, requirement, decision or determination. The Village board shall commence its consideration of the appeal at the board's next regularly scheduled meeting occurring at least seven days after the filing of the appeal. The Village board shall timely decide the appeal. 
(Ord. 5621, 10-22-2007; Ord. 6494, 6-26-2017) 
8-6-22. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to fine in accordance with the penalty provisions of this Code. There may be times when the Village will incur delay or other costs, including third party claims, because the utility will not or cannot perform its duties under its permit and this chapter. Unless the utility shows that another allocation of the cost of undertaking the requested action is appropriate, the utility shall bear the Village's costs of damages and its costs of installing, maintaining, modifying, relocating, or removing the facility that is the subject of the permit. No other administrative agency or commission may review or overrule a permit related cost apportionment of the Village. Sanctions may be imposed upon a utility that does not pay the costs apportioned to it. 
(Ord. 5621, 10-22-2007; Ord. 6494, 6-26-2017) 
8-6-23. - Enforcement. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional or further remedies that the Village may have for enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. 5621, 10-22-2007; Ord. 6494, 6-26-2017) 
TITLE 9 - TRAFFIC 
Chapter 1 - TRAFFIC REGULATIONS 

9-1-1. - Definitions. 
(A)  Terms used and rules referred to in this title have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes of the Illinois Vehicle Code. 
(B)  In addition to the terms defined in the Illinois Vehicle Code, for purposes of this title, unless otherwise expressly stated or the context clearly indicates a different sense, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings defined in this section: 
1.  Central Business District streets: Certain streets or sections of streets, as specified in this section, shall be known as Central Business District (CBD) streets as follows: 
Crescent Boulevard, between Prospect Avenue and Park Boulevard; 
Duane Street, between Prospect Avenue and Park Boulevard; 
Forest Avenue, between Hillside Avenue and Anthony Street; 
Glenwood Avenue, between Pennsylvania Avenue and Hillside Avenue; 
Hillside Avenue, between Prospect Avenue and Forest Avenue; 
Main Street, between Anthony Street and Hillside Avenue; and 
Pennsylvania Avenue, between Prospect Avenue and Park Boulevard; 
2.  Residential streets: Those streets located within the Village which are predominately of a residential character and which include all streets within the Village except those streets specifically listed and identified as "truck routes", as defined herein; and 
3.  Truck routes: Those streets located within the Village on which truck or other heavy vehicle traffic is allowed to pass through the Village and which consist of the following streets: 
(a)  Roosevelt Road (Illinois Route 38); 
(b)  St. Charles Road; 
(c)  Geneva Road; 
(d)  Park Boulevard, south of Roosevelt Road; 
(e)  Illinois Route 53; 
(f)  Finley Road; 
(g)  North-South Tollway; 
(h)  Those portions of DuPage (west of Illinois Route 53), Nicoll Way and Pershing Road (west of Illinois Route 53) forming the interchange between Illinois Route 53 and Roosevelt Road (Illinois Route 38); 
(i)  Main Street, north of St. Charles Road; and 
(j)  Lambert Road, south of Roosevelt Road. 
(Ord. 3541, 11-28-1988, eff. 1-1-1989) 
9-1-2. - Adoption of Illinois Vehicle Code. 
(A)  The Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-100 et seq., as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted by reference to be applied within the corporate limits of the Village to the extent permitted by law and to the extent that its subject matter is not regulated by the Village Code or inconsistent with any lawful provisions of the Village Code. All actions or failure to act made unlawful in the Illinois Vehicle Code shall be made unlawful events under the provisions of the Village Code. 
(B)  All references in sections of the Illinois Vehicle Code to "this Code" shall be to sections of the Illinois Vehicle Code and shall not refer to sections of the Glen Ellyn Village Code. References to a state employee or official may be to a corresponding Village employee or official where such reference is applicable or necessary. 
(C)  Citations for violations of the Illinois Vehicle Code adopted by reference herein may be issued by authorized personnel of the Village, using the appropriate Illinois Vehicle Code section which shall, by the effect of this section, represent identically and specially numbered sections of the Village Code. 
(Ord. 4936, 4-23-2001) 
9-1-3. - Penalties. 
(A)  A violation of any provision of this title, unless otherwise specified, or of any offenses classified as "petty" offenses under the provisions of the Illinois Vehicle Code shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $35.00 nor more than $1,000.00 for each offense. Offenses classified as "business" offenses under the provisions of the Illinois Vehicle Code adopted by reference herein shall be punishable as set forth therein. 
(B)  Offenses classified as "misdemeanors" under the provisions of the Illinois Vehicle Code adopted by reference herein shall be subject to a fine and/or imprisonment for a determinate term according to the following limitations: 
1.  For a class A misdemeanor, imprisonment for any term less than six months and/or a fine of not less than $200.00 and not to exceed $2,500.00 except as provided in subsection (B)4. of this section. 
2.  For a class B misdemeanor, imprisonment for not more than six months and/or a fine of not less than $100.00 and not to exceed $1,500.00. 
3.  For a class C misdemeanor, imprisonment for not more than 30 days and/or a fine of not less than $50.00 and not to exceed $1,500.00. 
4.  The court, upon making a finding of guilty for any offense under section 11-501 of the Illinois Vehicle Code adopted herein, in addition to any sentencing alternative elected by the court, shall impose a fine of not less than $750.00 nor more than $2,500.00 for each such offense. 
(C)  For a violation of any provision hereof in a street construction or maintenance work zone (stationary or moving), the minimum fine shall be not less than $75.00. 
(D)  Except for violations under sections 3-701, 3-702, 3-703, 6-303, and 11-501 of the Vehicle Code adopted herein, the penalty for any violation hereof shall be a fine only, according to the schedule in subsection (B) of this section. Where state law requires both a fine and imprisonment for misdemeanor violations to confer jurisdiction on the court, the penalties of both fine and imprisonment in subsection (B) of this section shall apply. 
(Ord. 4936, 4-23-2001) 
9-1-4. - Obedience to police. 
Members of the Police Department are hereby authorized to direct all traffic in accordance with the provisions of this title or, in emergencies, as public safety or convenience may require; and it shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order, signal or direction of a Policeman. 
Except in case of emergencies, it shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by the Police Chief to direct, or attempt to direct, traffic. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 21.04) 
9-1-5. - Flee, attempt to elude police. 
Any driver or operator of a motor vehicle who, having been given a visible or audible signal by a Police Officer directing such driver or operator to bring his vehicle to a stop, willfully flees or refuses to obey such direction, increases his speed, extinguishes his lights, or otherwise flees or attempts to elude the officer, is deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
The signal given by the Police Officer may be by hand, voice, siren or red or blue light; provided, the officer giving such signal shall be in Police uniform and, if driving a vehicle, such vehicle shall be marked showing it to be an official Police vehicle. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 21.05) 
9-1-6. - Speed. 
(A)  Speed limits: When it has been determined, upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation, that the prima facie speed limit of motor vehicles, as provided herein, on any street is greater or less than is reasonable and safe under the conditions found to exist, the Board of Trustees may designate the speed limit within the limits provided by law. 
(B)  Adjusted speed limits: When signs are erected giving notice of speed limits, no person shall drive a vehicle in excess of the speed limits so specified upon those parts of streets described in schedule J, section 9-5-10 of this title. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 21.21; Ord. 1561, 12-11-1967; amd. Ord. 4936, 4-23-2001) 
9-1-7. - Through streets; stop intersections. 
The streets described in schedule B, section 9-5-2 of this title, are hereby designated as through streets; and the intersections described in schedule C, section 9-5-3 of this title, are hereby designated as stop intersections. 
The Superintendent of Streets is hereby directed to erect and maintain stop signs, in conformity with state law, at the entrances to through streets and stop intersections described in such schedules. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 21.38; amd. Ord. 4936, 4-23-2001) 
9-1-8. - Yield right-of-way intersections. 
The Police Chief may cause "Yield Right-of-Way" signs to be erected at intersections he or she determines to be hazardous. 
(Ord. 4936, 4-23-2001) 
9-1-9. - One-way streets. 
The streets described in schedule D, section 9-5-4 of this title, are hereby designated one-way streets. 
Signs indicating the direction of traffic shall be erected at each intersection where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited, and vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated direction. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 21.69; amd. Ord. 4936, 4-23-2001) 
9-1-10. - Unattended motor vehicles. 
(A)  No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand unattended in any public place or new or used car lot or parking lot without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition, and removing the key, or, when standing upon any perceptible grade, without effectively setting the brake thereon and turning the front wheels to the curb or side of the street. 
(B)  Whenever any Police Officer shall find a motor vehicle standing unattended with the ignition key in the vehicle, in violation of this section, such Police Officer is authorized to remove the key from such vehicle and deliver the ignition key to the officer in charge of the Police station. 
(Ord. 1507, 1-23-1967; amd. Ord. 4936, 4-23-2001) 
9-1-11. - Games and toy vehicles. 
(A)  Games: It shall be unlawful to play games on any roadway. 
(B)  Toy vehicles: No person shall travel upon a roadway, other than a crosswalk, while using skates, a coaster, wagon, scooter, sled or other similar device, a skateboard, or any other toy vehicle. 
(C)  Skateboards and scooters: No person shall use, operate, or be in control of any motorized skateboard or motorized scooter (defined by state law as motor vehicles but not currently licensed by the state) on a public or private street, parking lot, sidewalk, bike path or other area open to the public. 
(D)  Central business district sidewalks: No person shall travel upon a sidewalk in the area known and defined as the Central Business District while using any of the devices delineated in subsection (B) of this section. 
(E)  Penalty: Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine of not less than $10.00 for the first offense and not less than $20.00 for the second or subsequent offense. 
(Ord. 3209, 5-27-1986; amd. Ord. 4936, 4-23-2001; Ord. 4954, 5-29-2001) 
9-1-12. - Impounding of vehicles. 
(A)  Members of the Police Department of the Village are hereby authorized to remove a vehicle to the nearest garage or other place of safety, as determined and designated by the Police Chief, under any of the circumstances hereinafter enumerated: 
1.  When a vehicle upon any public way is so disabled as to constitute an obstruction of traffic and the person or persons in charge of the vehicle are, by reason of physical injury or intoxication, incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to provide for its custody or removal. 
2.  When any vehicle illegally occupies parking space. 
3.  When any vehicle is parked in violation of official signs indicating that parking, standing or stopping is prohibited: 
(a)  At all times, 
(b)  During designated hours, or 
(c)  In excess of specified times. 
4.  When a vehicle is abandoned or junked as described in title 7, chapter 8 of this Code; or the removal is authorized in accordance with section 9-2-12 of this title. 
5.  When a vehicle presents an immediate danger to the safety, health, or welfare of the community or individual members thereof. 
6.  When a vehicle has been reported stolen; or is evidence; or subject to search and seizure in a criminal or quasi-criminal investigation. 
7.  When any emergency arises necessitating the removal of any vehicle upon any public way or from privately owned property. 
(B)  Before the owner, or person entitled to possession, of any legally impounded vehicle shall be permitted to remove the same from the custody of the Police Chief, he shall: 
1.  Furnish evidence of his identity. 
2.  Show evidence of his ownership of the vehicle or right to possession thereof. 
3.  Sign a receipt for the vehicle. 
4.  Pay the prevailing rate charged for towing or moving the vehicle to a place of safety or authorized garage. 
5.  Pay the storage charged at the prevailing rate at the garage in which the said vehicle is stored. 
(a)  In those cases in which a vehicle is stored on Village controlled property, the following fee schedule, based on a calendar day or any portion thereof, shall be used: 
(1)  The first through the fourth day ..... no charge 
(2)  The fifth day ..... $10.00 
(3)  The sixth and subsequent days, per day ..... $2.00 
(b)  The Police Chief may, for good cause, waive the storage fee, or a portion thereof, of a vehicle stored on Village controlled property. 
(Ord. 3141, 8-26-1985; amd. Ord. 4936, 4-23-2001) 
9-1-13. - DuPage Parkway (Prairie Path). 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or use any motor vehicle upon those parts of the Village, commonly known as the DuPage Parkway (Prairie Path), with the following exceptions: 
(A)  The use, operation and parking of motor vehicles will be permitted upon those parts of the DuPage Parkway (Prairie Path) provided by the Village, for the parking of motor vehicles and as streets. 
(B)  The use, operation and parking of authorized emergency motor vehicles, law enforcement motor vehicles, utility company motor vehicles, and motor vehicles of the Village or other authorized authorities, shall be permitted upon all parts of the DuPage Parkway (Prairie Path). 
(Ord. 2481, 8-13-1979; amd. Ord. 4936, 4-23-2001) 
9-1-14. - Operation of trucks on residential streets prohibited. 
(A)  Prohibition: No person shall operate or cause to be operated a second division motor vehicle licensed for a gross weight including vehicle and maximum load of 12,001 pounds or more or motorized equipment licensed for a gross weight of 12,001 pounds or more on any residential street, except as provided in subsection (B) of this section. 
(B)  Exceptions: The prohibition in subsection (A) of this section shall not prohibit: 
1.  Emergency vehicles: The operation of emergency vehicles upon residential streets; 
2.  Public utilities: The operation of vehicles owned or operated by the Village, public utilities, or any contractor or materialman while engaged in the repair, maintenance or construction of streets, Village owned utilities or privately owned utilities within the Village or vehicles owned or operated by other public bodies, public utilities or any contractor or materialman while traveling to or from streets, public or private utilities or facilities owned and maintained by such other public body or utility where the only access to such utilities or facilities owned and maintained by the other public body or utility is over Village residential streets; 
3.  Local destination or origination: The operation of vehicles upon residential streets where necessary to the conduct of business or the service of an occupant at a destination or origination point within the Village and requiring travel on residential streets or within another municipality or unincorporated area where the only access thereto is over Village residential streets; and 
4.  Detoured vehicles: The operation of vehicles upon residential streets which are officially established as a detour for a truck route. 
(C)  Enforcement: 
1.  Maps: The Village Clerk shall keep and maintain accurate maps showing the location of truck routes and residential streets. 
2.  Information available to public: The map shall be kept on file in the office of the Village Clerk, and shall be made available to the public. 
3.  Streets posted: All streets upon which truck traffic is prohibited (residential streets) shall be clearly posted at points of entry from truck routes to the Village to give notice that this section is in effect. 
4.  Failure to post: No person shall be charged with violating the provision of this section by reason of operating a motor vehicle or motorized equipment contrary to the prohibition contained in subsection (A) of this section on a residential street unless appropriate signs are posted on such street or along the route traveled by the vehicle. 
(D)  Penalty: Any violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $50.00 and not to exceed $500.00 for the first offense. Persons having been convicted of this violation more than once shall be fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00 per offense. 
(Ord. 3541, 11-28-1988, eff. 1-1-1989; amd. Ord. 4936, 4-23-2001) 
9-1-15. - Greenbriar Place Apartments. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or use any motor vehicle upon the connecting access driveway between Raintree Drive and the westernmost parking lot of the Greenbriar Place apartments, 470 22nd Street, except for the use, operation and parking of authorized emergency motor vehicles of the Glen Ellyn Police Department, Glen Ellyn volunteer fire company, emergency utility company vehicles and emergency medical vehicles. 
(Ord. 3624, 5-8-1989; amd. Ord. 4936, 4-23-2001) 
9-1-16. - Placement of traffic control devices. 
When official traffic control devices are required to be erected by this chapter or by law, it shall be the duty of the Superintendent of Streets to cause suitable devices to be erected in such areas if they are not erected by the state department of public works and buildings. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 21.09; amd. Ord. 4936, 4-23-2001) 
9-1-17. - Locations. 
The locations described in schedule A, section 9-5-1 of this title, are hereby designated as traffic control locations. When traffic control signals are erected and in operation at any such location, the driver of a vehicle shall obey such signals, as provided in this chapter. 
The Superintendent of Streets is hereby empowered to erect and maintain traffic control signals in conformity with state law at the locations described in said schedule A, section 9-5-1 of this title. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 21.10; amd. Ord. 4936, 4-23-2001) 
9-1-18. - Pedestrian control signals. 
Whenever special pedestrian control signals exhibiting the words "Walk" or "Don't Walk" are in place, such signals shall indicate as follows: 
(A)  While the "Walk" indication is illuminated, a pedestrian facing such signal may proceed across the roadway in the direction of the signal and shall be given the right-of-way by the drivers of all vehicles. 
(B)  While the "Don't Walk" indication is illuminated, either steady or flashing, no pedestrian shall start to cross the roadway in the direction of the signal, but a pedestrian who has partly completed his crossing during the "Walk" indication shall proceed to a sidewalk or to a safety island, if one is provided. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 21.12; amd. Ord. 4936, 4-23-2001) 
9-1-19. - Temporary signs and signals. 
The Police Chief is hereby empowered to have erected and maintained at dangerous or other hazardous locations temporary stop, slow, danger or warning signs or signals. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 21.13; amd. Ord. 4936, 4-23-2001) 
9-1-20. - Unauthorized signs, signals. 
(A)  No person shall place, maintain or display upon, or in view of, any street any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be, or is, an imitation of, or resembles, an official traffic control device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic; nor shall any person place, maintain or display upon, or in view of, any street any other sign which hides from view, or interferes with, the movement of traffic or the effectiveness of any traffic control device or any railroad sign or signal. 
(B)  Any unauthorized device is hereby declared a nuisance and may be removed by any Policeman without notice. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 21.14; amd. Ord. 4936, 4-23-2001) 
9-1-21. - Weight limitations. 
(A)  The Superintendent of Streets, with the consent of the Police Chief, and subject to the approval of the Board of Trustees, is authorized to determine and designate those streets, or parts of streets, upon which the operation of trucks or other commercial vehicles shall be prohibited, or upon which the speed of such vehicles shall be limited to six miles per hour for a total period of not to exceed 90 days in any one calendar year. 
(B)  The weight limitations and the types of pavement to which such limitations are applicable are as follows: 
1.  On semi-improved streets: two tons per axle; 
2.  On improved streets: three tons per axle; and 
3.  On concrete pavement: six tons per axle. 
(C)  Upon the approval of such limitations by the Board of Trustees, each year the Superintendent of Streets shall erect, or cause to be erected and maintained, signs designating the weight and speed limitations at each end of that portion of any street affected thereby; and this restriction shall not be effective unless and until such signs are erected. 
(D)  Whenever official signs are erected, prohibiting or restricting the use of any street, or part of a street, by trucks or other commercial vehicles, or by imposing weight and speed limitations upon such vehicles using said street, or part of a street, as authorized herein, no person shall drive a truck or other commercial vehicle upon any such street, or part of a street, in violation of any such signs. 
(E)  The word "load", when used on official signs erected by authority of this section, means the weight transmitted to the road by the wheels of a vehicle, being the weight of such vehicle plus the weight of its contents or load, if any. 
(M.C. 1965, Sec. 21.64; amd. Ord. 4936, 4-23-2001) 
9-1-22. - Bicycles. 
(A)  License required: No person residing within the Village shall ride or propel a bicycle on any street or public way set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles unless such bicycle has been licensed and such license is affixed thereto. 
(B)  License application; fee: The application for a bicycle license shall be made to the Police Chief upon a form provided by the Village. A fee of $0.50 shall accompany each application. 
Once a bicycle is licensed, no further fee will be charged unless: 1) the bicycle is sold to another resident of the Village, or 2) the license has been obliterated from the bicycle. 
(C)  Issuance of license: 
1.  The Police Chief, upon receipt of a proper application accompanied by the license fee, is authorized to issue a bicycle license. 
2.  The Police Chief, however, shall not issue a license for any bicycle when he knows, or has reasonable grounds to believe, that the applicant is not the owner of or entitled to the possession of such bicycle, or when such bicycle does not meet the requirements hereinafter set forth. 
3.  The Police Chief shall keep a record of the number of each license, the date issued, the name and address of the person to whom issued, the number on the frame of the bicycle being licensed, and all bicycle license fees collected. 
(D)  Attachment of license: 
1.  The Police Chief shall issue a license in the form of a decal showing the number of the license and the name of the Village, which he shall cause to be affixed to the bicycle frame in a position where it is plainly visible. 
2.  No person shall remove such license from a bicycle during the period for which it is issued except upon a transfer of ownership or in the event the bicycle is dismantled or inoperative. 
(E)  Inspection of bicycles: Each bicycle, before being licensed, shall be inspected by the Police Chief or any officer assigned such responsibility, and no license shall be issued for a bicycle which he determines is not in safe mechanical condition. 
(F)  Transfer of ownership: Upon the sale or other transfer of a licensed bicycle, the licensee shall remove the license; and if he acquires another bicycle, a license shall issue therefor without payment of an additional fee. 
(G)  Rental agencies: A rental agency shall not rent, or offer any bicycle for rent, unless there is a license affixed thereto and it is equipped so as to comply with all provisions of this chapter. 
(H)  Bicycle dealers: Every person engaged in the business of buying or selling new or secondhand bicycles shall make a report to the Police Chief of every bicycle purchased or sold by such dealer, giving the name and address of the person from whom purchased or to whom sold, a description of such bicycle by name or make, the number on the frame, and the number of the license, if any, found thereon. 
(I)  Penalties: Every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this section shall be punished by a fine of not more than $10.00, or by impounding such person's bicycle for a period of not to exceed 30 days, or both. 
(Ord. 1793, 2-26-1973; M.C. 1965, Sec. 6.04-6.09, 6.21; amd. Ord. 4936, 4-23-2001) 
Chapter 2 - STOPPING, STANDING, PARKING 

9-2-1. - Class A violations. 
For the purposes of fee structure and collection, the following violations shall be deemed to be class A violations: 
Parking in any three-hour meter parking space beyond the legal parking time or beyond the "maximum parking time" as defined in subsections 9-3-6(B) and (C) of this title within the "Central Business District" as defined in section 9-1-1 of this title. 
(Ord. 4543, 11-24-1997; amd. Ord. 4936, 4-23-2001) 
9-2-2. - Class B violations. 
For the purposes of fee structure and collection, the following violations shall be deemed to be class B violations: 
(A)  Parking overtime on the street beyond the legal parking time within the "Central Business District" (as defined in section 9-1-1 of this title). 
(B)  Parking beyond the legal time limit in any "zone B" parking meter space as defined in section 9-3-5 of this title. 
(Ord. 4543, 11-24-1997; amd. Ord. 4936, 4-23-2001) 
9-2-3. - Class C violations. 
For the purposes of fee structure and collection, the following violations shall be deemed to be class C violations: 
(A)  Parking prohibited in specific places: No person shall park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance with the directions of a Police Officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places: 
1.  On a sidewalk. 
2.  In front of a public or private driveway. 
3.  Within an intersection. 
4.  On a crosswalk. 
5.  Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection. 
6.  Within 30 feet of any flashing beacon, stop sign, or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway. 
7.  Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railway grade crossing. 
8.  Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to a fire station and, on the opposite side of the street, within 75 feet of said fire station entrance when properly signposted. 
9.  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such parking would obstruct traffic. 
10.  On the roadway side of any vehicle parked at the edge or curb of a street. 
11.  Upon a bridge on any street or within a street tunnel. 
12.  At any place where the standing of a vehicle will reduce the usable width of the roadway for moving traffic to less than 12 feet. 
13.  At any place where official signs prohibit stopping, standing or parking. 
14.  In any parking place specifically reserved for motor vehicles bearing a vehicle registration plate or parking permit identifying the owner as a handicapped person, as set forth in section 9-2-9 of this chapter, when the vehicle does not bear a handicapped person vehicle registration or parking permit. 
(B)  Application of restrictions: The parking restrictions set forth in subsection (A) of this section apply whether such areas are posted with signs or not; but if official signs or markings are located in such areas, the instructions of the signs and markings shall take precedence over the terms of subsection (A) of this section. 
(C)  Moving parked vehicle: No person other than a Police Officer shall move a vehicle into any prohibited area or away from a curb such a distance as is unlawful; or start, or cause to be started, the motor of any motor vehicle; or shift, change or move the levers, brake, starting device, gears, or other mechanism of a parked motor vehicle to a position other than that in which it was left by the owner or driver thereof, or attempt to do so. 
(D)  Parking at curb: A vehicle shall be parked at the direction of traffic movement, parallel with the curb and with the two curbside wheels of the vehicle within six inches of the regularly established curb line; except, that upon those streets that have been designated or marked for angle parking, a vehicle shall be parked at the angle to the curb indicated by such markings. 
Parking areas where such parking at an angle is permitted are described in section 9-5-5 (schedule E) of this title. 
(E)  Lights on parked vehicles: During the period from sunset to sunrise, a motor vehicle which is standing on any street need not display any light on either the front or at the rear of the vehicle if such street is lighted. 
(F)  Vehicle for sale, resale: No person shall park any vehicle upon any street, parkway or sidewalk for the purpose of displaying it for sale; or park any vehicle upon any business street from which vehicle merchandise is peddled; or park any vehicle upon any street, parkway, alley or sidewalk to repair the vehicle except for emergency repairs. 
(G)  Vehicles on sidewalks and parkways: 
1.  No motor vehicle shall be parked in such a manner that any part of the motor vehicle reduces the usable portion of a sidewalk by more than one-half of its width. 
2.  No person shall operate any motor vehicle along or upon any sidewalk or other public pedestrian way. 
3.  No motor vehicle shall be driven or parked on any parkway area, excepting those portions designed and constructed for use with a driveway. 
(H)  Parking spaces: Wherever parking spaces are marked on the pavement, vehicles shall be parked wholly within such marked spaces. 
(I)  Standing for loading, unloading: No operator or owner of a passenger vehicle shall stand such vehicle for a period of time longer than is necessary for the loading or unloading of passengers, and in no event for more than ten minutes; and no owner or operator of a commercial vehicle shall stand such vehicle for a period of time longer than is necessary to load, unload, and deliver materials, but in no event longer than 30 minutes, in any of the following places: 
1.  In any public alley during any hour of the day. 
2.  At any place not to exceed 30 feet in length on each side of the center of the entrance to any theater during the hours the theater is open for business. 
3.  At any place not a duly established taxicab stand or bus stop; provided, however, this provision shall not apply to the vehicles authorized to occupy such locations. 
The Superintendent of Streets may erect signs in any of the above mentioned places designating the space which is not to be occupied for a longer time than is necessary to load or unload passengers or materials. 
(J)  Parking on Roosevelt Road: No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle on Roosevelt Road between the east and west corporate limits of the Village and the north and south boundary lines of the highway except to stop in obedience to traffic regulations, signs or signals or upon the direction of a Police Officer. 
This section does not apply to the driver of any vehicle which is disabled while on the highway in such manner and to such extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and temporarily leaving such disabled vehicle in such position; however, at least one door of any motor vehicle permitted to stand unattended on the highway shall be left unlocked. 
(K)  All night parking: No person except a physician on an emergency call shall park any vehicle on any street within the Village between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(L)  Truck loading; residential districts: No person shall stand or park a motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for transporting property on any residential street or in the front yard area of a residence for a longer period of time than is necessary for the expeditious loading or unloading of such vehicle or for the performance of any work or service being provided to that residence. 
(M)  Parking prohibited; streets designated: When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person except a physician on an emergency call shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or parts of streets described in section 9-5-6 (schedule F) of this title. 
(N)  Limited parking: When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person except a physician on an emergency call shall park a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts of streets described in sections 9-5-7 and 9-5-8 (schedules G and H) of this title, at the times, or for a longer time than set forth in the schedules. 
The moving of a vehicle for 50 feet or less shall not be construed as an interruption of continuous parking. 
Section 9-5-8 (schedule H) of this title, as amended, is hereby further amended by changing the parking time limits on all streets within the corporate limits of the Village, unless otherwise posted, to five hours during the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., except on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays. 
(O)  Municipal parking lots: The municipal parking lots now owned or hereafter acquired by the Village shall be under the supervision of the Police Chief; and he shall cause signs to be erected indicating the direction in which traffic shall enter, proceed through, and exit from said lots. It shall be unlawful for traffic to move in a direction other than that indicated by such signs. The Police Chief may also cause signs to be erected indicating the specific locations and times vehicles may park within said lots. It shall be unlawful for vehicles to park in a location or during times other than indicated by such signs. 
Whenever parking spaces are marked on the pavement, vehicles shall be parked wholly within such marked spaces. 
(P)  Miscellaneous offenses: The following offenses in violation of any Village Code provision or state statute: 
1.  Overtime (limited) parking (except within the Central Business District). 
2.  Parking in a no parking zone (except those offenses listed in subsection 9-2-4(B) of this chapter). 
3.  Leaving a motor vehicle unattended. 
4.  No state license. 
5.  Improper parking and other parking violations not otherwise provided for (except parking in handicapped zones and snow emergencies). 
6.  Parking without proper Glen Ellyn Library authorization and/or not displaying a proper library authorization in one of the 22 licensed parking spaces designated in the west section of the Duane and Lorraine lot. 
(Q)  Display of vehicle card required: 
1.  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle on a Village leased parking space without displaying on the vehicle windshield the card issued to the person by the Village as part of their lease. 
2.  The card issued by the Village and so displayed must contain the card number, location and expiration date. 
3.  No person shall park in a space except as designated on the card or beyond the expiration date on the card. 
(Ord. 4543, 11-24-1997; amd. Ord. 4664, 12-14-1998; Ord. 4936, 4-23-2001; Ord. 6007, 3-12-2012) 
9-2-4. - Class D violations. 
For the purposes of fee structure and collection, the following violations shall be deemed to be class D violations: 
(A)  Private lots or drives: 
1.  It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in a private lot or drive established voluntarily or pursuant to the zoning ordinance to provide off street facilities for tenants or employees of the owner. 
2.  It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in a private lot or drive in such a manner as will prevent other vehicles from moving in or out of said lot or will reduce the usable width of a drive or roadway to less than 12 feet. 
3.  When any vehicle is parked in violation of subsections (A)1. and (A)2. of this section and there is no person in attendance upon such parked vehicle who can be served with a traffic violation notice to answer for such charge, then upon a complaint that the vehicle is not entitled to the privileges of the parking lot signed by the owner or proprietor of the lot or his duly authorized agent or by a tenant thereof, any Police Officer may attach to the vehicle a traffic violation notice, as provided in section 9-3-9 of this title, or remove such vehicle, pursuant to section 9-1-12 of this title. 
(B)  Parking in emergency vehicle access locations: No person shall park a vehicle in any of the following places: 
1.  Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant. 
2.  A fire lane. 
(Ord. 4543, 11-24-1997; amd. Ord. 4936, 4-23-2001; Ord. 6593, 4-9-2018) 
9-2-5. - Class E violations. 
For the purposes of fee structure and collection, the following violations shall be deemed to be class E violations: 
(A)  Parking prohibited during a snow emergency: An emergency is automatically declared to exist within the Village whenever there is an accumulation of snow and ice of two inches or more, at which time a parking prohibition shall automatically become effective throughout the Village in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(B)  No parking until streets cleared: It shall be unlawful for any person to park, or allow to remain parked and/or unattended, any vehicle on any Village street until the streets have been cleared of snow. 
(C)  Prohibition removed: This parking prohibition shall be removed between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. of any day on those streets or sections of streets known and defined as the "Central Business District". However, this exception shall not apply to the following sections of street(s) for the purposes of snow removal: 
Location Description Duane Street, north side Between the east line of Main Street and the west line of Forest Avenue Duane Street, south side Between the west line of Forest Avenue and the east line of the driveway to the Civic Center  
(D)  Evidence of violation: A vehicle that is parked and/or unattended when there is an accumulation of snow and ice of two inches or more shall be prima facie evidence of violation of this section by the person in whose name said vehicle is registered. 
(E)  Ticket issuance: Members of the Police Department are hereby authorized to ticket, pursuant to section 9-3-9 of this title, any vehicle parked and/or unattended in violation of this section and, if the Superintendent of Streets deems it necessary to effectuate snow removal operations, have the vehicle removed and relocated pursuant to section 9-1-12 of this title. 
(F)  Liability: If it becomes necessary for the Police to have a vehicle removed and relocated, the violator shall not be deemed to have complied with this section and shall remain liable for the fine provided plus all costs resulting from the removal, relocation and storage of said vehicle. 
(G)  Parking prohibition precedence: When the parking prohibition of this section becomes effective upon the occurrence of certain weather conditions, it shall take precedence over provisions of law normally in effect, except that it shall not take precedence over provisions of law relating to traffic accidents, emergency travel of authorized emergency vehicles, or emergency vehicles, or emergency traffic direction by a Police Officer. 
(H)  Police Department authorization: The Police Department is hereby authorized to administer this section in accordance with the terms herein. 
(I)  Municipal permit only parking lots : It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle, registered in the name of or operated by such person, to stop, stand or park on a Village parking lot designated as a permit only parking lot during the hours designated for that lot and on weekdays without visibly displaying on the vehicle a duly issued, valid, unexpired Village parking permit for the lot on which the vehicle is stopped, standing or parked. 
(Ord. 4543, 11-24-1997; amd. Ord. 4936, 4-23-2001; Ord. 6088, 11-26-2012; Ord. 6593, 4-9-2018) 
9-2-6. - Class F violations. 
For the purposes of fee structure and collection, the following violations shall be deemed to be class F violations: 
Handicapped Persons Parking: 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle, registered in the name of or operated by such person, which is not bearing registration plates, decals or permits issued to a handicapped person or disabled veteran as evidence that the vehicle is operated by or for a handicapped person or disabled veteran, to park in any parking place, including any private or public off street parking facility specifically reserved by the posting of an official sign as designated under 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-1301.1 for motor vehicles bearing such registration plates, decals, or permits. 
(Ord. 4543, 11-24-1997; amd. Ord. 4936, 4-23-2001) 
9-2-7. - Fee schedule. 
(A)  Fee basis: The fee schedule for all parking violations is structured to discourage repeated parking offenses. The fee for each offense is based on the classification of the offense and the aggregate number of any and all parking offenses within a 180 day period as of the date of the most current violation. The fee schedule is set forth in the table at subsection (B) of this section. 
(B)  Aggregate number of tickets: 
1 - 3 4 - 7 8 - 11 12 - 15 16+ Class A $15.00 $25.00 45.00 $60.00 $125.00 Class B 15.00 Class C 25.00 35.00 Class D 25.00 35.00 Class E 35.00 40.00 45.00 Class F 250.00 250.00 250.00 250.00 250.00  
(C)  Payment: Payment shall be made by mailing a check or money order for the required amount, together with the violator's copy of the notice, to the Village Of Glen Ellyn, 535 Duane Street, Glen Ellyn, IL 60137, or by paying the same in person at the Civic Center during regular business hours. Cash payment shall not be accepted if payment is made in denominations of 25 or more pennies, 25 or more nickels, or ten or more dimes. 
(D)  Time of payment: Any and all violations of this chapter are to be paid within ten days from the date of the offense. After ten days from the date of the offense, any claims not paid in full shall be increased by the sum of $10.00 for each claim left unpaid. 
(Ord. 4543, 11-24-1997; Ord. 4928, 4-9-2001; amd. Ord. 4936, 4-23-2001; Ord. 5856A, 4-26-2010) 
9-2-8. - Liability of registered owner. 
Whenever any vehicle is parked in violation of any provision of this Code prohibiting or restricting parking, the person in whose name such vehicle is registered shall be prima facie responsible for such violation and subject to the penalty therefor. 
Every person in whose name a vehicle is registered and who leases such vehicle to others, after receiving written notice of a violation of a parking regulation involving such vehicle, shall, upon request, provide the Police Chief and the court having jurisdiction thereof with a written statement of the name and address of the lessee at the time of such offense. 
(Ord. 4543, 11-24-1997; amd. Ord. 4936, 4-23-2001) 
9-2-9. - Handicapped persons; parking exemptions. 
(A)  Any motor vehicle bearing registration plates which identify the owner of the motor vehicle as a handicapped person or as a disabled veteran or which display an authorized handicapped person parking permit is exempt from all parking time limits as set forth in sections 9-3-1 and 9-5-8 (schedule H) of this title where those zones or streets are within an area zoned as a commercial district. 
(B)  Parking privileges granted by this chapter are strictly limited to the person to whom the registration plates or authorized parking permit were issued and to qualified operators acting under the disabled person's express direction while the disabled person is present. 
(C)  The Police Chief shall establish such administrative rules as are necessary to issue handicapped person parking permits, prevent abuses, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(D)  The Superintendent of Streets shall establish and maintain parking areas on public streets and Village owned off street parking facilities for use of handicapped persons, as set forth in section 9-5-13 (schedule M) of this title. 
(Ord. 4543, 11-24-1997; amd. Ord. 4936, 4-23-2001) 
9-2-10. - Temporary parking adjustments. 
(A)  The Police Chief may, in his discretion, temporarily prohibit parking in any area of the Village. 
(B)  The Police Chief may, in his discretion, grant temporary parking on any street in the Village. 
(Ord. 4543, 11-24-1997; amd. Ord. 4936, 4-23-2001) 
9-2-11. - Leased parking rates. 
(Repealed by Ordinance 6567, January 8, 2018) 
9-2-12. - Municipal permit only parking lots. 
(A)  Permit only lots: The following municipal parking lots are hereby designated as "permit only" lots in which it shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle without displaying a proper permit, as provided in subsection 9-2-4(C) of this chapter, during the hours and weekdays designated for each lot (permit only parking lots): 
1.  Park and Montclair Lot (Formerly known as Park Boulevard and Montclair Avenue parking lot) between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on Mondays through Fridays. 
2.  The South Main Lot extending easterly from Glenwood Avenue to the west edge of the Main Street municipal parking lot, located south of Duane Street and north of Hillside Avenue, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on Mondays through Saturdays. 
3.  The Crescent and Park Lot, Park and Prairie Path Lot, Duane and Forest Lot and the Main and Prairie Path Lot made up of the following components: 
(a)  Crescent and Park Lot (formerly known as Train Station Lot A): The Village parking area located on the south side of Crescent Boulevard between Park Boulevard and the Union Pacific train station between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m. on Mondays through Fridays. 
(b)  Park and Prairie Path Lot (formerly known as Train Station Lot B): The Village parking area located on Stewart Avenue between Forest Avenue and Park Boulevard between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m. on Mondays through Fridays. 
(c)  Duane and Forest Lot (formerly known as Train Station Lot C): The Village parking area located on the west side of Forest Avenue between Duane Street and Stewart Avenue between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m. on Mondays through Fridays. 
(d)  Main and Prairie Path Lot (formerly known as Train Station Lot D): The Village parking area located on Stewart Avenue between Main Street and Forest Avenue between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m. on Mondays through Fridays. 
4.  Crescent and Glenwood lot, that portion of the lot between Prospect Avenue and the east line of Glenwood Avenue extended, between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m. on Mondays through Fridays. 
5.  That portion of the Pennsylvania West Lot (formerly known as Main and Pennsylvania parking lot) consisting of 47 parking spaces north and northeast of 510 Pennsylvania Avenue between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m. on Mondays through Fridays. 
6.  That portion of the Pennsylvania West Lot (formerly known as Main and Pennsylvania parking lot) consisting of 41 parking spaces directly north of 510 Pennsylvania Avenue shall be designated as employee parking only - permit required between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on Mondays through Saturdays. 
7.  That portion of the Pennsylvania West Lot (formerly known as Main and Pennsylvania parking lot) consisting of 44 spaces closest to the Anthony Street access between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. 
8.  That portion on the south side of Hillside Avenue from a point 67 feet west of the west line of Main Street to a point 204 feet west of that same line consisting of 15 diagonal parking spaces shall be designated as employee parking only - permit required between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on Mondays through Saturdays. 
9.  That portion on the south side of Crescent Boulevard from a point 88 feet west of the west line of Glenwood Avenue to a point 201 feet west of that same line consisting of 16 diagonal parking spaces shall be designated as employee parking only - permit required between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on Mondays through Saturdays. 
10.  The Duane Street and Glenwood Avenue parking lot between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on Mondays through Fridays. 
11.  Civic Center parking lot, between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. Monday through Friday. 
(B)  Holiday parking: Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (A) of this section, any person may stop, stand or park a vehicle on a Village permit only parking lot on the following designated holidays: New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day. 
(C)  Number of permits: The number of parking permits to be sold for use in Village permit only parking lots will be determined by the Village Manager or his designee based upon demand and periodic administrative review. 
(D)  Issuance: Parking permits shall be issued only upon submission of satisfactory proof that the applicant qualifies for the issuance of the permit and upon payment of the required fee. 
(E)  Fees: 
1.  Annual permits are issued for January 1 to December 31. The annual fee for the issuance of a parking permit shall be as follows: 
Rate Effective
July 1, 2018 Rate Effective
July 1, 2020 Glen Ellyn residents  Crescent and Park Lot, Park & Prairie Path Lot, Duane & Forest Lot, Main & Prairie Path Lot (formerly known as Train Station lot sections A, B, C, D) $400.00 $500.00  All other lots $350.00 $400.00  Motorcycle (designated motorcycle parking in Park & Prairie Path Lot and Main & Prairie Path Lot - formerly known as Train Station lot sections B & D) $100.00 $125.00 Nonresidents  Crescent and Park Lot, Park & Prairie Path Lot, Duane & Forest Lot, Main & Prairie Path Lot (formerly known as Train Station lot sections A, B, C, D) $600.00 $750.00  All other lots $525.00 $600.00  Motorcycle (designated motorcycle parking in Park & Prairie Path Lot and Main & Prairie Path Lot - formerly known as Train Station lot sections B & D) $150.00 $187.50 Central Business District Employees and Business Owners  Crescent and Park Lot, Park & Prairie Path Lot, Duane & Forest Lot, Main & Prairie Path Lot (formerly known as Train Station lot sections A, B, C, D) $200.00 $250.00  All other lots $175.00 $200.00  
2.  Proration of annual fees : Permits purchased outside of the annual renewal will be prorated in whole months. Refunds will be made for unused full months. A $5.00 processing fee will be deducted from the refund. 
3.  Beginning July 1, 2022, the schedule of fees shall be subject to a biennial increase based the Consumer Price Index (CPI) as defined under section 1-5 of the Property Tax Extension Limitation Law. This represents the applicable December to December change in the national CPI for all urban consumers for all items as published by the United States Department of Labor. The increase shall be equal to the prior two year cumulative increase and all dollar amounts shall be rounded to the nearest $5.00. 
(F)  Replacement permit: Should a parking permit be lost or otherwise misplaced, a replacement permit will be issued upon the permit holder signing a statement that the previously issued permit is lost or otherwise misplaced and upon the payment of a reissuance fee of $10.00. 
(G)  Issuing priority: Parking permits shall be issued, up to the authorized number of permits per lot, in accordance with the following priorities: 
First: To all present holders of parking permits, resident or nonresident, who renew such permit by making payment prior to the beginning of the quarter or year for which the permit is issued. 
Second: To applicants who are residents (including employers located within the Village limits for use by their employees regardless of the employees' residency) in the order in which their applications were received by the Village, as determined by the Cashier's Office. 
Third: To all others in the order in which their applications were received by the Village, as determined by the Cashier's Office. 
(H)  Refund : Upon surrender of a parking permit prior to its expiration, a refund will be paid no sooner than ten days after surrender of the permit. A refund will be given for unused full months. A $5.00 processing fee will be deducted from the refund. 
(I)  Nontransferability : A permit may be used only by the person to whom it is issued or a member of his family residing in the same household, except a permit issued to an employer within the Village limits may be used only by those employees designated to the Village in writing by the employer. Permits may not be sold, assigned, lent, or otherwise transferred for use by any other person. Any person found to have sold, assigned, lent or otherwise transferred a permit for use by any other person shall be subject to a fine of $150.00. 
(J)  Size limitations: No vehicle shall be parked in a Village permit only parking lot which has a height in excess of eight feet, a length in excess of 19 feet or a width in excess of eight feet. All vehicles must be parked within all of the lines of a marked parking space, as required by section 9-2-3 of this chapter. 
(K)  Residence documentation: A resident parking permit shall not be issued, except to an employer located within the Village limits for the use of his employees, unless the applicant exhibits a current, validly issued Illinois driver's license or other documentary proof acceptable to the Cashier's Office showing residency within the Village limits. Failure to exhibit such proof of residency upon request shall preclude the issuance of a resident permit and cause the applicant to be treated as a nonresident for fee and priority purposes. 
(L)  Vehicle sticker: All users of a resident parking permit must purchase and display a current Glen Ellyn vehicle sticker, as required by this Code. 
(M)  Application information: An applicant for a parking permit shall provide the following information and such other information as may be reasonably requested: 
1.  Name and residence address. 
2.  Driver's license number. 
3.  Registered owner(s) and license plate number(s) of all vehicles to be using the permit. 
4.  For resident permits, the Village vehicle sticker number(s) of all vehicles to be using the permit. 
(N)  Alternate parking lot: In the event all marked parking spaces in a permit only lot are occupied when a parking permit user attempts to park in said lot, then the user of the parking permit may park in the Civic Center lot, east of 535 Duane Street, Glen Ellyn, Illinois, provided that the parking permit user immediately reports in person to the reception desk of the Glen Ellyn Police Department located in the Civic Center that the user was unable to find a place in the assigned lot. 
(O)  Violation: Any person who has been convicted of or paid three violations of this section committed in any three-month period shall be ineligible to receive a parking permit for one year after the last of the three disqualifying violations. 
(P)  Fraudulent parking permits: 
1.  No person shall manufacture, sell or use, cause to be used, display or cause to be displayed a falsified or replicated permit or a device made to resemble a permit issued by the Village for the purpose of parking a vehicle in a permit parking space within the Village of Glen Ellyn. 
2.  Any person found to have violated subsection (P)1. of this section shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than $250.00 nor more than $500.00; and such person shall not be eligible to purchase permit parking privileges in any municipal parking facilities within the Village for a period of one year after conviction. 
(Q)  Late fee : A late fee of $25.00 shall be charged for failure to pay the annual renewal on or before December 31. 
(R)  Relinquishment of permit : If payment for annual renewal is not received by January 15, the opportunity to obtain a renewal permit is forfeited. 
(Ord. 4543, 11-24-1997; Ord. 4677, 1-25-1999; amd. Ord. 4936, 4-23-2001; Ord. 5697, 9-22-2008; Ord. 5807, 10-26-2009; Ord. 5878, 7-12-2010; Ord. 6185, 11-12-2013; Ord. 6567, 1-8-2018; Ord. 6615, 6-25-2018; Ord. 6633, 10-8-2018; Ord. 6634, 10-22-2018; Ord. 6668, 1-28-2019) 
9-2-13. - Blue dot parking permits. 
(A)  Blue Dot Parking Permits allowed : The following municipal streets are hereby designated as "Blue Dot Parking Permits Allowed" in which it shall be lawful for an owner/employee of a business located in the Central Business District to park beyond the permitted time limit while displaying a valid Village of Glen Ellyn Blue Dot Parking Permit between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Monday thru Saturday. 
(1)  Forest Avenue between Duane Street and Hill Avenue. 
(2)  On Hillside Avenue starting at a point 163 feet east of the east line of Main Street to Park Boulevard. 
(3)  Forest Avenue between Anthony Street and Hawthorne Boulevard. 
(4)  Anthony Street between Western Avenue and Park Boulevard. 
(Ord. 6659, 12-10-2018) 
Chapter 3 - PARKING METERS 

9-3-1. - Maximum time limit and parking meter zones. 
There are hereby created, within the Village, maximum parking time limit zones, which shall consist of and include all streets and municipal parking lots, or parts thereof, designated by ordinance and listed in section 9-5-8, schedule H of this title. There are also hereby created, within the Village, parking meter zones, which shall consist of and include all streets and municipal parking lots, or parts thereof, designated by ordinance and listed in section 9-5-14, schedule N of this title. 
(Ord. 2702, 11-9-1981; amd. Ord. 4936, 4-23-2001) 
9-3-2. - Designation of parking spaces. 
The Superintendent of Streets is hereby directed and authorized to mark off individual parking spaces in the parking zones designated above, and in such other zones as may hereafter be established, said parking spaces to be designated by lines painted or indelibly marked on the curbing or surface of the street. 
(1965 Code § 13.02; amd. 1975 Code; Ord. 4936, 4-23-2001) 
9-3-3. - Installation of parking meters. 
(A)  In said parking meter zones, the Superintendent of Streets shall cause parking meters to be installed upon the curb or sidewalk immediately adjacent to the parking space, not more than two feet from the curb nor more than four feet from the front line of the parking space indicated; and the Police Chief shall be responsible for the regulation, control, operation, maintenance and use of such parking meters. 
(B)  Each device shall be so set as to display a signal showing legal parking upon the deposit of the appropriate coin or coins, lawful money of the United States of America, for the period of time prescribed by this Code. 
(C)  Each meter shall be so arranged that upon the expiration of a lawful time limit it will indicate, by a proper, visible signal, that the lawful parking period has expired; and in such cases, the right of such vehicle to occupy such space shall cease, and the operator, owner, possessor or manager thereof shall be subject to the penalties hereinafter provided. 
(1965 Code § 13.03; amd. Ord. 4936, 4-23-2001) 
9-3-4. - Operation of parking meters. 
(A)  Except in a period of emergency determined by officials of the fire or Police Department, or in compliance with the directions of a Police Officer or traffic control sign or signal, when any vehicle shall be parked in any parking space alongside or next to which a parking meter is located, the operator of such vehicle shall, upon entering said parking space, immediately deposit, or cause to be deposited, in said meter such proper coin of the United States as is required for such parking meter, and as is designated by proper directions on the meter; and failure to deposit such proper coin shall constitute a violation of this Code. 
(B)  Upon the deposit of such coin, the parking space may be lawfully occupied by such vehicle during the period of time which has been prescribed for the part of the street on which said parking space is located; provided, that the person placing a vehicle in a parking meter space adjacent to a meter which indicates that unused time has been left in the meter by the previous occupant of the space shall not be required to deposit a coin so long as his occupancy of said space does not exceed the indicated unused parking time. 
(C)  If said vehicle shall remain parked in any parking space beyond the parking time limit set for such space, and if the meter shall indicate such illegal parking, then, and in that event, such vehicle shall be considered as parking overtime and beyond the period of legal parking time, and such parking shall be deemed a violation of this Code. 
(1965 Code § 13.04; amd. Ord. 4936, 4-23-2001) 
9-3-5. - Parking rates and times. 
(A)  The following parking zones are hereby established with each zone having a specified rate of charge for the parking, standing or stopping of a motor vehicle, a maximum parking time which may be prepaid at one time (maximum prepaid time) and a maximum parking time during which a single vehicle may be parked or stopped at a parking space before it must be removed from that parking space: 
Zone A: 
Rate of charge: $0.05 per hour or less. 
Maximum prepaid time: Up to three hours. 
Maximum parking time: Up to three hours. 
Zone B: 
Rate of charge: $0.25 per each three hours or less. 
Maximum prepaid time: Six hours. 
Maximum parking time: None, provided rate of charge is prepaid. 
Zone C: 
Rate of charge: $0.25 per each three hours or less. 
Maximum prepaid time: 12 hours. 
Maximum parking time: None, provided rate of charge is prepaid. 
Zone D: 
Rate of charge: $2.00 per calendar day or less, effective January 1, 2015. 
Maximum prepaid time: One calendar day. 
Maximum parking time: None, provided rate of charge is prepaid. 
(B)  The location of each parking meter zone is set forth in section 9-5-14, "Schedule N; Parking Rate Zone Locations", of this title. 
(C)  The rate of charge shall be prepaid by depositing legal tender in the parking meter or other rate collecting device provided for the marked parking space in which a vehicle is parked, stopped or standing. 
(D)  The parking rates shall be payable in designated parking meter zones each Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday and Saturday from 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., with the following exceptions: 
1.  The parking rates shall be payable in the Main Street parking facility each Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday and Saturday from 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. 
2.  The parking rates shall be payable in the Duane and Lorraine parking facility each Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday and Friday from 5:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. 
3.  No parking rates will be charged in any designated parking meter zone or facility on the following holidays: 
New Year's Day (January 1), 
Memorial Day, 
Independence Day (July 4), 
Labor Day (first Monday in September), 
Thanksgiving Day (as designated by the President of the United States), 
and Christmas Day (December 25). 
(Ord. 3395, 11-23-1987, eff. 1-1-1988; Ord. 3961, 10-26-1992; Ord. 4087, 12-20-1993; Ord. 4359, 3-25-1996; amd. Ord. 4936, 4-23-2001; Ord. 5101, 10-28-2002; Ord. 6278, 12-8-2014) 
9-3-6. - Illegal acts. 
It shall be unlawful for any person: 
(A)  To cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in the name of or operated by such person to be parked beyond the period of legal parking time established for any maximum parking time zone, as herein described, and as listed in section 9-5-8, schedule H of this title. Whenever a vehicle remains in a particular maximum parking time zone beyond the period of time designated for that time zone, each such period of time shall constitute a separate and distinct violation. 
(B)  To cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in the name of or operated by such person to be parked in a parking space beyond the period of maximum parking time established for the parking rate zone in which the space is located, as herein prescribed in section 9-3-5 of this chapter. Whenever a vehicle remains parked in a space in a particular parking rate zone beyond the maximum parking time designated for that zone, each such period of maximum parking time shall constitute a separate and distinct violation. 
(C)  To cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in the name of or operated by such person to remain or be placed in any parking space in a parking rate zone or space for which a fee or rate is charged by means of meter or otherwise, while said meter or other rate collecting device indicates that the vehicle occupying such parking space has already parked beyond the period prescribed for such parking space or indicates that the rate for parking in such space has not been prepaid by being deposited in the parking meter or other rate collecting device. 
(D)  To cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle to be placed across any line or lines of a parking meter space or maximum time limit parking space, or in such position that the vehicle shall not be entirely within the area designated by such lines or markings for the parking meter space or maximum time limit parking space. 
(E)  To deface, injure, tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter or other rate collecting device. 
(F)  To deposit, or cause to be deposited, in any parking meter any slug, device or metal substance or other substitute for lawful coins. 
(Ord. 2702, 11-9-1981; Ord. 3395, 11-23-1987, eff. 1-1-1988; amd. Ord. 4936, 4-23-2001) 
9-3-7. - Enforcement. 
It shall be the duty of the Police Department to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(1965 Code § 13.07; amd. Ord. 4936, 4-23-2001) 
9-3-8. - Use of funds. 
The coins deposited in parking meters are required and shall be used to defray the expense of proper regulation of traffic upon the public streets of the Village; to provide for the cost of supervision, regulation and control of the parking of vehicles in parking meter zones; to cover the cost of purchase, supervision, protection, inspection, installation, operation, maintenance, control and use of parking meters; and for the acquisition, improvement and maintenance of all street parking areas. 
(1965 Code § 13.08; amd. Ord. 4936, 4-23-2001) 
9-3-9. - Ticketing violations. 
Whenever any vehicle is parked in violation of the provisions of this chapter, and there is no person in attendance upon such parked vehicle to be arrested or served immediately with notice to appear before the proper authority to answer the charge of such violation, any Police Officer observing such violation may attach to the vehicle used in such violation a notification or ticket directing the person in whose name such vehicle is registered to appear before the proper authorities within the time named in such notice and answer the charge of such violation. 
It shall be unlawful for any person other than the driver of the vehicle to which the notice is attached to remove the same from the vehicle. 
(1965 Code § 13.09; amd. Ord. 4936, 4-23-2001) 
9-3-10. - Meters or other rate collecting devices in municipal parking lots. 
Where a parking meter zone has been designated in a municipal parking lot, notwithstanding the provisions of sections 9-3-3 and 9-3-4 of this chapter, the Superintendent of Streets is hereby authorized to install rate collecting devices other than parking meters, so long as said other devices shall be so designed and constructed to indicate the deposit of the appropriate coin or coins, lawful money of the United States of America, for the period of time prescribed by this Code, for the designated parking meter space. The operator of a vehicle parking in parking meter spaces designated in municipal parking lots shall be subject to all of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2702, 11-9-1981; amd. Ord. 4936, 4-23-2001) 
9-3-11. - Penalty. 
(A)  Any person violating subsection 9-3-6(B) or (C) of this chapter by causing, allowing, permitting or suffering any vehicle to be illegally parked in a parking space located within an area designated as parking rate zone A shall be fined no more than nor less than $15.00. 
(B)  Any person violating subsection 9-3-6(B) or (C) of this chapter by causing, allowing, permitting or suffering any vehicle to be illegally parked in a parking space in any parking rate zone other than zone A shall be fined no more than nor less than $15.00; provided, however, that should a vehicle remain parked in a parking space in violation of subsection 9-3-6 (B) or (C) of this chapter for two hours or more after the issuance of a ticket or notification of violation, a subsequent ticket or notice of violation may be issued in which case the violation shall be considered a Class A violation as set forth in section 9-2-7 and the violator shall be fined no less than $25.00. 
(C)  Any person who violates subsection 9-3-6(D) of this chapter or section 9-2-7 of this title shall be fined not less than nor more than $25.00. 
(D)  Any person who violates subsection 9-3-6(B) of this chapter (meter feeding) shall be fined no less than $15.00 and it shall be considered a Class B violation as set forth in section 9-2-7. 
(E)  Any person violating any other section or provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than $5.00 nor more than $500.00 for each offense. 
(Ord. 3395, 11-23-1987, eff. 1-1-1988; amd. Ord. 4936, 4-23-2001; Ord. 5856A, 4-26-2010; Ord. 6593, 4-9-2018) 
Chapter 4 - MOTOR VEHICLE LICENSES 

9-4-1. - Definition. 
"Motor vehicle" means every vehicle which is self-propelled except for vehicles moved solely by human power and motorized wheelchairs, including, but not limited to, automobiles, motorcycles, motor driven cycles, school buses, trailers, trucks and truck tractors. 
Motor vehicles which are designed and used for carrying not more than ten persons shall be classified as motor vehicles of the first division. Those motor vehicles which are designed and used for pulling or carrying freight, transporting property, or which are used for the carrying of more than ten persons, shall be classified as motor vehicles of the second division. 
(Ord. 3929, 7-13-1992; amd. Ord. 4458, 1-13-1997; Ord. 4936, 4-23-2001) 
9-4-2. - License required. 
All motor vehicles registered in the Village must display a current, valid Village license. This requirement does not apply to vehicles registered to the Village of Glen Ellyn, Glen Ellyn Park District, School District 87, School District 89, School District 41, the Glen Ellyn Public Library, the College of DuPage, and the Glen Ellyn Volunteer Fire Company. 
No person shall use, or cause or permit any of his agents or employees to use, any motor vehicle upon the public streets or highways in the Village unless such vehicle is licensed. Leased or rented vehicles shall be licensed in the name of the owner if such vehicle is in custody of the resident of the Village assigned to him as primary user, unless said vehicle has a current license from another municipal corporation. 
It shall constitute prima facie evidence that a motor vehicle is operated upon the public streets or highways within the Village when the motor vehicle is registered to a named person at an address within the Village limits. 
(Ord. 3929, 7-13-1992; amd. Ord. 4936, 4-23-2001; Ord. 6660, 1-14-2019) 
9-4-3. - Application. 
Every owner of a motor vehicle shall make application to the Cashier's Office upon forms which set forth the name and address and phone number of the applicant and a description of the motor vehicle for which the license is desired. Upon payment by the applicant of the license fee, the Cashier's Office shall issue a license authorizing the use of such motor vehicle within the Village until the expiration of such license. 
(Ord. 3929, 7-13-1992; amd. Ord. 4570, 2-23-1998; Ord. 4936, 4-23-2001) 
9-4-4. - License fees and regulations. 
(A)  License fees: For licenses containing an expiration date of April 30, 2005, and thereafter, the following fees shall apply: 
1.  For Vehicles Of The First Division: 
(a)  Motor vehicles designed to carry not more than 10 persons (passenger cars and recreational vehicles) ..... $25.00 
(b)  Vehicles designed to travel on not more than 3 wheels in contact with the ground (e.g., motorcycles and mopeds) ..... 12.50 
(c)  Senior citizens (1 per family) 
Division 1 vehicle, senior rate ..... 8.00 
Division 2 vehicle, senior rate ..... 20.00 
2.  For Vehicles Of The Second Division: 
(a)  8,000 pounds or less (B plates) ..... 37.00 
(b)  More than 8,000 pounds, less than 12,000 pounds (D plates) ..... 48.00 
(c)  12,000 pounds or more (F or higher plates) ..... 68.00 
3.  Transfers: For transferring a vehicle license from one vehicle to another (purchased or acquired during the license year) or upon representation to the Cashier's Office that the original license has been destroyed, the sum of $5.00. 
(B)  Senior citizen license: To be eligible for the reduced senior rate, senior citizens must: 1) display a current driver's license and registration card issued by the Illinois secretary of state showing that the vehicle is registered to them, and 2) be 65 years of age before May 1 of the year for which the license is being purchased. A husband and wife residing together are defined as an "individual" entitled to one senior citizen Village vehicle license. No individual over 65 years of age shall purchase a senior citizen Village vehicle license at the reduced rate for the benefit of any other person. 
(C)  Multiple year license for active duty military personnel: Effective for the license year beginning May 1, 2013, one multiple year license will be provided to active duty members of the military, at no cost, upon providing sufficient proof to the Cashier's Office that the owner of the vehicle that is registered in the Village is an active duty member of the military. Proof may include active military issued identification, deployment papers, or other documentation. This provision cannot be provided retroactively. 
(D)  License year: Stickers are required to be purchased and displayed by 12:00 midnight of April 30 and shall be in effect from May 1 of the current year through April 30 of the following year. 
(E)  Purchase deadline: Each owner of a motor vehicle required under the provisions of this chapter to display a vehicle license sticker shall purchase and display a license emblem by 12:00 midnight of April 30, of each year for each motor vehicle owned on May 1 of that year. 
(F)  Multiple year licenses: 
1.  The Village may also offer a motor vehicle license which has a term of three years from an effective date of May 1. The license fees for a three year license shall be three times the fees itemized in subsections (A)1., "For Vehicles Of The First Division", and (A)2., "For Vehicles Of The Second Division", of this section, less a discount of $5.00. 
2.  A partial refund for a multiple year license may be issued, for full, unused years only, if the holder of the license will be moving away from the Village of Glen Ellyn and the license is returned to the Village or satisfactory proof of the move is provided. A $5.00 processing fee will be deducted from the refund. 
(G)  Vehicle acquired during license year: For each motor vehicle purchased or acquired during a license year, but not owned on May 1 of that license year, the owner may transfer a previously issued license or purchase a new vehicle license and shall display the same on the purchased or acquired vehicle within 30 days of such purchase or acquisition. 
(H)  New residents to the Village: Within 30 days after moving to the Village, a new resident of the Village must obtain a current, valid Village license. If the new resident has a current, valid license from another corporate entity, the resident shall pay a $5.00 transfer fee and will receive a current, valid Village license. This Village license shall remain valid until the out of town license expires or until April 30, whichever comes first. 
(I)  Additional late payment fee : Each owner of a motor vehicle who is required by this chapter to purchase a motor vehicle license and who fails to pay the prescribed fee on or before May 31 shall be required to pay, in addition to the required fee, a late fee of $30.00. If late fees accumulate, the Village shall be authorized to collect unpaid accumulated late fees, as well as the unpaid license fee(s), for all years which fees remain unpaid prior to selling a motor vehicle license for the current year. The late fee is in addition to the penalties prescribed in section 9-4-7 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 3929, 7-13-1992; amd. Ord. 4458, 1-13-1997; Ord. 4570, 2-23-1998; Ord. 4936, 4-23-2001; Ord. 5244, 2-23-2004; Ord. 5343, 3-14-2005; Ord. 6113, 2-11-2013; Ord. 6576, 2-12-2018) 
9-4-5. - Use of funds. 
Revenue derived from motor vehicle license fees shall be used for the purpose of improving, paving, repairing and maintaining the streets and other public roadways within the Village. 
(Ord. 3929, 7-13-1992; amd. Ord. 4936, 4-23-2001) 
9-4-6. - Display of license. 
Upon payment of the required fee, the Cashier's Office shall deliver to the applicant for a motor vehicle license a license bearing the words "Village Of Glen Ellyn Vehicle Tax" with numerals designating the year for which the license is issued and the number of such license. Prior to 12:00 midnight on April 30 of each year, the applicant shall affix the same to the lower right hand corner of the motor vehicle's front windshield or license plate of a motor driven cycle. 
(Ord. 3929, 7-13-1992; amd. Ord. 4570, 2-23-1998; Ord. 4936, 4-23-2001) 
9-4-7. - Penalty. 
Any person owning or any person operating a motor vehicle in violation of any sections of this chapter shall be fined not less than $50.00 nor more than $200.00 for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed for each day the offense or violation exists or is committed. 
(Ord. 4570, 2-23-1998; amd. Ord. 4936, 4-23-2001) 
Chapter 5 - SCHEDULES 

9-5-1. - Schedule A; traffic control intersections. 
DuPage Boulevard (northernmost section) and Illinois Route 53. 
Elm Street and Main Street - for pedestrian crossing purposes. 
Finely Road and Roosevelt Road. 
Geneva Road and Limits Avenue - for pedestrian crossing purposes. 
Geneva Road and St. Charles Road. 
Geneva Road and Western Avenue. 
Lambert Road and Roosevelt Road. 
Lambert Road and 22nd Street. 
Main Street and Roosevelt Road. 
Main Street and St. Charles Road. 
Nicoll Way and Roosevelt Road. 
Park Boulevard and Roosevelt Road. 
Park Boulevard and Sheehan Avenue and Winchell Way. 
Park Boulevard and 22nd Street. 
Pershing Avenue and Illinois Route 53. 
Riford Road and St. Charles Road. 
(Ord. 2911, 8-22-1983; amd. Ord. 4936, 4-23-2001) 
9-5-2. - Schedule B; through streets. 
Name of Street Direction Bryant Avenue From Walnut Street to State Route 53. Crescent Boulevard From the east line of Park Boulevard to the east corporate limits. Hawthorne Street Between the west corporate limits and Lenox Road. Hill Avenue Between the corporate limits. Main Street Between the north line of Roosevelt Road and the north corporate limits. Park Boulevard Between the south line of Pennsylvania Avenue and the south corporate limits. Riford Road Between the north line of Crescent Boulevard and the south line of St. Charles Road. Roosevelt Road Between the corporate limits. Western Avenue From Pennsylvania Avenue to Geneva Road.  
(1965 Code ch. 21; amd. Ord. 1543, 9-11-1967; Ord. 1609, 9-9-1968; Ord. 1629, 1-13-1969; Ord. 4936, 4-23-2001) 
9-5-3. - Schedule C; stop intersections. 
Intersections Direction from which Traffic Stops Anthony Street and Forest Avenue East and west Anthony Street and Kenilworth Avenue East and west Anthony Street and Main Street West Anthony Street and Park Boulevard West Anthony Street and Western Avenue East and west Arbor Court and Main Street West Brandon Avenue and Greenfield Avenue South Brandon Avenue and Hill Avenue North Bryant Avenue and Duane Street East and west Bryant Avenue and Fairview West Bryant Avenue and Highview North, south, east and west Bryant Avenue and Hill Avenue North, south, east and west Bryant Avenue and Hillside Avenue East and west Bryant Avenue and Revere Road East and west Bryant Avenue and Walnut Road South, east and west Bryant Avenue and Wingate Road West Carleton Avenue and Duane Street North and south Carleton Avenue and DuPage Boulevard North Carleton Avenue and Fairview Avenue South Carleton Avenue and Hill Avenue North Chidester Avenue and Riford Road East and west Coolidge Avenue and Park Boulevard West Cottage Avenue and Main Street East Cottage Avenue and Western Avenue East and west Cranston Court and Fairview Avenue North Crescent Boulevard and Colcord Place North Crescent Boulevard and Crescent Court South Crescent Boulevard and Crescent Drive North Crescent Boulevard and Ellyn Avenue North Crescent Boulevard and Hickory Road South Crescent Boulevard and Lake Road North Crescent Boulevard and Lee Street South Crescent Boulevard and Main Street North and west Crescent Boulevard and Park Boulevard North, east and west Crescent Boulevard and Park Row South Crescent Boulevard and Plumtree Road North Crescent Boulevard and Riford Road North and south Crescent Boulevard and Roger Road South Dawes Avenue and Park Boulevard West Dorset Court and Main Street East and west Duane Street and Glenwood Avenue South Duane Street and Main Street South, east and west Duane Street and Montclair North and south Duane Street and Park Boulevard North, south, east and west Duane Street and Prospect South, east and west Duane Street and Taylor Avenue North, south, east and west DuPage Boulevard and Lowell Avenue North DuPage Boulevard and Park Boulevard East Elm Street and Forest Avenue South Elm Street and Kenilworth Avenue East Elm Street and Main Street East and west Elm Street and Riford Road East and west Elm Street and Western Avenue East and west Euclid Avenue and Geneva Road South Euclid Avenue and Hawthorne Street North Exmoor Road and Highview Avenue South Fairview Avenue and Kenilworth Avenue East and west Fairview Avenue and Lambert Road East and west Fairview Avenue and Main Street North, south, east and west Fairview Avenue and Newton Avenue West Fairview Avenue and Ott Avenue East and west Fairview Avenue and Park/Summerdale North, south, east, west and southwest Fairview Avenue and Sunset Avenue North, south, east and west Forest Avenue and Hawthorne Street North and south Forest Avenue and Hill Avenue North and south Forest Avenue and Hillside Avenue East Forest Avenue and Oak Street North and south Forest Avenue and Pennsylvania Avenue South and east Forest Avenue and Phillips Avenue East and west Forest Avenue and Turner East and west Geneva Road and Highland Avenue South Geneva Road and Kenilworth Avenue South Geneva Road and Pleasant Avenue South Geneva Road and Prairie Avenue South Glen Oak Avenue and Hill Avenue East Glen Oak Avenue and Spring Road West Glenwood Avenue and Hill Avenue North and south Glenwood Avenue and Hillside Avenue North and south Glenwood Avenue and Phillips Avenue East and west Glenwood Avenue and Ridgewood East and west Glenwood Avenue and Turner North and south Grand Avenue and Oak Street South Grand Avenue and Riford Road South Grandview Avenue and Hill Avenue South Greenbriar and Raintree Drive North, south, east and west Greenfield Avenue and Kenilworth Avenue North and south Greenfield Avenue and Lambert Road South Greenfield Avenue and Lorraine Road East Greenfield Avenue and Main Street West Greenfield Avenue and Newton North, south, east and west Greenfield Avenue and Regent Street North Greenfield Avenue and Sunset Avenue North, south, east and west Harding Avenue and Park Boulevard East and west Hawthorne Street and Kenilworth Avenue North, south, east and west Hawthorne Street and Lenox Road North Hawthorne Street and Main Street North, south, east and west Hawthorne Street and Newton Avenue North, south, east and west Hawthorne Street and Park Boulevard North and south Hawthorne Street and Pleasant Avenue North and south Hawthorne Street and Prairie Avenue North and south Hawthorne Street and Western Avenue North, south, east and west High Road and Main Street East High Road and Park Boulevard West Highland Avenue and Oak Street North and south Highview Avenue and May Avenue North and south Highview Avenue and Merton Avenue North and south Highview Avenue and Montclair Avenue North and south Highview Avenue and Park Boulevard East Highview Avenue and Taylor Avenue North and south Highview Avenue and Van Damin North and south Hill Avenue and Kenilworth Avenue North and south Hill Avenue and Lorraine Road North, south, east and west Hill Avenue and Main Street North, south, east and west Hill Avenue and May Avenue South Hill Avenue and Miller Court North Hill Avenue and Montclair Avenue North and south Hill Avenue and Newton Avenue South Hill Avenue and Park Boulevard North, south, east and west Hill Avenue and Prospect Avenue North, south, east and west Hill Avenue and Spring Avenue South and east Hill Avenue and Taylor Avenue North and south Hill Avenue and Traver Avenue South Hill Avenue and Whittier Avenue West Hillside Avenue and Lorraine Road North, south, east and west Hillside Avenue and Main Street North, south, east and west Hillside Avenue and Montclair Avenue North and south Hillside Avenue and Park Boulevard East Hillside Avenue and Phillips Avenue South Hillside Avenue and Prospect Avenue North, south, east and west Hillside Avenue and Whittier Avenue North and west Illinois and Kenilworth Avenue North and south Illinois and Lambert Road North, south, east and west Illinois and Newton Avenue North and south Illinois and Ott Avenue North and south Joyce Court and Main Street West Kenilworth Avenue and Hawkinson Court North Kenilworth Avenue and Linden Avenue East Kenilworth Avenue and Lorraine Road South Kenilworth Avenue and Pennsylvania Avenue North Lake Road, 220 feet north of the north line of Crescent Boulevard South Lake Road and Oak Street South Lakeview Terrace and Park Boulevard West Lambert Road and Taft Avenue East and west Lenox Road and Linden Avenue West Lenox Road and Oak Street South Lenox Road and St. Charles Road South Linden Avenue and Main Street East and west Linden Avenue and Western Avenue East and west Lowden Avenue and Park Boulevard West Maiden Lane and Park Boulevard West Main Street and Maple Street East and west Main Street and Oak Street East and west Main Street and Parkside Avenue South and east Main Street and Pennsylvania Avenue North, east and west Main Street and Pershing Avenue South Main Street and Phillips East and west Main Street and Revere Road East Main Street and Ridgewood Avenue West Main Street and Taft Avenue West Main Street and Turner Avenue East and west Maple Street and Western Avenue East and west Marion Avenue and Western Avenue West Marston Avenue and Park Boulevard East May Avenue and Revere Road North, south, east and west May Avenue and Spring Road West Meredith Place and Riford Road West Muirwood Drive and Park Boulevard East Newton Avenue and Pennsylvania Avenue North Nicoll Way and Pershing Avenue South Nicoll Way and Taft Avenue West Oak Street and Park Boulevard North, south, east and west Oak Street and Riford Road West Oak Street and Western Avenue East and west Oxford and Spring Avenue East Park Boulevard and Park Plaza West Park Boulevard and Pennsylvania Avenue North and west Park Boulevard and Pershing Avenue West Park Boulevard and Raintree Drive West Park Boulevard and Revere Road East and west Park Boulevard and Taft Avenue East Park Boulevard and Turner Avenue West Park Boulevard and Williamsburg Road West Park Boulevard and Wilson Avenue East and west Park Boulevard and Wingate Road South and east Parkside Avenue and Summerdale Avenue Northeast, northwest and south Pennsylvania Avenue and Prospect Avenue East and west Pennsylvania Avenue and the public alley lying between Main Street and Glenwood Avenue South Pennsylvania Avenue and Western Avenue North, east and west Phillips Avenue and Prospect Avenue East and west Pleasant Avenue and Oak Street North and south Prospect Avenue and Ridgewood Avenue East and west South Ellyn Avenue and Sheehan Avenue North and south South Milton Avenue and Sheehan Avenue North, south, east and west Sunset Avenue and Turner Avenue South Surrey Drive and Briar Street South, east and west 22nd Street and Lorraine Road East 22nd Street and Ramblewood Drive North  
(Ord. 2910, 8-22-1983; amd. Ord. 3069, 1-14-1985; Ord. 3164, 12-9-1985; Ord. 3237, 8-11-1986; Ord. 3268, 11-24-1986; Ord. 3678, 9-11-1989; Ord. 4087, 12-20-1993; Ord. 4840, 5-22-2000; Ord. 4885, 11-13-2000; Ord. 4936, 4-23-2001; Ord. 5285, 8-23-2004; Ord. 5763, 6-8-2009; Ord. 5915, 1-24-2011) 
9-5-4. - Schedule D; one-way streets. 
Name of Street Direction of Traffic Movement Anthony Street Eastbound from Main Street to Park Boulevard. Eastbound from Pleasant Avenue to Main Street between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m. on Sunday. Bryant Avenue Southbound from the south line of Hill Avenue, to the north line of Turner Avenue; on school days, between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 9:00 a.m., 11:30 a.m. and 1:00 p.m., and 3:30 p.m. and 4:00 p.m. Cottage Avenue Westbound from Main Street to Pleasant Avenue. Crescent Boulevard Eastbound from Main Street to Forest Avenue. Ellyn Avenue Southbound from north line of Crescent Boulevard to a point 280 feet north between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. on school days. Elm Street Eastbound from the east line of Highland Avenue to the west line of Main Street; on school days, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:15 a.m., 10:45 a.m. and 1:00 p.m., and 2:00 p.m. and 4:00 p.m. Forest Avenue Northbound from Crescent Boulevard to Hawthorne Street. Southbound from Stewart Avenue to Hill Avenue. Glenwood Avenue Northbound from Hill Avenue to Duane Street between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on Sunday. Greenfield Avenue Westbound from the west line of Brandon Avenue to the east line of Newton between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 9:15 a.m., 11:30 a.m. and 1:15 p.m., and 3:00 p.m. and 4:00 p.m. on school days. Hillside Avenue Westbound from Park Boulevard to Prospect Avenue. Main Street Southbound from Pennsylvania Avenue to Crescent Boulevard. Newton Avenue Northbound from Greenfield Avenue to Turner Avenue between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on school days. Pennsylvania Avenue Westbound from Forest Avenue to Main Street. Phillips Avenue Eastbound from the west line of Main Street to the east line of Forest Avenue between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m. on Sunday. Pleasant Avenue Southbound from Cottage Avenue to Anthony Street. Stewart Avenue Eastbound from Main Street to Forest Avenue. Westbound from Park Boulevard to Forest Avenue. The public alley lying between Main Street and Glenwood Avenue and extending from Crescent Boulevard to Pennsylvania Avenue Northbound The public alley lying between Park Plaza and Roosevelt Road and extending from Park Boulevard to Parkside Avenue Westbound Turner Avenue Eastbound from Bryant Avenue to May Avenue.  
(1965 Code ch. 21; amd. Ord. 1581, 2-26-1968; Ord. 1612, 10-28-1968; Ord. 2085, 5-24-1976; Ord. 2173, 2-28-1977; Ord. 2403, 10-23-1978; Ord. 2858, 2-14-1983; Ord. 4936, 4-23-2001; Ord. 6115, 3-11-2013; Ord. 6256, 8-25-2014) 
9-5-5. - Schedule E; angle parking. 
Name of Street District Bryant Avenue, west side From a point 119 feet north of the north line of Turner Avenue extended to a point 264 feet north of the same line. Crescent Boulevard, north 
side From a point 60 feet east of the east line of Main Street to a point 100 feet west of the west line of Park Boulevard. Crescent Boulevard, north side From a point 125 feet west of Glenwood Avenue to the east line of Prospect Avenue, except those spaces otherwise designated. Crescent Boulevard, south 
side From a point 115 feet east of Prospect Avenue to a point 252 feet west of Main Street. Elm Street, south side Commencing at a point 406 feet west of the west line of Main Street and extending west 200 feet. Forest Avenue, both sides From the north line of Crescent Boulevard, to the south line of Pennsylvania Avenue, except for 1 space on the west side of Forest Avenue. Glenwood Avenue, east 
side From the south line of Pennsylvania Avenue to the north line of Crescent Boulevard. Greenfield Avenue, north 
side From the east line of Newton Avenue to the east line of Brandon Avenue extended. Hillside Avenue, north side From the east line of Main Street to a point 150 feet east of the east line of Main Street. From the east line of Prospect Avenue to the west line of Glenwood Avenue. Main Street, east side From the south line of Pennsylvania Avenue to the north line of Crescent Boulevard. Pennsylvania Avenue, north 
side From a point 100 feet east of the east line of Main Street to a point 190 feet east of the east line of Main Street. Pennsylvania Avenue, 
south side From the west line of Forest Avenue to the east line of Main Street, except in front of the drive-in mail drop.  
(1965 Code ch. 21; amd. Ord. 1823, 8-13-1973; Ord. 2111, 8-23-1976; Ord. 3009, 6-11-1984; Ord. 3034, 8-27-1984; Ord. 3932, 8-10-1992; Ord. 4936, 4-23-2001; Ord. 6355, 10-12-2015) 
9-5-6. - Schedule F; parking prohibited at all times. 
Name of Street District Annandale Avenue, west side Anthony Street, north side From the east line of Pleasant Avenue to the west line of Park Boulevard. From the east line of Western Avenue to the west line of Main Street. From the west line of Kenilworth Avenue to a point 278 feet west of that same line on Anthony Street. Anthony Street, south side From a point 25 feet west of the driveway for 519 North Main Street to the west edge of the driveway. From a point 115 feet east of the east line of Forest Avenue to a point 114 feet west of the west line of Park Boulevard. 25 feet each side of centerline at Pleasant. Brandon Avenue, west side From the north line of Hill Avenue to the south line of Ridgewood Avenue. Briar Street, east side From the north line of Roosevelt Road to the south line of Brighton Place. Briar Street, east side From the north line of Roosevelt Road to the south line of Surrey Drive. Brighton Place, north side From the east line of Briar Street to the west line of Surrey Drive. Bryant Avenue (arterial street no. 12), 
both sides From the north line of Revere Road to the intersection of Bryant Avenue with State Route 53. Bryant Avenue, east side From the south line of Hill Avenue to the north line of Turner Avenue. Carleton Avenue, both sides From the south line of Fairview Avenue to the north line of Roosevelt Road. Chidester Avenue, north side From the barricade at the west line of Eastern Avenue to a point 15 feet west thereof. Chidester Avenue, south side From the barricade at the west line of Eastern Avenue to a point 100 feet west thereof. Cottage Avenue, south side From Western to Forest. Cranston Court (east/west portion), 
north side From the west line of the north/south portion of Cranston Court to a point 297 feet east of the same line. Cranston Court (north/south portion), 
west side From the north line of Fairview Avenue to a point 389 feet north of the same line. Crescent Boulevard, both sides From the east line of Park Boulevard to the east line of Ellyn Avenue. Crescent Boulevard, north side From a point 27 feet west of the west line of Ellyn Avenue to a point 122 feet east of the east line of Ellyn Avenue. From a point 137 feet west of the west line of Park Boulevard to a point 254 feet east of the east line of Park Boulevard. From a point 265 feet west of the west line of Lake Road to a point 117 feet east of the east line of Roger Road. From the west line of Forest Avenue to a point 51 feet west of the same line. From the west line of Main Street to a point 252 feet west of Main Street except for 1 designated parking space 97 feet west of Main Street. Crescent Boulevard, south side From a point 9 feet west of the west line of Forest Avenue to a point 112 feet east of the east line of Forest Avenue. From the east line of Park Boulevard to a point 39 feet east of the east line of Ellyn Avenue. From the east line of Park Row to a point 117 feet east of the east line of Roger Road. From the west line of Park Row to a point 103 feet west of that same line. Dorset Court (east/west portion), north side From the west line of Main Street to a point 225 feet west of the same line. Dorset Court (north/south portion), east side From the north line of the east/west portion of Dorset Court to a point 188 feet north of the same line. Duane Street, both sides From the east line of Forest Avenue to the west line of Park Boulevard. From the west line of Prospect Avenue to the east line of Melrose Avenue. Duane Street, north side From the east line of Park Boulevard to a point 80 feet east of that same line. From the west edge of the drive at 364 Duane Street to a point 50 feet east of the west edge. From the west line of Lorraine Road to a point 82 feet west of the west line of Lorraine Road (measured in a straight line). Duane Street, south side From the east line of Glenwood Avenue to a point 190 feet west of Main Street. From the east line of Park Boulevard to a point 155 feet east of that same line. From the east line of Prospect Avenue to the west line of Glenwood Avenue. From the west line of Lorraine Road to the east edge of the drive at 367 Duane Street (212 feet measured in a straight line). DuPage Boulevard, both sides From the west line of Bryant Avenue (State Route 53) to the west line of Carleton Avenue. From the east line of Bryant Avenue (State Route 53) to the west line of Lowell Avenue. From the west line of Nicoll Avenue to the west line of Carleton Avenue. Ellyn Avenue, both sides From the north line of Crescent Boulevard to the south line of Hawthorne Street. Elm Street, north side From a point 266 feet east of the west line of Main Street to the east line of Highland Avenue. Elm Street, south side From the east line of Main Street to the west line of Forest Avenue. From the west line of Main Street to a point 406 feet west of the west line of Main Street. Exmoor Avenue, both sides From the south line of Fairview Avenue to the north line of DuPage Boulevard. Fairview Avenue, both sides From the east line of Exmoor Avenue to the west line of Bryant Avenue. From the east line of Park Boulevard to the west line of Exmoor Avenue. Fairview Avenue, north side From the east line of Main Street to the west line of Crest Road. Fairview Avenue, south side From a point 55 feet east of the east line of Cranston Court extended, to a point 273 feet east of the same extended line. From the east line of Main Street to a point 75 feet east of the same line. Forest Avenue, east side From the Chicago, Aurora and Elgin right-of-way to Duane Street. From the north line of Crescent Boulevard to a point 25 feet north of the same line. From the south line of Duane Street to the north line of Hill Avenue. From the south line of Duane Street to the north line of Hillside Avenue. Forest Avenue, west side From the north line of Crescent Boulevard to a point 51 feet north of the same line. From the north line of Hawthorne Street to the south line of Linden Avenue. From the north line of Linden Street to the south line of Elm Street. From the north line of Pennsylvania Avenue to the south line of Hawthorne Street. Glen Ellyn Place, south side From the east line of Park Boulevard to end. Glenwood Avenue, east side From the north line of Hillside Avenue to the south line of Duane Street. From the south line of Duane Street to the north line of Hillside Avenue. From the south line of Hill Avenue to the north line of Turner Avenue. Glenwood Avenue, west side From the south line of Duane Street to the north line of Hill Avenue. Greenbriar Place The connecting emergency access apartments driveway between Raintree Drive and the westernmost parking lot of the Greenbriar Place Apartments, 470 22nd Street. Greenfield Avenue, both sides From the west line of Main Street to a point 120 feet west of the same line. Hawthorne Street From Ellyn to East Side Jr. High. Hawthorne Street, both sides From the west line of Kenilworth Avenue to the west corporate limits. Hawthorne Street, north side From the east line of Park Boulevard to the west line of Lenox Road. From the west line of Main Street to the east line of Euclid Avenue. Heather Lane, south side From the east line of Briar Street to the west line of Surrey Drive. Highland Avenue, east side From the south line of Elm Street to a point 30 feet south of the same line. Highland Avenue, west side From the south line of Elm Street to the north line of Oak Street. Hill Avenue From east Village limits to west Village limits. Hill Avenue, both sides From a point 25 feet east of Lorraine Street to the east line of Lorraine Street. Hillcrest Avenue, both sides From the north line of Roosevelt Road to a point 158 feet north of that same line. Hillcrest Avenue, east side 15 feet from the south line of Greenfield Avenue. Hillcrest Avenue, west side From the south line of Greenfield Avenue to end of cul-de-sac. Hillside Avenue, north side From a point 120 feet east of the east line of Prospect Avenue to a point 175 feet east of the east line of Prospect Avenue. From the east line of Glenwood to a point 37 feet east of the same line. From the east line of Glenwood to the west line of Main Street. Hillside Avenue, south side From a point 88 feet east of the east line of Glenwood Avenue to the east line of Prospect Avenue. From a point 136 feet east of Park Boulevard to the east Prospect Avenue. From a point 136 feet east of the west line of Park Boulevard to the west line of Main Street. From Lorraine to Park. From the west line of Glenwood Avenue to the east line of Melrose Avenue. Illinois Route 53, Bryant Avenue, both sides From a point 610 feet north of DuPage Boulevard to a point 1,003 feet south of Pershing Avenue. Illinois Route 53, east side From the Village limits on the south to the Village limits on the north. Illinois Route 53, west side From the Village limits on the south to the Village limits on the north. Kenilworth Avenue, both sides From the south line of the southernmost leg of Anthony Street to the north line of Pennsylvania Avenue. From the west line of Lambert Avenue to a point 270 feet west thereof. Kingsbrook Glen (east side) From the south line of Taft Avenue to a point 140 feet south of that same line on Kingsbrook Glen. Lake Road, both sides From the east property line of Glenbard West High School to a point 110 feet east of the east property line of Glenbard West High School. Lake Road, east side From a point 450 feet south of the south line of Oak Street to a point 900 feet south of the south line of Oak Street. From the north line of Crescent Boulevard to a point 470 feet east of the north line of Crescent Boulevard. Lake Road, west side From the north line of Crescent Boulevard to the south line of Essex Road, extended. Lambert Road, both sides From the south line of Illinois Street to the north line of Roosevelt Road. From the south line of 22nd Street to the south Village limits. Lambert Road, east side From the south line of McCreey Avenue to the north line of 22nd Street. Lenox Road, west side From the north line of Hawthorne Street to the south line of Essex Road. Linden Street, north side From the east line of Forest Avenue to the west line of Lenox Road. Linden Street, south side From a point 124 feet east of the east line of Park Boulevard to a point 160 feet west of the west line of Lenox Road. Londonberry, south side From the east line of Briar Street to the west line of Surrey Drive. Main Street North Village limits to Pershing (except CBD). Main Street, both sides From a point 200 feet south of Elm Street to Elm Street. From the south line of Spalding Avenue to the north line of Duane Street. Main Street, east side 1 parking space north of theChurchill Condominiums driveway at Main Street between Pennsylvania Avenue and Anthony Street. Main Street, west side From the south line of Hillside Avenue to the north line of Hill Avenue. Melrose Avenue, east side From a point 175 feet north of the north line of Hillside Avenue to a point 188 feet north of the same line. Melrose Avenue, west side From the south line of Duane Street to the north line of Hillside Avenue. Merton Avenue, west side From the south line of Turner Avenue to the north line of Highview Avenue. Miller Court, west side From the north line of Hill Avenue to the south line of Ridgewood Avenue. Montclair Avenue, west side From the south line of Spalding Avenue to the north line of Hillside Avenue. Newton Avenue, east side The east side of Newton Avenue 10 feet north of and 10 feet south of the driveway entrance located immediately adjacent to the northwest corner of Dreisilker Motors. Nicoll Avenue, both sides From the south line of DuPage Boulevard to the north line of Illinois Route 38 (Roosevelt Road). Nicoll Way, both sides From the south line of Illinois Route 38 (Roosevelt Road) to the south line of Pershing Avenue. North Driveway, both sides The entire length of the street. Orchard Lane, north side From the west line of Lambert Road to the north line of Turnberry Lane. Park Boulevard From the south Village limits to Hawthorne (except Crescent to Pennsylvania). Park Boulevard, both sides From the north line of Pennsylvania Avenue to the south line of Anthony Street extended. Park Boulevard, east side From the north line of Crescent Boulevard to a point 152 feet north of Crescent Boulevard. From the north line of Hawthorne Street to a point 101 feet north of the north line of Hawthorne Street. Park Boulevard, east side From the south line of Pennsylvania Avenue to a point 32 feet south of Pennsylvania Avenue. Park Boulevard, west side From the north line of Anthony Street to the south line of Elm Street. From the south line of Pennsylvania Avenue to the north line of Crescent Boulevard. Park Row, east side From the south line of Crescent Boulevard to the north line of Willis Avenue. Pennsylvania Avenue, north side From a point 65 feet west of the west line of Kenilworth Avenue to a point 200 feet east of that same line. From a point 101.5 feet east of the east curb line of Forest Avenue to a point 123.6 feet east of the same extended line. From a point 365 feet west of Western Avenue to a point 147 feet east of the east line of Prospect Avenue. From the west line of Main Street to a point 145 feet west of Main Street. Pennsylvania Avenue, south side From the west line of Main Street to a point 45 feet west of Main Street. From the west Village limits to a point 76 feet east of the east line of Prospect Avenue. Pershing Avenue, both sides From the west line of Nicoll Way to the west line of Illinois Route 53. Phillips Avenue, south side From the west line of Main Street to the east line of Prospect Avenue. Pleasant Avenue, west side From Hawthorne to Cottage. From the north line of Anthony Street to the south line of Cottage Avenue. Prospect Avenue, both sides From the north line of Hill Avenue to the south line of the railroad tracks. Prospect Avenue, east side From the south line of Pennsylvania Avenue to the north line of Crescent Boulevard. Ridgewood Avenue, south side From the west line of Main Street to the east line of Prospect Avenue. Riford Road, east side From the south line of Oak Street to a point 137 feet south of that same line. From the north line of Oak Street to a point 163 feet north of that same line. Roosevelt Road (Illinois Route 38), 
north side From the Village limits on the east to the Village limits on the west. Roosevelt Road (Illinois Route 38), 
south side From the Village limits on the east to the Village limits on the west. Royal Glen Drive, both sides From the north line of Roosevelt Road for its entire length. St. Charles Road, north and south side From the Village limits on the east to the Village limits on the west. Sandhurst Circle, east The entire east side of the east portion of the roadway. Sandhurst Circle, north The entire north side of the north portion of the roadway. Sandhurst Circle, west The entire west side of the west portion of the roadway. Spring Avenue, east side From the north line of Illinois Route 53 to a point 225 feet north of the north line of Illinois Route 53. Spring Avenue, west side From the north line of Illinois Route 53 to a point 150 feet north of the north line of Illinois Route 53. Surrey Drive, east and north side From the north line of Roosevelt Road to the south line of Fairview Avenue. Surrey Drive, east side From the north line of Roosevelt Road to the south line of Brighton Place. Taft Avenue, both sides From the east line of Park Boulevard to the west line of Nicoll Way. From the west line of Main Street to a point 400 feet west of the west line of Lambert Road. Taft Avenue, north side From the west line of Nicoll Way to the east line of Park Boulevard. Taft Avenue, south side From the west line of Nicoll Way to a point 356 feet west of the same line, and from a point 556 feet west of Nicoll Way to the east line of Park Boulevard. Tanglewood Drive, east side The entire west side of the east portion of the roadway. Tanglewood Drive, north side The entire south side of the north portion of the roadway. Tanglewood Drive, west side From the south line of Woodview Drive 63 feet north of that same line. The entire east side of the west portion of the roadway. Taylor Avenue, east side From the north line of Duane Street to a point 75 feet north of the same line. From the south line of Walnut Street to a point 130 feet south of the same line. Taylor Avenue, west side From the north line of Walnut Street to north line of Duane Street. From the south line of Crescent Court to the north line of Willis Street. Traver Avenue, both sides From the south line of Hill Avenue to a point 90 feet south of the same line. Turner Avenue, both sides From the east line of Taylor Avenue to a point 170 feet east of Taylor Avenue. Turner Avenue, north side From the east line of Glenwood Avenue to a point 95 feet west of the west line of Main Street. From the east line of Montclair Avenue to the west line of Taylor Avenue. Turner Avenue, south side From the west line of Main Street to a point 95 feet west of the west line of Main Street. Walnut Street, north side From the east line of Taylor Avenue to the west line of Carleton Avenue. West Driveway, both sides The entire length of the street. Western Avenue, both sides From the north line of Pennsylvania Avenue to the south line of St. Charles Road. Willis Street, north side From the east line of Lee Street to the west line of Riford Road. Woodview Court The entire roadway on both sides. Woodview Drive, east side The entire west side of the east portion of the roadway. Woodview Drive, south side The entire north side of the south portion of the roadway. 22nd Street, both sides From the west line of Park Boulevard to the east line of Lorraine Road. 325 Alder Court A designated area located north of the main entrance to 325 Alder and marked by a yellow curb, 58 feet in length. 370 Ash A designated area located east of the main entrance of 370 Ash and marked by a yellow curb, 65 feet in length. 330 Cedar A designated area located east of the main entrance to 330 Cedar and marked by a yellow curb, 54 feet in length. 330 Larch A designated area located south of the main entrance to 330 Larch and marked by a yellow curb, 54 feet in length. 325 Marston A designated area located north of the main entrance to 325 Marston and marked by a yellow curb, 60 feet in length. 462 N. Park Glen Crossings Parking Lot Area 23 feet by 17.6 feet located at the southwest corner of the lot. Location used for automobile turnaround. 385 Spruce A designated area located northwest of the main entrance to 385 Spruce and marked by a yellow curb, 48 feet in length. 390 Spruce A designated area located east of the main entrance to 390 Spruce and marked by a yellow curb, 55 feet in length.  
(1965 Code ch. 21; amd. Ord. 1651, 8-25-1969; Ord. 1773, 1972; Ord. 1802, 5-14-1973; Ord. 1815, 7-9-1973; Ord. 1828, 9-10-1973; Ord. 1845, 2-11-1974; Ord. 1846, 2-11-1974; Ord. 1907, 11-12-1974; Ord. 1915, 1-13-1975; Ord. 1948, 5-26-1975; Ord. 1973, 8-1975; Ord. 1997, 10-27-1975; Ord. 2005, 10-27-1975; Ord. 2031, 1-26-1976; Ord. 2045, 2-23-1976; Ord. 2070, 5-10-1976; Ord. 2090, 6-14-1976; Ord. 2142, 11-8-1976; Ord. 2153, 12-13-1976; Ord. 2161, 1-10-1977; Ord. 2217, 7-11-1977; Ord. 2260, 9-12-1977; Ord. 2270, 10-11-1977; Ord. 2300, 12-12-1977, eff. 1-10-1978; Ord. 2301, 12-12-1977; Ord. 2302, 12-12-1977; Ord. 2328, 2-27-1978; Ord. 2425, 1-8-1979; Ord. 2464, 6-11-1979; Ord. 2491, 10-9-1979; Ord. 2502, 10-22-1979; Ord. 2517, 1-14-1980; Ord. 2529, 2-25-1980; Ord. 2540, 4-4-1980; Ord. 2587, 7-28-1980; Ord. 2709, 11-23-1981; Ord. 2744, 3-8-1982; Ord. 2828, 10-25-1982; Ord. 2858, 2-14-1983; Ord. 2943, 11-28-1983; Ord. 2986, 4-9-1984; Ord. 3001, 5-29-1984; Ord. 3002, 5-29-1984; Ord. 3021, 6-25-1984; Ord. 3066, 12-10-1985; Ord. 3163, 12-9-1985; Ord. 3288, 1-12-1987; Ord. 3422, 1-11-1988; Ord. 3438, 3-14-1988; Ord. 3490, 6-13-1988; Ord. 3507, 7-25-1988; Ord. 3530, 9-12-1988; Ord. 3531, 9-12-1988; Ord. 3624, 5-8-1989; Ord. 3663, 7-24-1989; Ord. 3797, 11-26-1990; Ord. 3845, 6-24-1991; Ord. 3853, 7-22-1991; Ord. 3946, 9-14-1992; Ord. 4270, 6-26-1995; Ord. 4292, 8-28-1995; Ord. 4335, 1-8-1996; Ord. 4480, 4-14-1997; Ord. 4575, 4-13-1998; Ord. 4635, 9-28-1998; Ord. 4840, 5-22-2000; Ord. 4877, 10-9-2000; Ord. 4902, 1-8-2001; Ord. 4908, 1-22-2001; Ord. 4936, 4-23-2001; Ord. 5185, 8-25-2003; Ord. 5431, 2-13-2006; Ord. 5451, 3-27-2006; Ord. 5501, 9-11-2006; Ord. 5502, 9-11-2006; Ord. 5560, 3-26-2007; Ord. 5772, 6-22-2009; Ord. 5807, 10-26-2009; Ord. 5960, 9-26-2011; Ord. 5968, 11-14-2011; Ord. 6006, 3-12-2012; Ord. 6160, 8-12-2013; Ord. 6222, 3-10-2014; Ord. 6312, 4-27-2015; Ord. 6313, 4-27-2015; Ord. 6314, 4-27-2015; Ord. 6347, 8-24-2015; Ord. 6355, 10-12-2015; Ord. 6387, 2-22-2016; Ord. 6529, 9-11-2017) 
9-5-7. - Schedule G; parking prohibited during certain hours. 
Name of Street District Hours Parking Prohibited Bloomfield Lane 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays Brandon Avenue, east side From the north side of Fairview Avenue to the south side of Greenfield Avenue 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on days when Abraham Lincoln School is in session Bryant Avenue, east side From the north line of Hill Avenue to the south line of Hillside Avenue 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on school days From the south line of Turner Avenue to the north line of Highview Avenue 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on days when Ben Franklin School is in session Bryant Avenue, west side From the south line of Hill Avenue to the north property line of Ben Franklin School 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on days when Ben Franklin School is in session Buena Vista Drive, both sides From the west line of Lambert Road to the east line of Lorraine Road 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on school days Chancel Circle 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. Chancel Lane 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. Cottage Avenue, north side From the west line of Main Street West to a point 275 feet west of Main Street 9:00 a.m. to 3:15 p.m. on school days Crescent Boulevard, north side From a point 254 feet east of the east line of Park Boulevard to a point 27 feet west of the west line of Ellyn Avenue 7:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. on school days, except by special permit From a point 265 feet west of the west line of Lake Road to a point 565 feet west of the west line of Lake Road 7:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. on school days, except by special permit Crescent Boulevard, south side From a point 9 feet west of the west line of Forest Avenue to a point 180 feet west of the same line 4:00 p.m. to 7:00 p.m. Monday through Friday From a point 33 feet west of the west line of Park Row to a point 83 feet west of the same line 7:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. Monday through Friday, except by Glen Ellyn park district permit From a point 39 feet east of the east line of Ellyn Avenue to a point 103 feet west of the west line of Park Row 7:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. on school days, except by special permit Elm Street, north side From the west line of Highland Avenue to the east line of Euclid Avenue 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on school days Elm Street, south side From the east line of Kenilworth Avenue to a point 148 feet east on that same line 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. no parking or standing on school days only From the west line of Highland Avenue to the east line of Euclid Avenue 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on school days Exmoor Avenue, both sides From Fairview Avenue north to end of cul-de-sac 5:00 p.m. to 7:00 p.m., August through November Farnsworth Court 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays Farnsworth Pembroke land 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays Forest Avenue, west side Between the south line of Duane Street and the north line of the commuter parking lot 7:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., Monday through Friday, except by special permit. Glen Ellyn Place, north side From the east line of Park Boulevard to the east end of Glen Ellyn Place 9:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. Monday through Friday except holidays Greenfield Avenue, north side Between Regent Street and the west line of Brandon Avenue 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on days when Abraham Lincoln School is in session From the east side of Lambert Road to the west side of Newton Avenue 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on days when Abraham Lincoln School is in session West line of Brandon Avenue to a point 92 feet East of the east line of Regent Street 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on days when Abraham Lincoln School is in session Greenfield Avenue, south side From the east line of Newton Avenue to the west line of Sunset Avenue 8:00 A.M. to 4:00 P.M. on days when Abraham Lincoln School is in session Highland Avenue, east side From the north line of Elm Street to the south line of Geneva Road 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on school days Kenilworth Avenue, both sides From the south line of Geneva Road to the north line of Elm Street 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. no parking or standing on school days only Kenilworth Avenue, west side From the south line of Geneva Road to the north line of Oak Street 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. no parking or standing on school days only Lake Road, both sides From Crescent Boulevard to Essex Road, except when public and civic events are conducted in Lake Ellyn Park or Glenbard West High School 6:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. Lake Road, east side Lake Road, east side From a point 470 feet east of the north line of Crescent Boulevard to a point 900 feet south of the south line of Oak Street 7:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. when school is in session at Glenbard West High School Lake Road, west side From the north line of Crescent Boulevard to the south line of Essex Road 12:00 midnight to 7:30 a.m. Lee Street, west side Between Willis Street and Crescent Boulevard 7:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays Lenox Road, both sides Hawthorne Street to Essex Road 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. Lenox Road (east side) From a point 67 feet north of the north line of Hawthorne Boulevard to a point 287 feet north of that same line; and, from a point 507 feet north of the north line of Hawthorne Boulevard to a point 679 feet north of that same line. 7:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. on school days except by special permit Linden Avenue Park Boulevard to Lenox Road 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. Longfellow Avenue, both sides From the north line of Duane Street to the south line of Walnut Street 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. Lowell Avenue, both sides From the north line of Duane Street to the south line of Walnut Street 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. Main Street, both sides From the north line of Anthony Street to the south line of Hawthorne Street 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., except Sundays and holidays Main Street, east side From the south line of Hillside Avenue to the north line of Phillips Avenue 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Montclair Avenue, both sides From Fairview Avenue north to end of cul-de-sac 5:00 p.m. to 7:00 p.m., August through November Newton Avenue, east side From the north line of Greenfield Avenue to a point 221 feet north 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on school days From the north side of Fairview Avenue to the south side of Greenfield Avenue 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on days when Abraham Lincoln School is in session Oak Street, north side From the west line of Main Street to a point 250 feet west of the same line 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on days when Forest Glen School is in session Park Row, west side From the south line of Crescent Boulevard to the north line of Willis Street 7:00 a.m.to 3:00 p.m. on school days, except by special permit Raintree Court Along its entire length 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. Ramblewood Drive 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays Regent Street, east side From the north line of Greenfield Avenue to the south line of Arlington Avenue 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on days when Abraham Lincoln School is in session Sandhurst Circle 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays South Driveway 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. South Kenilworth Avenue, both sides From the north line of 22nd Street to the south line of McCreey Avenue 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on school days South Ott Avenue, both sides From the north line of 22nd Street to the south line of McCreey Avenue 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on school days Spalding Avenue, both sides Along its entire length 8:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. Monday through Friday except holidays Taylor Avenue, east side From a point 100 feet south of the east leg of Turner Avenue to a point 60 feet north of the east leg of Turner Avenue 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on school days only From the south line of Crescent Court to the north line of Willis Street 7:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., except Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays Taylor Avenue, west side From the south line of Hill Avenue to a point 66 feet south of the south line of Turner Avenue 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on school days Train station west parking lot, east of Main Street and south of Crescent Boulevard First 3 metered parking stalls west of handicapped parking stall 12:00 midnight to 6:00 a.m. Turner Avenue, north side From the east line of Bryant Avenue to the west line of May Avenue 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on days when Ben Franklin school is in session From the west line of Taylor Avenue to the east line of Merton Avenue 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on school days Walnut Street, both sides From the east line of Bryant Avenue to the west line of Whittier Avenue 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. Whittier Avenue, both sides From the north line of Duane Street to the south line of Walnut Street 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. Williamsburgh Road, both sides From the east line of Prince Edward Road to the west line of Park Boulevard 8:30 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. no stopping, standing or parking on school days Willis Street, south side From the west line of Park Row to the west line of Riford Road 7:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. on school days, except by special permit Woodstock Avenue, west side From a point 244 feet south of the south line of Roslyn Road to a point 744 feet south of Roslyn Road 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. 22nd Street, both sides From the east line of South Ott Avenue to the west line of South Kenilworth Avenue 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on school days  
(1965 Code ch. 21; amd. Ord. 1527, 6-12-1967; Ord. 1728, 7-26-1971; Ord. 1858, 4-22-1974; Ord. 2392, 9-11-1978; Ord. 2393, 9-11-1978; Ord. 2447, 4-9-1979; Ord. 2596, 8-25-1980; Ord. 2751, 3-22-1982; Ord. 2769, 5-10-1982; Ord. 2803, 8-23-1982; Ord. 2889, 5-23-1983; Ord. 3001, 5-29-1984; Ord. 3128, 7-8-1985; Ord. 3267, 11-24-1986; Ord. 3438, 3-14-1988; Ord. 3490, 6-13-1988; Ord. 3530, 9-12-1988; Ord. 3532, 9-12-1988; Ord. 3657, 7-10-1989; Ord. 3987, 1-11-1993; Ord. 4172, 8-8-1994; Ord. 4292, 8-28-1995; Ord. 4402, 8-26-1996; Ord. 4428, 10-28-1996; Ord. 4480, 4-14-1997; Ord. 4574, 4-13-1998; Ord. 4575, 4-13-1998; Ord. 4635, 9-28-1998; Ord. 4806, 2-14-2000; Ord. 4909, 1-22-2001; Ord. 4921, 3-26-2001; Ord. 4936, 4-23-2001; Ord. 5196, 10-27-2003; Ord. 5316, 12-20-2004; Ord. 5392, 9-12-2005; Ord. 5502, 9-11-2006; Ord. 5560, 3-26-2007; Ord. 5755, 5-11-2009; Ord. 5973, 11-14-2011; Ord. 6111, 1-28-2013; Ord. 6201, 12-9-2013; Ord. 6307, 4-20-2015; Ord. 6355, 10-12-2015; Ord. No. 6530, 9-11-2017; Ord. 6570, 1-22-2018; Ord. 6633, 10-8-2018) 
9-5-8. - Schedule H; parking limits. 
Time Limits Name Of Street District 10 minutes Main Street, west side From a point 127 feet from the north line of Crescent Boulevard north to a point 147 feet from the same line between 6:00 p.m. and 10:30 p.m. Winchell Way Both sides of traffic circle extension in front of Village Links Clubhouse, as shown on the map on file with the Village Clerk. 15 minutes Crescent Boulevard, south 
side From a point 83 feet from the west line of Park Row to a point 133 feet from the same line. Main Street, east 
side First 2 parking spaces north of Pennsylvania Avenue. Park Boulevard, 
east side From a point 152 feet north of Crescent Boulevard to a point 32 feet south of the south line of Pennsylvania Avenue. Turner Avenue, 
north side From a point 95 feet west of the west line of Main Street to a point 20 feet west of the west line of Main Street. 15 minutes, 4-way flashers required Duane Street, south side The first two parking spaces east of Main Street 30 minutes Duane Street, 
south side From a point 157 feet from the east line of Main Street east to a point 281 feet from the same line from 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, except holidays. 1 hour Cottage Avenue, 
north side From the west line of Forest Avenue to the east line of Main Street from 7:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. on school days. Forest Avenue, 
east side From the north line of Anthony Street to the south line of Hawthorne Boulevard from 7:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. on school days. Lee Street, east 
side From the south line of Crescent Boulevard to the north line of Willis Street on school days between 7:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. Lenox Road (east side) From a point 287 feet north of the north line of Hawthorne Boulevard to a point 507 feet north of that same line. Park Boulevard, 
east side From the north line of Hawthorne Street to the south line of Maple Street from 7:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. on school days. 1 hour school 
visitor parking 
only Crescent Boulevard, north 
side From a point 122 feet east of the east line of Ellyn Avenue to a point 290 feet east of the east line of Ellyn Avenue 7:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. Monday through Friday on school days: school check-in required with registration and vehicle owner information. 2 hours Forest Avenue, east side From the south line of Anthony Street to the north line of Pennsylvania Avenue. Glen Ellyn Place, 
north side From the east line of Park Boulevard to the east end of Glen Ellyn Place. Library parking lot The parking lot northeast of the Glen Ellyn Public Library building on the north side of Crescent Boulevard between Park Boulevard and Ellyn Avenue. Montclair Avenue, 
east side From Prairie Path to Duane Street, from 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. Municipal parking lot The parking lot known as Schock Square, south of Pennsylvania Avenue, between Main Street and Forest Avenue. Park Row, west 
side From the south line of Crescent Boulevard to the north line of Willis Avenue from 7:30 A.M. to 3:30 P.M., Monday through Friday. Pennsylvania East Lot (formerly known as Municipal Parking Lot and Schock Square) The parking lot formerly known as Schock Square, south of Pennsylvania Avenue, between Main Street and Forest Avenue. 3 hours Crescent Boulevard, both 
sides From the east line of Prospect Avenue to the west line of Park Boulevard. Duane Street: 
North side From the east line of Prospect Avenue to the west line of Park Boulevard. South side South side From a point 160 feet west of the west line of Forest Avenue to the west line of Forest Avenue. From a point 190 feet west of the west line of Main Street to the west line of Main Street. From the east line of Main Street to a point 157 feet east of Main Street. Forest Avenue, 
both sides From the north line of Crescent Boulevard to the south line of Pennsylvania Avenue. Glenwood Avenue, both 
sides From the south line of Pennsylvania Avenue to the north line of Crescent Boulevard. Hillside Avenue, 
north side From the east line of Main Street to a point 150 feet east of Main Street. Lenox Road, east 
side From the north line of Hawthorne Street to the south line of Essex Road - 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. on school days. Linden Avenue From the west line of Lenox Road to the east line of Park Boulevard - 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. on school days Main and 
Pennsylvania lot 12 spaces immediately north of the north line of Pennsylvania on the west side of the lot, extending 100 feet north of that point. Main Street, both 
sides From the south line of Anthony Street to the north line of Hillside Avenue. Municipal parking lot South side of Duane Street between the Methodist Church and the Glen Ellyn Civic Center. Pennsylvania 
Avenue: Both 
sides From the east line of Prospect Avenue to the west line of Forest Avenue. South side From the east line of Forest Avenue to a point 96 feet directly east. Pennsylvania West Lot (formerly known as Main and Pennsylvania Lot) 12 spaces immediately north of the north line of Pennsylvania on the west side of the lot, extending 100 feet north of that point. 4 hours Annandale 
Avenue, east side Anthony Street, 
south side From the east line of Western Avenue to the west line of Park Boulevard. Forest Avenue: 
East side From the north line of Hawthorne Street to the south line of Linden Avenue. From the south line of Anthony Street to the north line of Pennsylvania Avenue. West side From the south line of Duane Street to the north line of Hillside Avenue. Hillside Avenue: 
North side From a point 150 feet east of the east line of Main Street to the west line of Montclair Avenue, except on Sunday. From the west line of Glenwood Avenue to the east line of Lorraine Road. From the west line of Main Street to the east line of Lorraine Road. South side From a point 88 feet east of the west line of Glenwood Avenue to a point 40 feet east of that same line. Melrose Avenue, 
east side From the south line of Duane Street to the north line of Hillside Avenue Pennsylvania 
Avenue: North 
side From the west line of Prospect Avenue to the east line of Kenilworth Avenue. South side From the west line of Prospect Avenue to the east line of Western Avenue. Phillips Avenue, 
north side From the west line of Main Street to the east line of Prospect Avenue. Pleasant Avenue, 
east side From the north line of Anthony Street to the south line of Cottage Avenue. Ridgewood Avenue, 
north side From the west line of Main Street to the east line of Prospect Avenue. To load and 
unload only Bryant Avenue, 
west side From the north line of Turner Avenue extended to a point 119 feet north of the same line from 8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., Monday through Friday on school days. Crescent 
Boulevard, north 
side From a point 193 feet west of the west line of Forest Avenue to a point 24 feet farther west; restricted to passenger vehicles only from 5:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m., Fridays and Saturdays. From a point 210 feet east of the east line of Ellyn Avenue to a point 220 feet west of the west line of Lake Road from 7:00 a.m. to 3:30 p.m., Monday through Friday on school days. Forest Avenue, 
west side From a point 105 feet south of the south line of Duane Street to a point 173 feet south of the same line, on Sunday only. Greenfield 
Avenue, north 
side From a point 87 feet west of the west line of Hillcrest Avenue extended, to a point 48 feet east of the west line of Hillcrest Avenue extended, from 8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., Monday through Friday on school days. Hill Avenue, south 
side From a point 194 feet west of the west line of Main Street to a point 278 feet west of the same line. Park Boulevard, 
west side From a point 40 feet south of the south line of Stewart Avenue to a point 98 feet south of the same line. Pennsylvania 
Avenue, north 
side From a point 201.3 feet east of the east line of Main Street to a point 223.5 feet east of the same line. Winchell Way Both sides of traffic circle extension in front of Village Links Clubhouse, as shown on the map. Leased parking The President and Board of Trustees may designate spaces within the municipal parking lots which individuals may rent at monthly prices fixed by the Board of Trustees.  
(1965 Code ch. 21; amd. Ord. 1554, 11-13-1967; Ord. 1605, 8-26-1968; Ord. 1611, 10-7-1968; Ord. 1760, 5-8-1972; Ord. 1802, 5-14-1973; Ord. 1828, 9-10-1973; Ord. 1841, 1-14-1974; Ord. 2260, 9-12-1977; Ord. 2329, 2-27-1978; Ord. 2409, 11-13-1978; Ord. 2441, 3-12-1979; Ord. 2490, 8-24-1979; Ord. 2491, 10-9-1979; Ord. 2502, 10-22-1979; Ord. 2587, 7-28-1980; Ord. 2744, 3-8-1982; Ord. 2757, 4-12-1982; Ord. 2784, 6-14-1982; Ord. 2858, 2-14-1983; Ord. 3001, 5-29-1984; Ord. 3009, 6-11-1984; Ord. 3021, 6-25-1984; Ord. 3034, 8-27-1984; Ord. 3163, 12-9-1985; Ord. 3312, 4-13-1987; Ord. 3332, 6-22-1987; Ord. 3530, 9-12-1988; Ord. 3600, 3-27-1989; Ord. 3629, 5-22-1989; Ord. 3850, 7-22-1991; Ord. 3961, 10-26-1992; Ord. 4087, 12-20-1993; Ord. 4105, 3-14-1994; Ord. 4866, 8-28-2000; Ord. 4908, 1-22-2001; Ord. 4936, 4-23-2001; Ord. 5281, 7-26-2004; Ord. 5352, 4-25-2005; Ord. 5502, 9-11-2006; Ord. 5560, 3-26-2007; Ord. 5588, 7-23-2007; Ord. 5807, 10-26-2009; Ord. 6065, 8-27-2012; Ord. 6066, 8-27-2012; Ord. 6133, 5-28-2013; Ord. 6161, 8-26-2013; Ord. 6355, 10-12-2015; Ord. 6509, 6-12-2017; Ord. 6570, 1-22-2018; Ord. 6593, 4-9-2018; Ord. 6634, 10-22-2018; Ord. 6659, 12-10-2018; Ord. 6668, 1-28-2019) 
9-5-9. - Schedule I; snow routes. 
Name of Street District Bryant Avenue From Walnut Street to State Route No. 53. Crescent Boulevard From Prospect Avenue to Roger Road. Duane Street From Prospect Avenue to Whittier Avenue. Ellyn Avenue From Hawthorne Street to Crescent Boulevard. Fairview Avenue From Sunset Avenue to Park Boulevard. Forest Avenue From Pennsylvania Avenue to Crescent Boulevard. Glenwood Avenue From Pennsylvania Avenue to Crescent Boulevard. Hawthorne Street From Limits Avenue to Lenox Road. Hill Avenue From Travers Avenue to Whittier Avenue. Kenilworth Avenue From Geneva Road to Pennsylvania Avenue. Lenox Road From St. Charles Road to Hawthorne Street. Linden Street From Main Street to Lenox Road. Lorraine Street From Duane Street to Harwarden Street. Main Street From Geneva Road to Roosevelt Road. Maple Street From Main Street to Park Boulevard. Oak Street From Western Avenue to Riford Road. Park Boulevard From Elm Street to south corporate limits. Park Row From Crescent Boulevard to Willis Street Pennsylvania Avenue From west corporate limits to Park Boulevard Pershing Avenue From Main Street to Park Boulevard Prospect Avenue From Pennsylvania Avenue to Duane Street Riford Road From St. Charles Road to Willis Street Sheehan Avenue From Park Boulevard to State Route No. 53. Spring Avenue From Hill Avenue to State Route No. 53. Sunset Avenue From Turner Avenue to Roosevelt Road. Taylor Avenue From Willis Street to Walnut Street. Turner Avenue From Sunset Avenue to Main Street. Walnut Street From Taylor Avenue to Bryant Avenue. Western Avenue From Geneva Road to Pennsylvania Avenue. Willis Street From Park Row to Riford Road.  
(Ord. 1560, 12-11-1967; amd. Ord. 4936, 4-23-2001) 
9-5-10. - Schedule J; adjusted speed limits. 
Name of Street District Maximum Speed 
Limits Crescent Boulevard From the east line of Ellyn Avenue to the west line of Lake Road, on school days, when children are present. 20 mph Dawes Avenue From Park Boulevard west to end of Dawes Avenue. 20 mph Geneva Road From a point 300 feet west of the west property line of Churchill School, 240 Geneva Road, to a point 300 feet east of the east property line of Churchill School, on school days, when children are present. 20 mph Lake Road From Crescent Boulevard to Oak Street. 25 mph Lambert Road From the south line of Roosevelt Road to the south Village limits. 35 mph Park Boulevard From a point 100 feet south of the south line of 22nd Street to the south corporate limits. 40 mph From Coolidge Avenue to a point 100 feet south of the south line of 22nd Street. 35 mph Parkside Avenue From Summerdale Avenue to Main Street. 20 mph S. Park Boulevard From a point 300 feet south of the south property line of Parkview School, 250 S. Park Boulevard, to a point 215 feet north of the north line of Sheehan Avenue, on school days, when children are present. 20 mph  
(Ord. 2044, 2-23-1976; amd. Ord. 2518, 1-14-1980; Ord. 2539, 4-18-1980; Ord. 2676, 7-13-1981; Ord. 2888, 6-13-1983; Ord. 4936, 4-23-2001; Ord. 5812, 11-9-2009) 
9-5-11. - Schedule K; right turn on red prohibited. 
Name of Street Direction Location/Limitation Baker Hill Drive Westbound Route 53; 24 hours a day. Park Boulevard Northbound Sheehan Avenue; on school days when children are present. Southbound Winchell Way; on school days when children are present. Sheehan Avenue Eastbound and westbound Route 53; on school days when children are present. Westbound Park Boulevard; on school days when children are present. Winchell way Eastbound Park Boulevard; on school days when children are present.  
(Ord. 4607, 7-13-1998; amd. Ord. 4731, 7-12-1999; Ord. 4936, 4-23-2001) 
9-5-12. - Schedule L; left hand turn prohibited. 
Name of Street Direction Location/Limitation Bryant Avenue Southbound At Illinois Route 53. At Turner Avenue; on school days, between hours of 8:30 a.m. and 9:00 a.m., 11:30 a.m. and 1:00 p.m., and 3:15 p.m. and 3:45 Central Station parking facility Eastbound At Park Boulevard; Monday through Friday, holidays excepted, 6:30 a.m. - 9:00 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. - 7:30 p.m. Grandview Avenue Southbound At Illinois Route 53. Grove Avenue Northbound At Illinois Route 53. Highland Avenue Southbound At Elm Street; school days from 8:00 a.m. - 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. - 4:00 p.m. Illinois Route 38 Westbound At Pershing Avenue. Illinois Route 53 Eastbound At Grandview Avenue. Westbound At Grove Avenue. Main Street Southbound At Stewart Avenue; 6:30 a.m. - 7:30 p.m. Park Boulevard Northbound At Stewart Avenue; 6:30 a.m. - 9:30 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. - 7:30 p.m. Southbound At Park/Montclair parking facility; 6:30 A.M. - 7:30 P.M. Pershing Avenue Northbound At Illinois Route 38. Prospect Avenue Northbound At the driveway of the Duane/Prospect parking facility, located 100 feet north of the north line of Duane street, on the west side of Prospect St. Charles Road Eastbound At Highland Avenue; Monday through Friday, between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. Eastbound At Stacy Court; Monday through Friday, between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. Train station lot section B Eastbound At Park Boulevard, Monday through Friday; holidays excepted, 6:30 a.m. - 9:00 a.m., and 4:30 p.m. - 7:30 p.m. Train station lot section D Westbound At Main Street; Monday through Friday; holidays excepted, 6:30 a.m. - 9:00 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. - 7:30 p.m. 22nd Street Westbound At the east driveway of parking lot number 10, at the College of DuPage. At the east leg of the "U" shaped drive of "building A" at the College of DuPage.  
(Ord. 3056, 11-13-1984; amd. Ord. 3932, 8-10-1992; Ord. 4017, 5-24-1993; Ord. 4594, 5-26-1998; Ord. 4936, 4-23-2001; Ord. 5127, 1-13-2003; Ord. 5922, 3-14-2011; Ord. 6257, 8-25-2014) 
9-5-13. - Schedule M; handicapped person parking locations. 
Name of Street Location Crescent Boulevard A single angled parking space located on the north side of the street 60 feet east of the east line of Main Street. Hillside Avenue The first space east of Main Street on the north side of Hillside Avenue Hillside Avenue The first 4 parking spaces on the north side of Hillside Avenue, immediately west of Glenwood Avenue. Main Street The first angled parking space south of Pennsylvania on the east side of Main Street. Main Street Lot The first 2 parking spaces on the north side of the parking lot, immediately west of the parking lot entrance.  
(Ord. 2706, 11-23-1981, eff. 1-6-1982; amd. Ord. 3431, 2-22-1988; Ord. 3577, 2-13-1989; Ord. 4936, 4-23-2001) 
9-5-14. - Schedule N; parking rate zone locations. 
Zone Location Description A CN&W west lot 21 spaces on the south side of the lot extending 375 feet from the east line of Main Street. Crescent and Glenwood lot 13 spaces on the north side of the lot extending from a point 40 feet east of the east line of Glenwood Avenue to a point 200 feet east of the same line. Main & Crescent Lot (formerly known as CN&W West Lot) 21 spaces on the south side of the lot extending 375 feet from the east line of Main Street. Main Street lot between Duane Street and Hillside Avenue 28 spaces in northerly one-third of the lot and 29 spaces in southerly one-third of the lot. Train station lot 4 spaces on the south side of Stewart Avenue extending 33 feet from the east line of Main Street. B Crescent and Glenwood lot 5 spaces on the north side of the east line of Glenwood Avenue to a point 40 feet east of the same line. 27 spaces on the south side of the lot beginning 16 feet west of the building at 505 Crescent Boulevard and extending to the east line of Greenwood Avenue. Main and Pennsylvania lot 32 spaces immediately to the rear of the building at 510 Pennsylvania Avenue extending 190 feet from the west line of Main Street. Main Street lot between Duane Street and Hillside Avenue 26 spaces in the central one-third of the lot. C Repealed D Duane and Lorraine lot Entire lot, except for 22 parking spaces subject to the terms of the IGA between the village and Glen Ellyn Library.  
(Ord. 3395, 11-23-1987, eff. 1-1-1988; amd. Ord. 3850, 7-22-1991; Ord. 3932, 8-10-1992; Ord. 3961, 10-26-1992; Ord. 4359, 3-25-1996; Ord. 4458, 1-13-1997; Ord. 4936, 4-23-2001; Ord. 6007, 3-12-2012; Ord. 6120, 4-8-2013; Ord. 6634, 10-22-2018) 
9-5-15. - Schedule O; right turns prohibited. 
Name of Street Direction Location/Limitation Brandon Avenue Northbound At Greenfield Avenue; school days from 8:00 a.m. - 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. - 4:00 p.m. Harding Avenue Eastbound At Park Boulevard; Monday through Friday, between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 8:00 p.m. Highland Avenue Southbound At St. Charles Road; Monday through Friday, between the hours of 2:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m. Wilson Avenue Eastbound At Park Boulevard; Monday through Friday, between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 8:00 p.m.  
(Ord. 3345, 7-13-1987; amd. Ord. 4594, 5-26-1998; Ord. 4936, 4-23-2001; Ord. 6257, 8-25-2014) 
9-5-16. - Schedule P; fire lane zones. 
Location Description 440 Raintree Court The full length of the driveway from its intersections with Raintree Court. 450 Raintree Court From a point 40 feet east of the main entrance of 450 Raintree Court to a point 34 feet west of the same entrance. 460 Raintree Court From a point 60 feet south of the main entrance of 460 Raintree Court to a point 65 feet north of the same entrance. 470 Raintree Court From a point 76 feet south of the main entrance of 470 Raintree Court to a point 32 feet north of the same entrance. 490 Raintree Court The full length of the driveway from its intersections with Greenbrier Road; excepting the designated parking area.  
(Ord. 3128, 7-8-1985; amd. Ord. 4936, 4-23-2001) 
9-5-17. - Schedule Q; peddling prohibited at all times. 
Location Description Geneva Road Main Street to west village limits. Hill Avenue East village limits to west village limits. Main Street Elm Street to Anthony Street. Main Street Hillside Avenue to Pershing Avenue. Park Boulevard South village limits to Hawthorne Street. Roosevelt Road East village limits to west village limits. St. Charles Road East village limits to west village limits. Western Avenue Geneva Road to Pennsylvania Avenue.  
(Ord. 4155, 6-27-1994; amd. Ord. 4936, 4-23-2001) 
9-5-18. - Schedule R; U-turns prohibited. 
Name of Street Location/Limitation Crescent Boulevard Between the west line of Ellyn Avenue and the east line of Lake Road.  
(Ord. 5502, 9-11-2006) 
9-5-19. - Schedule S; customer parking only. 
(A)  No person who owns, operates, manages or is employed at a place of business in the area established as the Central Business District by Village ordinance shall park in a zone which has been designated as customer parking only while that person is working at that business. 
(B)  It shall be a rebuttable presumption that any person who is an employee of a business in the Central Business District shall be deemed to be working at that place of business from 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. on weekdays and weekends. 
(C)  Only persons seeking to purchase merchandise or other services within the Central Business District shall be allowed to park a vehicle in customer designated locations. All other vehicles, including those parked for train commuting purposes, are prohibited. 
(D)  The following locations in the Central Business District shall be designated as customer parking only zones: 
Name of Street Direction Location/Limitation Crescent Boulevard Eastbound and westbound From the east line of Prospect Avenue to the west line of Park Boulevard. Duane Street Eastbound and westbound From the east line of Prospect Avenue to the west line of Forest Avenue. Forest Avenue Northbound From the north line of Crescent Boulevard to the south line of Pennsylvania Avenue. Glenwood Avenue Northbound and southbound From the north line of Crescent Boulevard to the south line of Pennsylvania Avenue. Hillside Avenue Westbound From the east line of Main Street to a point 150 feet east of said line. Main Street Northbound and southbound From the north line of Hillside Avenue to the south line of Anthony Street. Pennsylvania Avenue Eastbound and westbound From the east line of Prospect Avenue to the west line of Forest Avenue. That portion on 
the Main and Pennsylvania parking lot consisting of 12 parking spots Immediately north of the north line of Pennsylvania, extending 160 feet north of that point. The parking lot known as Schock Square South of Pennsylvania Avenue, between Main Street and Forest Avenue between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Mondays through Saturdays. Union Pacific West lot Immediately south and east of the intersection of Main Street and Crescent Boulevard between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Mondays through Saturdays.  
(E)  A violation of this section shall be considered a Class C violation as set forth in section 9-2-7. 
(Ord. 5560, 3-26-2007; amd. Ord. 6186, 11-12-2013; Ord. 6593, 4-9-2018) 
9-5-20 - Schedule T; no straight through traffic, right turn or left turn only. 
Name of Street Direction Location/Limitation Taft Avenue Westbound At Lambert Road  
(Ord. 6639, 11-12-2018) 
Chapter 6 - VEHICLE SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT 

9-6-1. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
BUSINESS DAY: Any day in which the office of the Village Clerk of the Village of Glen Ellyn is open to the public for a minimum of seven hours. 
MOTOR VEHICLE OR VEHICLE: Every vehicle which is self-propelled, including, but not limited to, automobiles, trucks, vans, motorcycles and motor scooters, and shall include every vehicle defined by section 1-146 of the Illinois Vehicle Code. 
OWNER: A person who holds legal title of a vehicle, or in the event a vehicle is the subject of an agreement for the conditional sale or lease thereof with the right of purchase upon performance of the conditions stated in the agreement and with an immediate right of possession vested in the conditional vendee or lessee, or in the event a mortgagor of such vehicle is entitled to possession, then such conditional vendee or lessee or mortgagor shall be deemed the owner. Any person may, with the owner's express permission, perform any act that the owner is authorized to perform. 
(Ord. 5860, 4-26-2010) 
9-6-2. - Acts subjecting vehicle to seizure and impoundment; administrative and public safety fee. 
(A)  A motor vehicle: 1) that was driven, used, or operated, by a person who is reasonably charged or could be charged with; or 2) for which there is a reasonable factual basis for finding it was used or operated in the commission of; any of the following violations may be seized and impounded by the Village: 
1.  Driving a motor vehicle under the influence of alcohol, other drug or drugs, intoxicating compound(s), or a combination thereof; 
2.  Driving a motor vehicle while the driver's license, permit or privilege to operate a motor vehicle is suspended or revoked, regardless of whether the revocation or suspension was of an Illinois driver's license or the driver's license from another state; 
3.  Driving a motor vehicle without ever having been issued a valid driver's license; or 
4.  Driving a motor vehicle when the driver's license has been expired for more than six months, or the driver's permit, restricted driver's permit or other driving privilege has expired, regardless of whether such expired license, permit, restricted driver's permit or other driving privilege was previously issued by the state of Illinois or another state; 
5.  A person against whom a warrant has been issued by any court of competent jurisdiction for any reason; 
6.  Driving by a person who is less than 17 years of age when in violation of the lawfully established curfew; 
7.  Fleeing or attempting to elude; 
8.  Drag racing; 
9.  Reckless driving; 
10.  Speeding 40 miles per hour in excess of applicable limit; 
11.  Any of the following firearms offenses: 
(a)  Unlawful use of weapons; 
(b)  Aggravated discharge of a firearm; 
(c)  Aggravated discharge of a machine gun or a firearm equipped with a device designed or used for silencing the report of a firearm; 
(d)  Reckless discharge of a firearm; and 
(e)  Aggravated unlawful use of a weapon. 
12.  Any of the following drug offenses: 
(a)  Possession of cannabis more than 30 grams, 
(b)  Unauthorized possession of controlled substances, 
13.  Any other misdemeanor or felony of the Vehicle Code where a custodial arrest is initiated; and 
14.  Any other misdemeanor or felony where a motor vehicle is used to attempt an escape from the crime scene or where a custodial arrest is initiated. 
(B)  No vehicle shall be seized and impounded pursuant to subsections (A)3. and (A)4. of this section, if the driver was driving pursuant to certain exceptions to the licensing requirements, as allowed in the exemption provision, section 5/6-102, of the Illinois Vehicle Code. 
(C)  In the event a motor vehicle is seized and impounded pursuant to this chapter, the owner of the motor vehicle shall be liable to the Village for an administrative and public safety fee of $300.00, in order to cover the costs incurred by the Village in ensuring that the motor vehicle is properly removed from the scene of the incident and the vehicle, and personal property enclosed therein, is secured and safeguarded, and any passengers in the vehicle, including children are assisted. All owners of a motor vehicle shall be jointly and severally liable for the administrative and public safety fee. 
(D)  Upon demonstration that it has the right to possession of a seized motor vehicle, a lessor, whether a rental agency or otherwise, or lienholder of a motor vehicle shall have the right to pay the administrative and public safety fee and be issued a release from the Glen Ellyn Police Department authorizing it to gain possession of the vehicle. 
(E)  The administrative and public safety fee is separate and distinct from, and in addition to, any fine assessed upon being found liable or culpable for the underlying offense and fees or costs owed by the owner to a private towing company for the towing and storage of the vehicle. 
(Ord. 5860, 4-26-2010) 
9-6-3. - Seizure and impoundment procedures. 
(A)  Whenever a Police Officer has reason to believe that a motor vehicle is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to section 9-6-2 of this chapter, the Police Officer may order that the vehicle be seized and impounded. The Glen Ellyn Police Department shall utilize the services of a private towing company. If towed, the motor vehicle must be impounded and stored in a secure facility owned, leased, or operated by the Village or a private towing company. 
(B)  The Police Officer shall inform the person being arrested for the offenses identified in section 9-6-2 of this chapter, or any owner of the vehicle at the scene of the arrest, of the circumstances, rights and obligations related to the: 
1.  Seizure and impoundment of the vehicle; 
2.  Owner's right to retrieve the vehicle by payment of the administrative and public safety fee to the Village and towing and storage fees and costs to the private towing company; and 
3.  Availability of posting a bond in the full amount of the administrative and public safety fee and to request a hearing before an Administrative Hearing Officer to determine whether or not the seizure and impoundment was proper. 
(C)  The Police Officer shall allow for another properly licensed and otherwise fit person to drive the vehicle, if insured, from the scene of the arrest if that person is the owner, or is authorized by the owner, and such person is present at the scene prior to the arrival of the tow truck. The Police Officer shall not be under any duty or requirement to: 
1.  Inform the person being arrested that he or she may contact another person to remove the vehicle from the scene of the incident; 
2.  Allow a driver being arrested to make or send a telephone call, electronic message or other attempt to contact a person to drive the vehicle from the scene of the arrest; and 
3.  Initiate such call, message or contact another person on behalf of the arrestee. 
(D)  Upon the arrest of a driver for violations referenced in section 9-6-2 of this chapter, the vehicle shall not be removed from the scene by any owner, or another person authorized by the owner, if the Police Officer determines that the vehicle should not be released due to the applicability of section 9-6-8 of this chapter. 
(E)  The imposition of the administrative and public safety fee shall not apply if the vehicle driven by a person arrested in connection with the offenses identified in section 9-6-2 of this chapter, was stolen at that time and the theft was reported to the appropriate Police authorities within 24 hours after the theft was discovered or reasonably should have been discovered. 
(Ord. 5860, 4-26-2010) 
9-6-4. - Release of motor vehicle. 
(A)  Any owner, or lienholder or lessor of record of a motor vehicle that is seized and impounded pursuant to this chapter may regain possession of the vehicle by: 1) paying to the Village the $300.00 administrative and public safety fee; or 2) posting a bond in the full amount of the fee, pursuant to section 9-6-5 of this chapter; and 3) providing proof of appropriate insurance. The fee or bond shall be paid at the Glen Ellyn Police Department. The fee or bond shall only be paid with cash, credit card, cashier's or certified check, or other type of payment acceptable to the Village that has the legal effect of being equivalent to the aforementioned methods of payment. 
(B)  Upon payment of the fee or bond, the department shall provide the payor with a document authorizing the release of the vehicle from the private towing company. The owner, or any authorized lessor or lienholder, may present the department issued document authorizing release to the private towing company, and upon payment of any fees and costs to company for towing and storage of the vehicle, shall regain possession of the vehicle. 
(Ord. 5860, 4-26-2010) 
9-6-5. - Right to a hearing; posting of bond. 
(A)  Any owner, or lienholder or lessor of record, shall have the right to a hearing before a Hearing Officer to contest whether the seizure and impoundment was proper. All requests for a hearing shall be made in writing to the Code administrator identified in title 1, chapter 13 of this Code. If a request for a hearing is made, a bond in the amount of $300.00 must be posted with the Glen Ellyn Police Department and it shall be held by the Village until the Hearing Officer makes a final decision. 
(B)  Hearings shall be held at the time and date provided for hearings under section 1-13B-2 of this Code. If a request for a hearing is not made at the time the administrative and public safety fee is paid or the bond is posted, the owner shall be deemed to have waived the right to a hearing. No party shall have a right to a hearing unless requested within ten days of the date of the notice referenced in section 1-13B-2 of this Code. 
(Ord. 5860, 4-26-2010) 
9-6-6. - Collection of unpaid administrative and public safety fee. 
If an administrative and public safety fee is imposed pursuant to this chapter the fee shall constitute a debt due and owing the Village of Glen Ellyn. The Village may collect on the debt using all means permitted by law, including, without limitation, obtaining a judgment on the debt and enforcing such judgment against the owner, or disposing of the vehicle as an unclaimed vehicle. The Village may commence legal proceedings to collect an unpaid administrative and public safety fee, or take actions to dispose of the impounded vehicle: a) 35 days after a determination was made at the requested hearing that the seizure and impoundment was proper, and no petition was filed in the circuit court seeking judicial review of the Administrative Hearing Officer's determination or other review; b) 30 days after a final order is rendered by a judge of the circuit court whenever a petition seeking judicial review was filed by a party; or c) 15 days after the notice provided in section 1-13B-2 of this Code was mailed and no administrative hearing was requested. 
(Ord. 5860, 4-26-2010) 
9-6-7. - Lienholders. 
Except as may otherwise be provided by law, no owner, lienholder, lessor, or other person, shall be legally entitled to take possession of a vehicle impounded under this chapter, until the administrative and public safety fee has been paid or a bond is posted. However, whenever a lienholder against the impounded vehicle has commenced foreclosure proceedings, then possession of the vehicle shall be given to lienholder without the requirement that the administrative and public safety fee be paid or bond posted, conditioned upon the lienholder agreeing in writing to pay to the Village the fee from the net proceeds of any foreclosure sale. 
(Ord. 5860, 4-26-2010) 
9-6-8. - Release of motor vehicle not allowed. 
The provisions of this chapter authorizing an owner, or other party, to regain possession of a motor vehicle are not applicable when vehicle or asset forfeiture proceedings have been instituted under state or federal drug asset forfeiture laws or article 36 of the Illinois criminal code of 1961. In such case, the Village shall not release, or dispose of, the vehicle to any person, except as consistent with those proceedings. 
In the event the Glen Ellyn Police Department determines that the vehicle seized and impounded pursuant to this chapter should not be released to its owner or other persons, or disposed of as an unclaimed vehicle, due to the need to retain the vehicle as part of a continuing criminal investigation, or as evidence in a crime, then the Village shall notify the owner no later than five days after the seizure and impoundment that the vehicle will be retained and not released except as required by law. 
(Ord. 5860, 4-26-2010) 
9-6-9. - Multiple owners. 
Whenever in this chapter the word owner is used, it shall apply to all owners. This chapter presumes that all owners have equal rights to a seized and impounded vehicle. In instances of multiple owners of a vehicle, the Village shall not have any duty or responsibility to inquire or determine whether all owners concur with, or object to, any action taken, or omissions, by any one owner in relation to the vehicle seized and impounded. 
(Ord. 5860, 4-26-2010) 
Chapter 7. - REGULATING WEIGHTS AND SIZES OF VEHICLES 

9-7-1. - Definitions and word phrases. 
(a)  Definition of words and phrases. The following words and phrases when used in this Code shall, for the purpose of this Code, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this article, except when the context otherwise requires and except where another definition is set forth in another article of this Code. 
(1)  Commercial vehicle. Any vehicle operated for the transportation of persons or property in the furtherance of any commercial or industrial enterprise, for-hire or not-for-hire, but not including a commuter van, a vehicle used in a ridesharing arrangement when being used for that purpose, or a recreational vehicle not being used commercially. A commercial vehicle shall be any vehicle or a combination of vehicles with a manufacturers GVWR, GCWR, registered weight, combined registered weight or actual weight on a scale of 10,001 pounds or more. 
(2)  Gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR). The value specified by the manufacturer or manufacturers as the maximum loaded weight of a single vehicle. The GVWR of a combination of vehicles (commonly referred to as the "gross combination weight rating" or GCWR) is the GVWR of the power unit plus the GVWR of the towed unit or units. In the absence of a value specified by the manufacturer, GCWR is determined by adding the GVWR of the power unit and the total weight of the towed unit and any load on the unit. 
(3)  Gross weight. The weight of a vehicle whether operated singly or in combination without load plus the weight of the load thereon. 
(4)  Highway. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
(5)  Implement of husbandry. Every vehicle designed and adapted exclusively for agricultural, horticultural, or livestock raising operations, including farm wagons, wagon trailers or like vehicles used in connection therewith, or for lifting or carrying an implement of husbandry. 
(6)  Motor vehicle. Every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle which is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires, but not operated upon rails, except for vehicles moved solely by human power and motorized wheelchairs. For this act, motor vehicles are divided into two divisions: 
First division: Those motor vehicles, which are designed for the carrying of not more than ten persons. 
Second division: Those motor vehicles which are designed for carrying more than ten persons, those motor vehicles designed or used for living quarters, those motor vehicles which are designed for pulling or carrying freight, cargo or implements of husbandry, and those motor vehicles of the first division remodeled for use and used as motor vehicles of the second division. 
(7)  Permit route. The route authorized by the issuing authority with proper jurisdiction over the roadway(s) for which permission has been granted to move a vehicle or combination of vehicles that is in itself indivisible or carrying an indivisible load that exceeds legal dimensions or weight or a combination thereof. 
(8)  Semitrailer. Every vehicle without motive power, other than a pole trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that some part of its weight and that of its load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle. 
(9)  Tandem axles. Any two or more single axles whose centers are more than 40 inches and not more than 96 inches apart, measured to the nearest inch between extreme axles in the series. 
(10)  Trailer. Every vehicle without motive power in operation, other than a pole trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the towing vehicle. 
(11)  Truck tractor. Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn. 
(12)  Village. The Village of Glen Ellyn. 
(Ord. 6667, 1-14-2019) 
9-7-2. - Overweight and/or overdimension vehicles. 
(a)  Reserved. 
(b)  Overweight and/or overdimension vehicles. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to be in control of, to drive, to park, or move on, upon or across or for the owner to cause or knowingly permit to be parked, driven, or moved upon or across, any street or highway under the jurisdiction of the Village, any vehicle or combination of vehicles exceeding the size and weight limitations stated in the ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5/15-102 (width), ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5/15-103 (height), ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5/15-107 (length), and ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5/15-111 (weight). 
(2)  Size and weights limitations while operating on Village streets shall not apply to fire apparatus or equipment for snow or ice removal operations owned or operated by or for any governmental body or to implements of husbandry temporarily operated or towed in a combination in the furtherance of a farm or agricultural endeavor and to any vehicle or combination of vehicles operating under the terms of a valid oversize and/or dimension permit issued by the Village under the authority of subsection (c). 
(3)  Where lower size and weight limits or other restrictions are imposed by ordinance under authority of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5/15-111, 15-316 and 15-317, and signs indicating such limitations or restrictions are posted, it shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle or combination of vehicles in excess of such size or weight limitations or in violation of such restrictions. 
(4)  Whenever any vehicle or combination of vehicles is operated in violation of this section, the owner and/or driver of such vehicle shall be deemed guilty of such violation and either or both the owner and driver of such vehicle may be prosecuted for such violation. 
(c)  Permits for overweight and/or overdimension vehicles. 
(1)  A permit shall be required for the movement of any vehicle or combination of vehicles with a nondivisible load on roadways and bridges within the jurisdiction of the Village which exceeds the legal dimensions and weights provided in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5/15-102 (width), ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5/15-103 (height), ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5/15-107 (length), and ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5/15-111 (weight). 
(2)  The Village with respect to any street or highway under its jurisdiction may upon application to the Village on forms provided by the Village and good cause being shown therefore issue a special permit authorizing the applicant to operate or move a vehicle or combination of vehicles of a size or weight of vehicle or load exceeding the maximum specified in subsection (c)(1). The applicant shall furnish the following information in the special permit application: 
 The name and address of the owner or lessee of the vehicle. 
 Applicant's name. 
 Type of permit request whether it be for a single trip, round trip, or multiple routing. 
 Description of the object or vehicle to be moved. 
 The number of axles of the vehicle or combination of vehicles. 
 The maximum axle weights of all single, tandem or series axles. 
 Maximum gross weight of the vehicle. 
 The maximum width, length and height of the vehicle and load. 
 Requested routing over Village streets to and from a specific location. 
(d)  For purposes of this section, the following definitions apply: 
(1)  A one-way or single trip movement means one move from the point of origin to the point of destination. Any additional stops between the point of origin and the point of destination are expressly prohibited. Single trip permits are effective for seven consecutive days from the date of issuance unless otherwise directed by the Village. 
(2)  Round trip movement means two trips over the same route in opposite directions, or upon an alternate route as prescribed by the police department on the permit. Round trip permits are effective for 14 consecutive days from the date of issuance. 
(3)  Multiple move permits when granted by the Village shall be for a period of time not to exceed 90 days from the date of issuance, and shall provide the applicant the ability to make unlimited moves on Village streets. 
(e)  The owner or his or her agent shall submit an application fee based on the below chart for a single routing which will be valid for seven calendar days, round trip routing valid for 14 calendar days and multiple routings valid for a base period of 90 days. Permits are valid only for the date periods specified on the permit and for the specific vehicle, load and routing as established by the chief of police or designee. No substitution of vehicle, load or routing is permitted without expressed written permission by the chief of police or his designee and the permit must be carried in the vehicle to which the permit applies. 
FEE SINGLE TRIP ROUND TRIP MULTIPLE PERMIT SIZE - WEIGHT (WITH LOAD)  Up to 100,000 pounds $50 $75 $200  100,001-120,000 pounds $75 $100 $250  120,001-150,000 pounds $100 $125  Over 150,000 pounds $150 $200 PERMIT SIZE - WIDTH (WITH LOAD GREATER THAN 8'6")  Up to 12' $50 $75 $150  14' $50 $75 $200  16' $75 $100  Greater than 16' wide $100 $125 PERMIT SIZE - HEIGHT (WITH LOAD GREATER THAN 13'6'')  15' $50 $75 $150  Greater than 15' high $75 $100 PERMIT SIZE - LENGTH (WITH LOAD)  115' $50 $75 $150  145' $75 $100  Greater than 145' long $100 $125  
(f)  Police escort may be required for vehicles operating under a valid overweight or over dimension permit which exceeds the weight and size limits described in schedule (e), and when, in the discretion of the police chief or his designee, is necessary to protect life safety, traffic flow and infrastructure. 
(g)  The permittee must make all arrangements with the police department at least 24 hours prior to the move. 
(h)  Fees for police escort, when required, shall be in addition to the permit fees. The applicant shall pay the cost for a police vehicle escort at a flat fee of $100.00. 
(i)  The chief of police or his designee is authorized to approve the application for approved routes. Upon approval and payment of all required fees, the Village shall issue a permit allowing passage of the oversize and/or overweight vehicles over Village streets. The permit shall be specific and contain: 
(1)  Permit number. 
(2)  The dates the permit is valid. 
(3)  Whether the permit is for single, round or multiple trip routing. 
(4)  The description of object or vehicle to be moved. 
(5)  Authorized gross weight, axle weights, width, length and height. 
(6)  The authorized routing over Village streets including the origin and termination point within the Village. 
(7)  The fee paid. 
(8)  The date and signature of the chief of police or his designee. Permits issued electronically shall be considered signed by the chief of police or his designee. 
(9)  In addition, the permit will specify general conditions that the permittee must comply with that are consistent and reasonable for the protection of the general public and Village streets. A copy of all permits issued will be provided to the Village administration for informational purposes. Any provisions listed on an approved permit will not be more restrictive than those afforded by the Illinois Department of Transportation (IDOT) OPER 993 form or the American Association of State and Highway Transportation Officials (AASHTO) Guidelines. 
(j)  It is the duty of the permittee to read and familiarize himself/herself with the permit provisions upon receipt. Undertaking of the permit move is deemed prima facie evidence of acceptance of the permit and that: 
(1)  The permittee is in compliance with all operation requirements; 
(2)  All dimension and weight limitations specified in the permit will not be exceeded; 
(3)  All operation, registration and license requirements have been complied with; 
(4)  All financial responsibilities, obligations and other legal requirements have been met; and 
(5)  The permittee assumes all responsibility for injury or damage to persons or to public or private property, including his or her own, or to the object being transported, caused directly or indirectly by the transportation or movement of vehicles and objects authorized under the permit. The permittee agrees to hold the Village harmless from all suits, claims, damages, or proceedings of any kind and to indemnify the Village for any claim it may be required to pay arising from the movement. 
(k)  The permit shall be carried in the vehicle to which the permit applies at all times while operating on streets within the Village and shall be exhibited upon demand to any law enforcement officer, police officer or authorized official of the Village. Electronic display of a permit on a device which may be inspected is authorized. 
(l)  Whenever any vehicle is operated in violation of the provisions of a Village permit whether it be by size, weight or general provisions, and either or both the owner or driver of such vehicle shall be deemed guilty, and either or both the owner or the driver of such vehicle may be prosecuted for such violation. 
(m)  Vehicles prohibited on certain streets. 
(1)  As provided under the authority of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5/15-111 and 15-316, it shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle upon any street where the operation of that vehicle is prohibited by ordinance and where signs of such prohibition are posted. Vehicles operating under the authority of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5/15-111 or 15-316 shall use the most direct route to points of loading and unloading. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful to park a commercial motor vehicle on a residential street while said truck is running between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the following day. 
(n)  Penalty. 
(1)  Any person, firm or corporation who or which violates, disobeys, neglects, fails to comply with or resists enforcement of the provisions of this chapter will be fined according to the penalty structures provided in the Illinois Vehicle Code as adopted by section 9-1-2 of this Code. 
(2)  In addition to seeking a fine, as hereinabove provided, the Village attorney may institute any proper action in the name of the Village to enjoin the violation of any provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. 6667, 1-14-2019) 
TITLE 10 - ZONING CODE 
Chapter 1 - TITLE, PURPOSE AND INTERPRETATION 

10-1-1. - Short title. 
This title shall be known and cited as the Glen Ellyn Zoning Code. 
(Ord. 6086, 11-13- 2012) 
10-1-2. - Purpose. 
This Zoning Code is adopted with the purpose of protecting and promoting the public health, safety, morals, comfort and general welfare. The fulfillment of this purpose is to be accomplished by seeking: 
(A)  To establish adequate standards for the provision of light, air and open spaces. 
(B)  To zone all properties with a view to conserving the value of buildings and land and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the Village. 
(C)  To lesson congestion on the public streets, and to facilitate the provision of adequate transportation, and of other public requirements and services such as water, sewerage, schools and parks. 
(D)  To avoid hazards to persons and damage to property from inappropriate development of lands and provide for adequate drainage, curbing of erosion and reduction of flood damage. 
(E)  To avoid undue concentration of population and to prevent the overcrowding of land, thereby ensuring proper living and working conditions and preventing the development of blight and slums. 
(F)  To foster a more rational pattern of relationship between residential, business, commercial and industrial uses for the mutual benefit of all. 
(G)  To provide for and preserve appropriate open space. 
(H)  To protect residential, business, commercial and industrial areas alike from harmful encroachment by incompatible uses, and to ensure that land allocated to a class of uses shall not be usurped by other inappropriate uses. 
(I)  To isolate or control the location of unavoidable nuisance producing uses. 
(J)  To facilitate the preservation of sites, areas and structures of historical, architectural and aesthetic importance. 
(K)  To establish reasonable standards to which buildings and structures shall conform, and to encourage reasonable flexibility of development design through appropriate innovation. 
(L)  To provide for the regulation of nonconforming buildings, structures and uses. 
(M)  To prevent such additions to, and alterations or remodeling of, existing buildings or structures as would not comply with the restrictions and limitations imposed herein. 
(N)  To define the powers and duties of the administrative and enforcement officers and bodies. 
(O)  To prescribe penalties for any violation of the provisions of this title, or of any amendment thereto. 
(P)  To implement the objectives of the Village Comprehensive Plan, as well as protect all appropriate existing structures and uses. 
(Ord. 3617, 5-8-1989, eff. 6-1-1989) 
10-1-3. - Provisions declared to be minimum requirements. 
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this title shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety and the general welfare. Whenever the requirements of this title are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, ordinances or resolutions, the most restrictive, or that imposing the higher standards, shall govern. 
(Ord. 3617, 5-8-1989, eff. 6-1-1989) 
10-1-4. - Ordinance provisions are noncumulative. 
This title is noncumulative in nature. Zoning district requirements do not accumulate from one district to another unless expressly stated. Each zoning district contains all regulations pertinent to itself without reference to other zoning districts. 
(Ord. 3617, 5-8-1989, eff. 6-1- 1989) 
10-1-5. - Separability clause. 
Should any section or provision of this title be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of this title as a whole, or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. 3617, 5-8-1989, eff. 6-1-1989) 
10-1-6. - Interpretation of use lists. 
The Building and Zoning Official may allow a land use to be considered as a permitted or special use which, though not contained by name in a zoning district list of permitted or special uses, is deemed to be similar in nature and clearly compatible with the listed uses. The Building and Zoning Official shall consult the Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) code to determine similarity or compatibility. However, such nonlisted uses shall not be considered for review and approval until the application for such use has been reviewed by the Village Attorney. All nonlisted uses which are tentatively approved by the Building and Zoning Official shall be added to the appropriate use list by ordinance at the time of periodic updating and revision. 
(Ord. 3617, 5-8-1989, eff. 6-1-1989) 
10-1-7. - Relationship to Village Code. 
This Zoning Code shall be considered an integral part of the Village Code of Glen Ellyn and, as such, is interrelated with all other titles, chapters and provisions of the Village code. All applications for permits under the terms of this title shall be subject to all the provisions of all other pertinent Village regulations. 
(Ord. 3617, 5-8-1989, eff. 6-1-1989) 
Chapter 2 - DEFINITIONS 

10-2-1. - Interpretation. 
For purposes of this title, certain terms or words used herein shall be interpreted as follows: 
(A)  "Person" means any individual, firm, copartnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, this and any other county, city and county, municipality, district or other political subdivision, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, or personal representative thereof. 
(B)  The present tense includes the future tense, the singular number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the singular. 
(C)  The word "shall" is a mandatory requirement, the word "may" is a permissive requirement, and the word "should" is a preferred requirement. 
(D)  The words "used" or "occupied" include the words "intended, designed or arranged to be used or occupied". 
(E)  The word "lot" includes the words "plot" and "parcel". 
(Ord. 3617, 5-8-1989, eff. 6-1- 1989) 
10-2-2. - Terms defined. 
The following words and terms, wherever they occur in this title, shall be construed as hereinafter defined. 
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE: A use or structure on the same lot with and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use or structure. However, no enumerated special use shall be considered to be an accessory use to any other permitted or special use, and a separate permit shall be required for each separate special use. 
ACRE: 43,560 square feet. 
ADDITION: Change to a structure or part thereof that increases the finished floor area of the building (class I: up to 75 percent; class II: 75 percent to less than 150 percent; class III: 150 percent or greater). 
ADULT DAYCARE CENTER: A nonresidential facility offering supervised care, recreation or training of adults. 
ALLEY: See definition of "street." 
ALTERATION: Any change to the exterior surfaces of a building or part thereof, including, but not limited to, renovation, rehabilitation, restoration, or rearrangement of structural parts or elements or any change that affects the plan configuration of walls, spaces, or bulk of a building (class I: up to 50 percent; class II: 50 percent to less than 75 percent; class III: 75 percent or greater). 
ALTERATIONS, STRUCTURAL: See definition of Structural Alteration. 
ALTERED SURFACE: The altered surface as described elsewhere in this title and used in subsection 10-8-6(B) of this title shall include all of the exterior surface of a building except the area of existing window or door openings, which will be relocated or will be removed and filled in with exterior wall material, shall not be included in the altered surface area. 
ANIMAL DAYCARE: Any premises where four or more domestic animals, over four months of age, at any one time, are accepted for care, exercise, or socialization. Animal daycare does not include overnight boarding. 
ANIMAL GROOMING: Any place or establishment, public or private, where animals are bathed, clipped, or combed and a fee is charged for such service. Animal Grooming does not include overnight boarding. 
ANIMAL TRAINING: An establishment where animals are brought and trained for the purposes of obedience, assistance, tricks or tasks. Animal training does not include overnight boarding. 
ANIMAL HOSPITAL OR CLINIC: See definition of Veterinary Animal Hospital Or Clinic. 
ANTENNA OR ANTENNA ATTACHMENT: Any structure designed for transmitting signals to a receiver or receiving station or for receiving television, radio, data, communication, or other signals from other antennas, satellites, or other services. 
ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE: Any building, tower, or structure used for the purpose of supporting an antenna. 
APARTMENT: See definition of "dwelling unit." 
APARTMENT HOTEL: See definition of "hotel, motel and apartment hotel." 
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD: The land which is subject to a one percent chance of flooding annually. This area may also be identified as that which is subject to the 100-year flood. The area is designated as zone A, A1-99, AH or AO on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM). 
ATTIC: For residential buildings, the space between the ceiling beams of the top story and the roof rafters, unless that space is accessible via a permanent stairway, and has a minimum of 100 square feet of area and a ceiling height of at least seven feet six inches over 50 percent of that area. 
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION: See definition of "garage, service station." 
AUTOMOTIVE, MOBILE HOME OR TRAILER SALES FACILITY: The sale or rental of new and used motor vehicles, mobile homes and trailers, but not including repair work except incidental to warranty. 
AUTOMOTIVE REPAIR SHOP: A building or premises used for the repair, rebuilding or reconditioning of motor vehicles or parts thereof, including collision service, painting and steam cleaning of vehicles. 
BALCONY: A projecting platform that is open and roofless and which is suspended or cantilevered from, or supported solely by, the principal structure. 
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. The base flood is also known as the 100-year flood. 
BASE FLOOD AREA: The land area subject to inundation by waters of the base flood. 
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION: The highest water surface elevation of the base flood. 
BASEMENT: That portion of a building all or partly underground but having at least one-half of its height, the distance between the ceiling and floor, below grade. 
BASEMENT, WALK OUT: That portion of a building located partly underground and having an exterior door, where the finished ground at that exterior door is lower than the finished floor. 
BEAUTY/BARBER SHOP: An establishment where people go to receive beauty treatments. These treatments primarily include one or more of the following: 1) cutting, trimming, shampooing, weaving, coloring, waving, or styling hair; 2) providing facials; and 3) applying makeup (except permanent makeup). Spa services may be provided as additional and secondary services. 
BUILDING: Any structure designed or intended for the support, enclosure, shelter or protection of persons, animals, chattel or property. 
BUILDING, ACCESSORY: See definition of "accessory use or structure." 
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance measured from the average existing grade on a zoning lot to the highest point of a structure. Chimneys may not exceed the building height by more than five feet. In nonresidential districts, antennas, chimneys and spires are excluded from building height. 
BUILDING HEIGHT, MAXIMUM: The additional height allowed in zoning districts if bonus provisions such as interior side yard setback increases, underground or enclosed parking or other improvements are provided. 
BUILDING LINE: See definition of "setback line." 
BUILDING PERMIT: A document issued by the Building and Zoning Official which authorizes performance of an activity which is subject to the Glen Ellyn Building Code. 
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: A building permanently affixed to the land in which is conducted the main or principal use of the lot on which said building is situated. 
BUILDING, TEMPORARY: Any building not permanently affixed to the land. 
BULK: A composite characteristic of a given building as located upon a given zoning lot, involving all of the following characteristics: a) ground floor area and height of building; b) location of exterior walls of buildings or structures at all levels in relation to lot lines, streets or to other buildings or structures; c) gross floor area of the building in relation to lot area (floor area ratio); d) all open spaces allocated to the building; e) the size and shape (area, lot frontage and lot width) of the zoning lot and the amount of lot area and lot width provided per dwelling unit or other unit of measure. 
CELLAR: See definition of "basement." 
CEMETERY: Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the animal or human dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes, including crematories, mausoleums and mortuaries if operated in connection with and within the boundaries of such cemetery. 
CHURCH: A building primarily used for religious worship. The word "church" shall include chapel, temple, synagogue and mosque. As a land use, "church" shall include the grounds surrounding said building, and shall include those activities and uses typically and incidentally associated with churches, including, but not limited to: Sunday schools; vacation Bible schools; meetings conducted on the premises by private groups; clergy residence; church offices; and columbaria and memorial gardens for interment of ashes. Such typical and incidental associated uses shall be treated as part of the church use and shall not require separate special use permits. 
CLINIC, MEDICAL OR DENTAL: A building or portion thereof, the principal use of which is for offices of three or more healthcare practitioners for the diagnosis and/or treatment of outpatients. 
CLUB: A building or portion thereof or premises owned or operated for a social, literary, political, educational or for recreational purposes primarily for the exclusive use of members and their guests. 
COLLEGE OR UNIVERSITY: An educational institution of higher learning generally offering academic training to graduates of high schools (grade 12). 
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE: Any vehicle, except standard passenger vehicles, operated for the transportation of persons or property in the furtherance of any commercial or industrial enterprise, for hire or not for hire, but not including a vehicle used in a ridesharing arrangement when being used for that purpose or a recreational vehicle not being used commercially. In any event, any vehicle that is licensed for a gross weight, including vehicle and cargo, of 8,001 pounds or more, or any vehicle used in a commercial enterprise and containing lettering on the vehicle body advertising that commercial enterprise, shall be considered a commercial vehicle. 
COMPENSATORY STORAGE: An artificially excavated volume of storage within the base flood area used to balance the loss of natural flood storage capacity when artificial fill or structures are placed within the floodplain. 
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The plan, or any portion thereof, adopted by the Village Board on April 9, 2001, by ordinance 4930, which establishes the goals, objectives and policies of the community and sets forth the general location and extent of present and proposed physical facilities, including residential and commercial uses, major streets, parks, schools, other public facilities and land uses, including amendments thereto when adopted. 
CONGREGATE HOUSING FOR THE ELDERLY: Multiple-unit housing designed as a planned, coordinated development that caters to the special needs of older people who are capable of independent living, yet need certain facilities and services available on site to compensate for declining mobility, perception and cognition, except the provision of ongoing on site medical care. 
CORNER LOT: See definition of "lot types." 
COURT: An open space more than one-half surrounded by buildings. 
CUL-DE-SAC: See definition of "street." 
CULTURAL FACILITY: A structure or premises devoted primarily to the arts and/or enlightenment. 
DAYCARE CENTER: Any childcare facility receiving more than eight children for daytime care during all or part of a day. The term "daycare center" includes facilities commonly called "childcare centers", "day nurseries", "nursery schools", "kindergartens", "playgrounds" and "centers or workshops for mentally or physically handicapped" with or without stated educational purposes. The term does not include: a) kindergartens or nursery schools or other daytime programs operated by public or private elementary school systems or secondary level school units or institutions of higher learning; b) facilities operated in connection with a shopping center or service, or other similar facility, where transient children are cared for temporarily while parents or custodians of the children are occupied on the premises, or are in the immediate vicinity and readily available; c) any type of daycare center that is conducted on federal government premises; or d) special activities programs, including athletics, crafts instruction and similar activities conducted on an organized and periodic basis by civic, charitable and governmental organizations. 
DAYCARE HOME: Any dwelling or family home which, as a home occupation, receives for care, for less than 24 hours per day, more than three and up to a maximum of eight children. The number counted includes the family's natural or adopted children residing in the home and all other persons under the age of 12. This term does not include facilities which receive only children from a single household. 
DEAD END STREET: See definition of "street." 
DECIBEL: A unit of measurement of the intensity (loudness) of sound. Sound level meters, which are employed to measure the intensity of sound, are calibrated in decibels. 
DECK: An open and roofless platform that adjoins a principal building and is supported by a means other than the principal structure. 
DENSITY: A unit of measurement; the number of dwelling units per acre of land. 
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, construction of or substantial improvements to buildings or other structures, the placement of mobile homes, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations. 
DISTRICT: A part of the Village wherein regulations of this title are uniform. 
DRIVE-IN COMMERCIAL FACILITIES: A use of land where services or goods are rendered or delivered to customers in vehicles. 
DRIVEWAY: A hard surfaced area on a zoning lot upon which vehicles may be driven or parked, and which may provide access to parking spaces. 
DRIVEWAY APPROACH: The area from street pavement to zoning lot which provides vehicular access to a driveway. 
DRY CLEANING: See definitions of "laundry, commercial and laundry, retail." 
DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY: A building consisting of three or more dwelling units, including apartments and condominiums that have common building elements such as entrances, corridors, driveways and garages and where the property on which the building is located is owned by a single party. 
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED: A building consisting of three or more dwelling units separated by common vertical walls where each unit is located on, or intended to be located on its own lot and may have an entrance opening directly to the outside. 
DWELLING UNIT: Space within a building comprising of living, dining, sleeping, storage, cooking, bathing and toilet facilities, all used by only one family as defined herein. 
DWELLING UNIT, SINGLE-FAMILY: A building consisting of a single dwelling unit only, separated from other dwelling units by open space. 
DWELLING UNIT, TWO-FAMILY: A building consisting of two dwelling units which may be either attached side by side or one above the other, and each unit having a separate or combined entrance or entrances, circulation, cooking, sleeping, or bathing facilities. 
EASEMENT OF ACCESS: A portion of land intended for the sole purpose of providing ingress/egress to a landlocked parcel. An easement of access shall not include land encumbered by a cross access easement. 
EAVE: The lower edge of a sloping roof surface; the top edge of a parapet or the top of a flat roof (for additional information regarding eave locations, building height or mansard roofs, see section 10-11-2, figure 5 of this title). 
EFFICIENCY UNIT: A dwelling unit consisting of one principal room, together with bathroom, kitchen facilities and closet space. 
FAMILY: One or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption, occupying a dwelling unit as an individual housekeeping organization, and including foster children placed by appropriate order of the court. A family may include no more than two adult persons unrelated by blood, marriage, adoption or foster child arrangement. A family may also include no more than four unrelated persons 55 years of age and older. Group homes and sheltered care facilities shall not be subject to the definition of family. 
FENCE: A tangible barrier constructed of any allowable material erected for the purpose of providing a boundary or as a means of protection, or to prevent uncontrolled access, or for decorative purposes (such as an ornamental gate or ornamental gates), and/or to screen from viewers in or on adjoining properties and streets, materials stored and operations conducted behind it. 
FENCE, OPEN: A fence, including entrance and exit gates, designed and constructed so that the surface area of any segment of such fence contains at least 33.3 percent open spaces, as compared to solid materials. 
FENCE, SOLID: A fence, including solid entrance and exit gates, which effectively conceals from viewers in or on adjoining properties and streets, materials stored and operations conducted behind it. 
FLOOD: The condition existing when the waters of any watercourse, pond or depression temporarily rise to a height above their normal levels and overflow the boundaries within which they are ordinarily contained. It also includes the unusual rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters. 
FLOOD FREQUENCY: A period of years, based on statistical analysis, during which a flood of a stated magnitude may be expected to be equaled or exceeded. 
FLOOD FRINGE: The higher portion of the floodplain, immediately adjacent to and on either side of the floodway, occupied by quiescent or slow moving waters during floods. 
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS): An examination and evaluation of hydrologic and hydraulic data sponsored by the federal insurance administration to determine base flood flows, elevations, areas, and floodways. The FIS also determines flows, elevations and areas of floods having lesser and greater frequencies of occurrence. 
FLOOD PROFILE: Graphical representations of the elevations of the water surface of the 100-year flood along the watercourses of the Village. 
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION: The elevation to which uses regulated by this title are required to be elevated or floodproofed. 
FLOOD RETURN PERIOD: See definition of "flood frequency." 
FLOODPLAIN: The special flood hazard lands adjoining a watercourse, whose surface elevation is lower than the base flood elevation, that are subject to periodic inundation during floods. 
FLOODPROOFING: Modifications to structures made to reduce flood damages. These changes may be made to existing structures or incorporated in the design of new structures. In all instances, floodproofing must be watertight and must be adequate without the need for human intervention. 
FLOODWAY: The channel of a watercourse and those portions of the adjoining floodplains which are required to carry and discharge the 100-year flood with no significant increase in the base flood elevation. 
FLOODWAY ENCROACHMENT LINES: The lateral boundaries of the floodway which separate it from the flood fringes. 
FLOOR AREA, GROSS: The sum of the gross horizontal area of the several floors of a building, excluding area covered by roofed terraces and roofed porches and excluding attics, basements and walk out basements. All dimensions shall be measured from exterior faces of walls. 
FLOOR AREA, NET (To Be Used In Calculating Parking Requirements): The gross floor area of a building for a specified use excluding floor space devoted to stairwells at each floor, washrooms intended for general public use, elevator shafts at each floor, public foyers and atria intended for general public use, and floor space and shafts used for mechanical, electric, and plumbing equipment. 
FLOOR AREA RATIO: The numerical value obtained through dividing the floor area of a building or buildings by the net area of the zoning lot on which the building or buildings are located or intended to be located. 
FOOD TRUCK: A licensed, motorized vehicle which is temporarily parked on a government or privately owned lot from which food and/or beverages are sold to the general public but not including ice cream trucks. 
FREEBOARD: An increment of elevations added to the base flood elevations to provide a factor of safety for uncertainties in calculations, unknown localized conditions, wave actions, and unpredictable effects such as may be caused by ice or debris jams. 
FREQUENCY: The number of oscillations per second in a sound wave, measuring the pitch of resulting sound. 
FRONTAGE: All the property on one side of a street or highway. 
GARAGE, PRIVATE: A detached accessory building or portion of a principal building used or occupied for the parking or temporary storage of household goods, automobiles, travel trailers and/or boats of the occupants of the premises and wherein: 
(A)  Not more than one space is rented for parking to persons not resident on the premises; and 
(B)  No more than one commercial vehicle per dwelling unit is parked or stored. 
GARAGE, PUBLIC: A principal building or accessory building other than a private garage, used or occupied for parking or temporary storage of vehicle and in which no other service shall be provided for remuneration. 
GARAGE SALE: The sale of miscellaneous used items commonly associated with residential use. Garage sales shall not be for the sale of primarily a single commodity. The term "garage sale" includes "sidewalk sale", "yard sale", "basement sale", and "estate sale". 
GARAGE, SERVICE STATION: Buildings and premises where gasoline, oil, grease, batteries, tires or motor vehicle accessories may be supplied and dispensed at retail and where, in addition, services and sales incidental to normal maintenance and repair of motor vehicles may be made, but such services and sales shall not include major mechanical and body work, straightening of body parts, painting, welding, storage of automobiles not in operable condition, or other work involving noise, glare, fumes, smoke or other nuisance factors. 
GARAGE, SIDE LOAD: A private garage where the overhead doors are perpendicular to the front lot line and generally not visible from a public way. 
GARAGE, STORAGE: Any building used or occupied for the storing of vehicles to be offered for sale or rental. 
GRADE: The average elevation of the surface of the ground of a zoning lot, measured at the four corners of a structure closest to the lot lines, before any dirt is moved. 
GRADE, AVERAGE EXISTING: The average grade calculated from the grade elevations at the four points where an imaginary line parallel to the front and rear yard setback lines and touching the proposed structure intersects the required side yard setback lines. 
GROUP HOME: A residential building housing not more than four people who have a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities, living with professional staff who function as surrogate parents. The group home houses individuals who are undergoing treatment or rehabilitation and constitutes a single housekeeping unit. A group home does not include a nursing home, hospital, adult day care center, child daycare center or a dwelling unit or living quarters which serves to house persons as an alternative to incarceration for a criminal offense. Where a sponsoring agency of the group home is required to be licensed or certified by the state, that sponsoring agency must maintain at all times a current and valid Illinois State license or certification by the State to operate. Five or more residents may be permitted by special use in certain districts. In cases where a special use is required, the total number of occupants of a group home may be further limited by the conditions of the special use where lawful. 
HEALTH SPA: A place or building where exercise, physical therapy, and related fitness activities are performed utilizing weight control or muscle building equipment or apparatus for the purpose of physical fitness. Also, a place or building that provides massage, exercise, and related activities with or without such equipment. 
HISTORICAL FACILITY: A facility devoted primarily to historic preservation, education, and the administration of activities or events related to those purposes including displaying, preserving, and exhibiting objects of historic, architectural, or archaeological interest. 
HOME OCCUPATION: Any occupation, business or commercial enterprise conducted within the home. 
HOSPITAL: A place used for the care, diagnosis and treatment of sick, ailing, infirm or injured persons, and those who are in need of medical and surgical attention, and who are provided board or room and kept overnight. 
HOTEL, MOTEL AND APARTMENT HOTEL: A building in which lodging or boarding and lodging are provided and offered to the public for compensation. 
HYDROSTATIC UPLIFT: The upward pressure exerted on floor slabs or an entire structure by standing water or groundwater, which tends to float a structure or crack the floor. It is based on the difference in elevation between the surface levels of the water. Hydrostatic pressure may also be horizontal, imposing forces on walls causing them to crack or fail. 
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE: Any solid material supported by the surrounding ground, including, but not limited to, compacted gravel or limestone, concrete, brick, paver stone or asphalt of which 50 percent or greater of the whole surface or portion thereof is incapable of allowing water to penetrate and which is commonly used for walkways, parking lots, driveways or recreation areas. 
IMPROVED STREET: A public or private street that is constructed or planned to be constructed in accordance with an approved plat of subdivision. 
INDOOR AMUSEMENT: Establishment providing five or more indoor player operated amusement or entertainment devices or machines. Such devices may include such things as pinball machines, video games, shuffleboard, dartboards and billiard tables. Typical uses include game rooms, billiard halls and video arcades. Indoor amusement shall not be constructed so as to include a bingo hall, gambling devices or any other devices prohibited by law. 
KENNEL OR CATTERY: Any business, premises, or portion thereof, in which more than four dogs or cats or similar household companion animals over four months of age are boarded overnight for compensation, bred, or kept for sale including boarding kennels, animal shelters, care services, pet resorts/hotels, animal rescue, and pet adoption centers. 
KINDERGARTEN, STAND ALONE: A kindergarten not located in the same building as an elementary school or preschool that provides educational instruction for four to six year olds. 
LAUNDRY, COMMERCIAL: Dry cleaning or laundry establishments, other than laundry retail, where the cleaning process is done on the premises by the operator of the establishment. 
LAUNDRY, RETAIL: Dry cleaning or laundry establishment where the cleaning process is self-service or is done on the premises in equipment units of 30 pounds' or less capacity or is received for processing off the premises. 
LIVE ENTERTAINMENT: Any musical act (including karaoke), theatrical act (including standup comedy), play, revue, scene, dance act or song and dance act, or any combination thereof, performed by one or more persons, whether or not they are compensated for the performance. Live entertainment applies to privately owned premises that are open to the public, whether or not admission is charged. 
LOADING SPACE, OFF STREET: An open area of land other than a street, public way, or required parking space, the principal use of which is for standing, loading and unloading of motor trucks, tractors and trailers, to avoid undue interference with the public use of streets and alleys. 
LOT: A parcel or tract of land. 
LOT COVERAGE RATIO: The numerical value obtained through dividing the sum of the gross horizontal area of the footprint of all buildings and covered or roofed structures on a zoning lot by the area of the zoning lot on which the buildings are located or intended to be located. 
LOT, FRONT OF: The narrowest portion of a zoning lot which abuts a street. 
LOT LINES: The dividing lines between a public way and an abutting lot, piece or parcel or the projected dividing lines between lots, pieces and parcels without regard to any recorded plat. 
The front lot line is the front street line. The corner side lot line shall be the street line that is not the front lot line. 
The rear lot line is the lot line most nearly parallel to the front lot line. 
Other lines are side lot lines. 
LOT MEASUREMENTS: A lot shall be measured as follows: 
(A)  Depth of a lot shall be considered to be the average distance between the front and rear lot line. 
(B)  Width of a lot shall be considered to be the distance between side lot lines measured at the minimum required front yard setback line in the zoning district. 
(C)  The measurement of lot frontage shall be considered to be the distance between side lot lines at the street right-of-way. If the side lot lines do not intersect the street right-of-way, the lot frontage shall be only that portion of the lot line abutting the street that coincides with the street right-of-way. For an arc shaped lot line, the lot frontage shall be the tangent or chord dimension toward the interior of the lot. 
(D)  The area of a lot shall be computed exclusive of any portion of the right-of-way of any public or private street or easement of access. 
For all plats approved by the Village after March 1, 1999, the area of a lot shall also be exclusive of any approved stormwater storage area or 100-year flood area. However, floor area ratio and lot coverage ratio shall be calculated using the gross lot area. 
(E)  In the event a recorded distance and a measured distance differ, the Village shall accept the recorded distance. 
LOT OF RECORD: An area of land which is designated as a separate platted subdivision lot in a subdivision plat prepared in accordance with the plat act and recorded in the Office of the County Recorder of Deeds. 
LOT TYPES: Terminology used in this title with reference to corner lots, interior lots, through lots, and reversed corner lots is as follows: 
(A)  A corner lot is a lot located at the intersection of two or more streets. A lot abutting on a curved street shall be considered a corner lot if straight lines projected tangent to the curve from the points of intersection between the curve and the side lot lines meet at an interior angle of less than 135 degrees. 
(B)  An interior lot is a lot other than a corner lot with only one frontage on a street. 
(C)  A through lot is a lot which fronts on two improved streets which do not intersect at the boundary of the lot. 
(D)  A reversed corner lot is a corner lot where the corner side lot line is substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the adjacent lot. See section 10-11-2 - Figure 1. 
LOT, ZONING: A single tract of land in common ownership located within a single block, which is used or occupied for any principal use, whether permitted, special or nonconforming. A "zoning lot" need not coincide with a lot of record, and may consist of: 
(A)  A single lot of record; 
(B)  A portion of a lot of record; 
(C)  A combination of complete lots of record; of complete lots of record and portions of lots of record; or of portions of lots of record; 
(D)  A piece of property described by metes and bounds. 
LOW SLOPED ROOF: See definition of "roof, low sloped." 
MAINTENANCE AND STORAGE FACILITIES: Land, buildings and structures devoted primarily to the maintenance and storage of construction equipment and material. 
MEDICAL CANNABIS DISPENSARY: A business regulated and authorized by the State of Illinois to sell legal quantities of cannabis derived products, including marijuana, to patients who are also authorized by the State of Illinois to purchase cannabis. 
MICRO FOOD AND BEVERAGE MANUFACTURING: An establishment not exceeding 5,000 square feet in floor area where food, beverages, and/or alcohol are processed or otherwise prepared and which may include the distribution of such items. 
MOBILE HOME: A structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis, and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. It does not include recreational vehicles or travel trailers. 
MOTEL: See definition of "hotel, motel and apartment hotel." 
NAIL SALON: An establishment providing nail care services, such as manicures, pedicures, and nail extensions. 
NONCONFORMITY: A building, structure or use of land (including use of a zoning lot) which does not conform to the zoning regulations of the district in which it is situated. 
NURSERY: Land, building, structure or combination thereof for the storage, cultivation, transplanting of live trees, shrubs or plants offered for retail sale on the premises including products used for gardening or landscaping. 
NURSING HOME: A place or residence for the aged or infirm in which three or more persons not of the immediate family are received, kept or provided with food and shelter, or care for compensation; but not including hospitals, clinics or similar institutions devoted primarily to the diagnosis and treatment of the sick or injured. "Nursing homes" typically provide ongoing, on site medical care. 
OBSTRUCTION: Any building or structure, or part thereof, which is located so as to intrude upon any open space required by this title. Trees or shrubs shall not be considered as obstruction, except as may be regulated herein. 
OCCUPANCY CERTIFICATE: A written statement by the Director of Community Development or the Building and Zoning Official that the building, use and premises is in compliance with all applicable standards, including this title. 
OCTAVE BAND: A term denoting all the sound frequencies between any given frequency and double that frequency. 
OFFICE, MEDICAL: An office used by one or two licensed medical practitioners for the diagnosis, treatment or care of human beings on an outpatient basis. 
100-YEAR FLOOD: A flood magnitude with a one percent statistical chance of being equaled or exceeded during any year. A flood this large would be reached once during a 100-year period, on the average. However, the occurrence of such an event does not diminish the chance of its recurring again at any time. 
OPEN SPACE: That part of a lot on which no part of a building or structure extends above the following elevations: 
(A)  Two feet above the highest curb elevation of the street or streets that bound the lot; 
(B)  One foot above the adjacent curb elevation for each one and one-fourth foot the building or structure is set back from the street lot line, except that no portion of the structure shall exceed 12 feet above the adjacent curb elevation. However, in no event shall any such structure included within "open space" extend more than two feet above the highest curb elevation bounding the lot. 
OUTDOOR BEAUTIFICATION DISPLAY: Outdoor displays of live or artificial plants, sculptures, statues and other similar displays of art and vegetation used to beautify and enhance the appearance of the Village provided that such items are not offered for sale. 
OUTDOOR MERCHANDISE: The display of products or services that are offered for sale or purchase and which are not located within an enclosed building. 
OUTDOOR STORAGE: The outdoor storage of any material, object, or item for a period greater than 96 hours, including, but not limited to, items for sale, lease, processing and repair (including vehicles) not in an enclosed building and excluding outdoor beautification displays and tables or chairs associated with an approved outdoor eating area. 
PARK OR PLAYGROUND, PUBLIC: A land use designed principally to offer recreation, passive and/or active, to the public. 
PARKING LOT: An open vehicle parking area containing more than four parking spaces. 
PARKING SPACE: A hard surfaced area other than a street or alley accessible from an approved driveway approach and upon which vehicles may be parked. 
PERFORMANCE STANDARD: A criterion to control noise, odor, smoke, toxic or noxious matter, vibration, fire and explosive hazards, or glare or heat generated by or inherent in the uses of land or buildings. 
PERMITTED USE: A use of land, building or structure expressly permitted within a district. 
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: One or more uses accommodated in a planned environment under more flexible standards than those allowed in the district(s) in which the development is located. 
PORCH: A one-story roofed structure attached to the house with no floor space above and no more than two sides of the porch are enclosed by a vertical wall, window or screened surface. 
PORCH, RAISED: A porch, with a minimum of 24 inches above any approaching walkway and that extends at least 75 percent of the maximum width of a house, where the floor surface of the porch extends at least seven feet from any adjacent wall surface behind or above. 
PREMISES: A lot together with all buildings and structures thereon. 
PRIVATE UTILITY USE OR FACILITY: Utilities that are not subject to Village acceptance for operation or maintenance. For purposes of this Code, private utilities may include such things as natural gas lines or facilities, power lines and plants, communication lines and facilities (with the exception of telecommunication uses) and similar uses and facilities. 
PUBLIC USES: Administrative and cultural buildings, uses and structures, including buildings, lots and facilities owned, used or operated by any governmental agency. 
PUBLIC UTILITY AND PUBLIC SERVICE FACILITY: Power plant, or bus, rail station, or other transportation depot, water treatment plant or pumping station, sewage disposal or pumping plant and other similar public service structures erected, operated or regulated by a public utility, by a railroad, whether publicly or privately owned, or by a municipal or other governmental agency, including, but not limited to, electrical, gas, rail transport, communication, public water and sewage services facilities. 
PUBLIC WAY: An alley, avenue, boulevard, bridge, channel, ditch, easement, expressway, freeway, highway, land, parkway, right-of-way, road, sidewalk, street, subway, tunnel, viaduct, walk or other ways in which the general public or a public entity have a right, or which are dedicated, whether improved or not. 
RANCH HOUSE: A single-family detached residence which has a single story above grade. 
RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT: A barbecue pit, hot tub, paved court, play structure and equipment, sauna, swimming pool, swing set, tree house, and other similar structures. 
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: Any camping trailer, motor home, mini-motor home, travel trailer, truck camper, van camper, and boat trailer used primarily for recreational purposes and not used commercially, as well as any vehicle bearing recreational vehicle (RV) registration (license) plates. 
RESEARCH ACTIVITIES: The conduct of research, development and testing in various fields of science, such as, but not limited to, chemistry, pharmacy, medicine, electricity, transportation and engineering. 
RESIDENTIAL SPORT COURT: Any hard surface or material and associated appurtenances (lights, nets, poles, screens, etc.) designed and constructed for the purpose of recreational and sporting activities on a lot used for residential purposes. 
RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT: A place of business devoted in whole or in part to the sale, rental and/or servicing of goods or commodities which are normally delivered or provided on the premises to a consumer. 
RIGHT-OF-WAY: A strip of land taken or dedicated for use as a public way. In addition to the roadway, it normally incorporates the curbs, lawn strips, sidewalks, lighting and drainage facilities. 
RIVERINE: Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries, streams, creeks or brooks). 
ROOF, LOW SLOPED: Any roof surface with a pitch less than three inches vertically in 12 inches horizontally (3:12), including flat roofs. 
SCHOOL, ELEMENTARY OR HIGH: A public or private educational institution whose principal use is the offering of primary and secondary school classes - grades K through 12. 
SCREENING: Any structure or vegetation that conceals, protects or separates. 
SEAT: The number of devices for seating individual persons or the number of spaces allocated for seating individuals (but not less than 24 linear inches) in multiperson seating units. 
SETBACK LINE: A line generally parallel with and measured from the lot line, defining the limits of a yard within which no building or structure may be located above ground, except as may be permitted by this title. A required front yard setback on a lot which does not abut a public right-of-way shall be measured beginning 15 feet from the closest edge of the curb or pavement of a private street or access drive on the same side as the principal structure. 
SHELTERED CARE FACILITY: A structure or part of a structure used for the temporary sheltering of abused individuals and/or the homeless. Qualified supervision and care shall be provided for those housed in the facility. 
SIDEWALK: That portion of the road right-of-way which is paved and intended for the use of pedestrian traffic. 
SIGN: An identification, description, illustration, or device illuminated or not illuminated, which is visible from any public place or is located on private property and exposed to the public, and which directs attention to a product, service, place, activity, person, institution, business or solicitation, including any permanently installed or situated merchandise or any emblem, painting, banner, pennant, placard or temporary sign designated to advertise, identify or convey information, and which is subject to regulation by the sign ordinance. For purposes of removal, signs shall also include sign structures. 
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. A system intended to convert solar energy into thermal, mechanical, or electrical energy. 
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, BUILDING-INTEGRATED. A solar energy system that is an integral part of a principal or accessory building, rather than a separate mechanical device, replacing or substituting for an architectural or structural part of the building. Building-integrated systems include, but are not limited to, photovoltaic or hot water systems that are contained within roofing materials, windows, skylights, shading devices and similar architectural components. 
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, GROUND-MOUNTED. A solar energy system that is mounted on the ground and not attached to any other structure other than structural supports. 
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, STRUCTURE-MOUNTED. A solar energy system that is mounted on the façade or roof of either a principal or accessory structure flush with a finished building surface, at no more than six inches in height above that surface. 
SOLAR PANEL. A group of photovoltaic cells assembled on a panel. 
SPECIAL USE: Includes, but is not limited to: a) public and quasi-public uses affected with the public interest; b) uses which may have a unique, special or unusual impact upon the use or enjoyment of neighboring property; and c) planned unit developments. 
SPECIAL USE PERMIT: The ordinance authorizing a special use. 
STANDARD SHRUB: A standard shrub is any plant specimen, evergreen or deciduous, which upon maturity occupies a space not less than 18 cubic feet. The plant selection shall be made from the recommended list of plant materials presented in the "Appearance Guide And Criteria" for the Village of Glen Ellyn. 
STANDARD TREE: A tree with a minimum caliper of three inches (measured one foot above ground), ten to 12 feet high, of a deciduous or evergreen variety which is normally capable of attaining a 25 foot overall spread when the plant is 20 years old. The plant selection shall be made from the recommended list of plant materials presented in the "Appearance Guide And Criteria" for the Village of Glen Ellyn. 
STORAGE LOT, VEHICLE: An open, hard surfaced area, other than a street or public way, intended to be used for the storage of passenger automobiles and commercial vehicles, and not available to the public. 
STORMWATER STORAGE AREA: That portion of a parcel of land which is utilized to meet the requirements of the DuPage County countywide stormwater and floodplain ordinance or the Village of Glen Ellyn stormwater and floodplain regulations or which is restricted from development by a recorded easement for the purpose of storing stormwater. A stormwater storage area may include, but is not limited to, "stormwater detention easement", "stormwater control easement", "easement for wetland", and "conservation easement". 
STREET, PRIVATE: An undedicated street, privately owned and maintained, and intended as a primary means of access to a lot or lots. 
STREET, THOROUGHFARE OR ROAD: A right-of-way as specified in the official plan of the Village of Glen Ellyn, which affords primary means of access by pedestrians and vehicles to abutting properties, whether designated as a street, avenue, highway, road, boulevard, lane, court, or however otherwise designated. 
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION: Any change, except those required by law or ordinance, which would prolong the life of the supporting members of a building or structure, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders, but not including openings in bearing walls. 
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. Among other things, structures include buildings, walls, fences, signs, air conditioning units and heat pumps, and other fixed mechanical equipment. 
STRUCTURE OR BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: A building permanently affixed to the land in which is conducted the main or principal use of the lot on which said building is situated. 
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals 50 percent of the fair market value of the structure either before the improvement or repair is started, or if the structure has been damaged, and is being restored, before the damage occurred. The term does not, however, include either: a) any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or b) any alteration of a structure or site documented as deserving preservation by the Illinois department of conservation or listed on the national register of historic places. 
SWIMMING POOL: A pool, open tank or other containment of water intended for swimming or bathing, containing at least 24 inches of water at any point and maintained by the owner or manager. 
(A)  Private: Exclusively used without paying an additional charge for admission, by: the residents and guests of a single household; a multi-family development; the members and guest of a club; or the patrons of a motel or hotel. 
(B)  Public: All other pools. 
TERRACE (OR PATIO): An open and roofless paved surface area located on the ground directly adjacent to a principal building and typically used for leisure purposes. 
THROUGH LOT: See definition of "lot types." 
TOWER AND ANTENNA, RADIO OR TELEVISION: Structure attached to a building or a detached structure affixed to the ground, used in the transmission, relaying or receiving of electromagnetic waves or signals. 
TOWNHOUSE: See definition of "dwelling, single-family attached." 
TRANSPORTATION PLAN: That portion of the Comprehensive Plan adopted by the Village Board indicating the general location recommended for expressway, arterial, collector and local thoroughfares within the corporate limits of the Village and/or unincorporated areas within the planning jurisdiction of the Village. 
TURRET: A pyramidal or conical tower-like structure that projects vertically from the edge of a building. 
USE: The specific purposes for which land or a building is designated, arranged, intended or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained. Use includes construction, establishment, maintenance, alteration, enlargement and occupation. 
VARIATION: An ordinance granting specific relief from the requirements of this title. 
VETERINARY ANIMAL HOSPITAL OR CLINIC: A place used for the care, grooming, diagnosis and medical and surgical treatment of sick, ailing, infirm, or injured animals and which may include overnight accommodations. 
VISIBILITY (OR SAFE SIGHT) TRIANGLE: That portion of a corner lot between intersecting property lines (actual or extended) parallel to streets and a straight line connecting them at points 30 feet distant from the point of intersection. 
WATERCOURSE: Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch or other drainageway in or into which stormwater runoff and floodwater flow either regularly or intermittently. 
WHOLESALE ESTABLISHMENT: A business establishment engaged in selling to retailers or jobbers rather than consumers. 
YARD: An open space on a lot, other than a court, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided in this title. 
YARD, CORNER SIDE: The open space between the closest point of the principal building and the corner side lot line and extending from the front line of the building to the rear lot line. 
YARD, FRONT: The open space across the full width of the lot extending from the closest point of the front line of the principal building to the front line of the lot. On corner lots, the front yard shall face the shortest dimension of the lot adjacent to the street. 
YARD, REAR: The open space extending the full width of the lot between the closest point of the principal building and the rear lot line. 
YARD, SIDE: The open space between the closest point of the principal building and the side line of the lot and extending from the front line to the rear line of the building. 
YARD WIDTH: The horizontal distance from the adjoining lot line to the closest point of the principal or accessory building. 
ZONING CERTIFICATE: A written statement by the Director of the Department of Community Development or the Building and Zoning Official attesting that the application complies with all pertinent requirements of this title. 
(Ord. 3617, 5-8-1989, eff. 6-1-1989; amd. Ord. 3953, 9-28-1992; Ord. 4194, 9-12-1994; Ord. 4195, 9-12-1994; Ord. 4235, 2-13-1995; Ord. 4282, 8-14-1995; Ord. 4673, 12-14-1998, eff. 3-1-1999; Ord. 5035, 1-14-2002, eff. 3-1-2002; Ord. 5123, 12-16-2002, eff. 1-1-2003; Ord. 5365, 6-13-2005; Ord. 5543, 1-22-2007; Ord. 5554, 2-26-2007; Ord. 5591, 7-23-2007; Ord. 5650, 1-28-2008; Ord. 5886, 9-13-2010; Ord. 6015, 3-26-2012; Ord. 6043, 6-25-2012; Ord. 6144, 6-24-2013; Ord. 6207, 1-13-2014; Ord. 6208, 1-13-2014; Ord. 6228, 4-14-2014; Ord. 6303, 3-9-2015; Ord. 6601, 5-14-2018; Ord. 6607, 6-4-2018; Ord. 6619, 8-27-2018; Ord. 6674, 2-25-2019) 
Chapter 3 - ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE OF DISTRICTS AND DISTRICT BOUNDARIES 

10-3-1. - Intent. 
The following zoning districts are hereby established for the Village of Glen Ellyn, Illinois. For the interpretation of this title, the zoning districts have been formulated to realize the general purposes as set forth in section 10-1-2 of this title. In addition, the specific purpose of each zoning district shall be as follows: 
(A)  CR Conservation/Recreation District: The CR district is designed to preserve the existing open space area or protect natural resources; a second purpose is that of protecting the public health, safety, comfort and welfare; and, thirdly, reducing financial burdens imposed on the community and its individuals by restricting the use of those areas which may be subject to periodic flooding or which constitute water retention or recharge areas; 
(B)  CC Community College District: It is recognized that public community colleges are enabled by the general assembly of Illinois and established pursuant to public referendum to provide educational facilities through capital projects in accordance with standards established by rules promulgated by the Illinois community college board in order to provide comprehensive higher education programs for the communities serviced by the public community college. Public community college facilities require unique uses with multiple buildings, recreational facilities and integrated vehicular and pedestrian systems and provide educational, economic and cultural benefits to the Village. For these reasons, it is appropriate to recognize the governmental powers of the public community college and to provide flexibility to public community colleges in the development of their property. The CC district is intended to provide such flexibility to the College Of DuPage. To the extent consistent with the public community college's educational mission, the Village shall engage with the College Of DuPage in a cooperative manner to minimize any negative impacts of development on the residential surrounding area. Development in this district shall only be in accordance with a master plan approved by the Village Board of Trustees; 
(C)  RE Residential Estate District: The RE district is intended to preserve the existing large lot single-family residential areas with a rural/country estate type setting that may be annexed to the Village. The requirement for curbs and gutters, sidewalks, and streetlights may be waived by the Village Board after evaluation by the Plan Commission. This district will be generally located on the periphery of the Village; 
(D)  R0 Residential District: The R0 district is intended to accommodate rural/country estate type residential uses, characterized as areas of low density, large lot single-family dwellings. The requirement for curbs and gutters, sidewalks, and streetlights may be waived by the Village Board after evaluation by the Plan Commission. This district will be generally located on the periphery of the Village; 
(E)  R1 Residential District: The R1 district is intended to provide for large lot single-family areas. This district will be located generally on the periphery of the Village; 
(F)  R2 Residential District: The R2 district is primarily designed to accommodate and protect the low density, single-family neighborhoods which comprise the bulk of the land use in Glen Ellyn; 
(G)  R2B Residential District: The R2B district was created with the intention of applying this district to certain portions of unincorporated DuPage County as they are annexed to the Village. The standards in this district are a combination of DuPage County's R4 single- family residence district and Glen Ellyn's R2 Residential District. By combining the standards of these two districts the Village hopes to better protect the character of existing single-family neighborhoods as they are annexed to Glen Ellyn and to reduce the number of nonconformities that may be created upon annexation; 
(H)  R3 Residential District: The R3 district is intended to provide areas of single-family, two-family and attached single-family dwellings. This district is also intended to serve as a transitional area between existing single-family residential neighborhoods and higher intensity land use areas; 
(I)  R4 Residential District: The R4 district is designed to provide varied dwelling types of moderate density consisting of attached single-family and multi-family dwellings; 
(J)  R5 Residential District: The R5 district is intended to ensure the planned and orderly development of those residential land areas identified within the Glen Ellyn Comprehensive Plan as areas which must be guided by an overall development plan to ensure the coordination of land use areas, dwelling unit densities, building sites, access points, internal circulation and open space systems. Within the R5 district, all unimproved land must be developed as a planned development, meeting all applicable requirements of the "planned unit development regulations" herein; 
(K)  C1 District: This C1 district is reserved; 
(L)  C2 Community Commercial District: The C2 district is intended to provide basic services and convenience shopping for adjacent neighborhoods as well as the entire community; 
(M)  C3 Service Commercial District: The C3 district is designed to allow for a wide range of retail and service uses and to accommodate those motorist oriented commercial activities which may be incompatible with uses encouraged in other business districts; 
(N)  C4 Office District: The C4 district is intended primarily to accommodate office buildings, and civic and governmental structures in a mutually compatible environment; 
(O)  C5 Central Business District: The C5 district constitutes the historic business area of the Village. The C5 district is comprised of two separate and distinct subdistricts: the C5A Central Retail Core and the C5B Central Service. A principal purpose of this district is to maintain and protect the primary retail core of the "downtown", generally bounded by Pennsylvania, Forest, Hillside and Glenwood (C5A subdistrict). This compact area should be intensely developed and oriented to pedestrian shopping. Outside this retail core area, the remainder of the C5 district (C5B subdistrict) is intended to accommodate necessary service uses and consolidated parking, while allowing for the gradual and planned expansion of the retail core. Within the C5 district, all unimproved land or additions to existing structures which increase the square footage of a structure that is 4,000 square feet or greater, or increase a structure any size by more than 25 percent must be developed as a planned development, composed of permitted and/or special uses in the C5 district, and meeting all applicable requirements of the "planned unit development regulations" and "administrative procedures" herein; 
(P)  C6 Commercial/Multiuse Planned Development District: The C6 district is intended to ensure the planned and orderly development of those areas identified as mixed use development areas in the Glen Ellyn Comprehensive Plan. These land areas are characterized by a number of unique design, land planning, and access considerations that warrant careful control of development by the planned development procedure. Within the C6 district, all unimproved land or additions to existing structures must be developed as a planned development, composed of permitted and/or special uses in the C6 district, and meeting all the applicable requirements of the "planned unit development regulations" herein; 
(Q)  I1 Light Industrial Zoning District: The I1 district is intended to provide an environment suitable for industrial activities that do not create appreciable nuisance or hazards and which can be located harmoniously on the same lot with office uses and in relatively close proximity to residential areas. 
(Ord. 3617, 5-8-1989, eff. 6-1-1989; amd. Ord. 3953, 9-28-1992; Ord. 5271, 6-14-2004; Ord. 5571, 4-23-2007; Ord. 6015, 3-26-2012; Ord. 6207, 1-13-2014; Ord. 6520, 7-24-2017) 
10-3-2. - Zoning district map. 
(A)  The boundaries of the districts are shown upon the map attached hereto and made a part hereof, which map is designated as the "zoning district map". The zoning district map is composed of two parts: 
1.  A Village-wide map; and 
2.  A detailed, small scale map of the central business district. 
The zoning district map and all notations, references and other information shown thereon are a part of this title and have the same force and effect as if the zoning district map and all the notations, references and other information shown thereon were all fully set forth or described herein. The original zoning district map is properly attested and is on file with the Village Clerk of the Village of Glen Ellyn, Illinois; 
(B)  Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated by official action of the Village Board of the Village of Glen Ellyn, the zoning district adjoining each side of such street, alley or public way shall be automatically extended to the center of such vacation, and all area included in the vacation shall then and henceforth be subject to all appropriate regulations of the extended districts; 
(C)  The district boundaries are as shown on the zoning district map, and where the district designated on the zoning district map are bounded approximately by street or alley lines, the centerline of the street or alley shall be construed to be the boundary of the district; 
(D)  Where the district boundaries are not otherwise indicated, and where the property has been divided into blocks and lots of record, the district boundaries shall be construed to be the lot lines of the lots of record. Where the district designated on the zoning district map are bounded approximately by lot lines of lots of record, said lot lines shall be construed to be the boundary of the districts unless the boundaries are otherwise indicated on the zoning district map; 
(E)  In unsubdivided property, the district boundary lines on the zoning district map shall be determined as reflected in the dimensions appearing on this map. 
(Ord. 3617, 5-8-1989, eff. 6-1-1989) 
10-3-3. - Automatic zoning. 
Any property(ies) annexed to the Village for which the Village Board has not adopted a zoning classification associated with such annexation shall automatically be zoned RE Residential Estate District, R0 Residential District, R1 Residential District, R2 Residential District or R2B Residential District, depending upon which of these districts will result in the majority of the zoning lots so annexed being conforming with respect to the bulk regulations of said zoning district. Automatic zoning granted pursuant to this provision shall not require a public hearing, and the appropriate designation as determined by the Director of Community Development, in accordance with the criteria set forth above, shall appear on the zoning district map of the Village of Glen Ellyn. 
In the event the petitioner disagrees in writing with the recommendation of the Director of Community Development, a formal application for a zoning map amendment to consider a different zoning classification may be filed in accordance with the procedures outlined in section 10-10-13 of this title, at the petitioner's expense. 
(Ord. 5487, 6-26-2006; Ord. 6674, 2-25-2019) 
Chapter 4 - DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

10-4-1. - Compliance with regulations. 
(A)  The regulations for each district set forth in this title shall be minimum regulations for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals, comfort, convenience, prosperity and general welfare; 
(B)  The regulations for each district shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure or land use within the districts, except as hereinafter provided; 
(C)  No building, structure, lot, parcel or zoning lot, or part thereof, shall be used or occupied except in conformity with all of the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located. There shall be only one principal building per zoning lot, except as may otherwise be permitted as part of a planned unit development. No accessory building or structures may be erected on a zoning lot unless a principal building is present on the same zoning lot; 
(D)  No building or other structure shall be erected, altered, moved, reconstructed, extended or enlarged: 
1.  To provide for greater height or bulk; 
2.  To accommodate or house a greater number of families or dwelling units; 
3.  To occupy a greater percentage of lot area; or 
4.  To have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards or other open spaces; 
other than herein permitted or in any other manner to be contrary to the provisions of this title; 
(E)  A residence may not be converted to accommodate an increased number of dwelling units unless: 
1.  The lot dimensions still meet the lot dimensions required by zoning regulation for new structures in that district; 
2.  The lot area per family or dwelling unit complies with the lot area requirements for new structures in that district; 
3.  The ground floor areas and/or the floor area ratio per dwelling unit is not reduced to less than that which is required for new construction in that district; and 
4.  The conversion is in compliance with all other relevant codes and ordinances; 
(F)  No single-family dwelling shall be converted to more than one dwelling unit in any single- family residential district; 
(G)  No portion of any zoning lot, whether improved or unimproved, shall be sold, granted or otherwise divided if such division will cause the lot width, lot frontage, lot area, setbacks, maximum lot coverage, floor area ratio or required open space of any of the resulting parcels to be less than the minimum requirements set forth in this title for the particular zoning district in which the property is located; 
(H)  Where two or more contiguous substandard lots of record or parts of lots of record are in common ownership and are of such size as to constitute at least one conforming "zoning lot", such lots of record or portions thereof shall be so joined, developed and used jointly for the purpose of forming an effective and conforming zoning lot(s). Such contiguous substandard lots of record in common ownership on the effective date of this title shall be considered jointly thereafter as being a single parcel, lot or zoning lot for the purpose of this title; 
(I)  Every building or structure erected subsequent to the adoption of this title shall be built and maintained upon a zoning lot conforming to the bulk requirements of the zoning district in which the property is located, provided, however, that the deck may be constructed on a developed single-family residential lot in the R2 Residential District which is nonconforming with respect to the bulk regulations of that district, subject to the regulations for decks set forth in this title. No existing building or structure shall be enlarged, altered, reconstructed, converted or relocated in such a manner as to conflict or further conflict with the bulk requirements of this title for the zoning district in which such building or structure is located; 
(J)  Notwithstanding the requirements of the preceding paragraphs of this section, a new single-family dwelling may be built and maintained in the R2 Residential District upon a vacant whole lot of record which has not been in common ownership with surrounding property on or after June 1, 1989, and which has less than the minimum lot width or minimum lot area required by the bulk requirements of said zoning district, provided any new single-family dwelling and accessory structures erected on the subject lot of record conform to all other bulk requirements of the zoning district in which it is located, and further provided that the vacant whole lot of record (subject lot) meets all of the following conditions: 
1.  The subject lot of record was platted as a single lot of record in an original subdivision or a resubdivision properly approved and recorded in the Office of the County Recorder of Deeds and was a buildable lot at the time it was recorded; and 
2.  The subject lot of record has a minimum lot width of not less than 50 feet and a minimum lot area of not less than 6,534 square feet; and 
3.  The subject lot of record cannot be combined with adjoining land to increase lot width or lot area to meet the minimum lot requirements for a single-family dwelling because: 
(a)  The necessary adjoining land is public property that is unavailable for purchase; or 
(b)  The adjoining land is part of an improved zoning lot and is necessary either to maintain the adjacent improved zoning lot in conformity with the bulk requirements or to prevent the improved zoning lot from becoming more nonconforming; or 
(c)  The applicant has made a good faith effort to obtain adjoining land, but has not been able to do so; and 
4.  The subject lot of record fronts on a street and lies between two intersecting streets where, exclusive of the subject parcel: 
(a)  At least 75 percent of the zoning lots fronting on both sides of the street, including corner lots, are improved with single-family dwellings; and 
(b)  At least 75 percent of the single-family dwellings fronting on both sides of the street are constructed on zoning lots with the same or less lot width as the subject lot of record. Dwellings on corner lots of equal or less lot width than the subject parcel shall be included in this calculation; dwellings on corner lots of greater lot width than the subject parcel shall be excluded; 
(See section 10-11-2, figure 10, "Area of Comparison (Sample)", of this title.) 
(K)  Notwithstanding the requirements of the preceding paragraphs of this section, a new single-family dwelling may be built and maintained in the R2 Residential District upon a vacant whole lot of record which has less than the minimum lot width or minimum lot are required by the bulk requirements of said zoning district and has been in common ownership with an adjacent whole lot of record which is improved with a single-family dwelling wholly contained on the adjacent whole lot of record, provided any new single- family dwelling and accessory structures erected on the subject lot of record conform to all other bulk requirements of the zoning district in which it is located, and further provided: 
1.  At the time of sale of the subject lot of record which resulted in a separation of ownership from the adjacent whole lot of record, the seller had been the legal or beneficial common owner of the subject lot and the adjoining whole lot of record on June 1, 1989. If the property was held in a trust or land trust on June 1, 1989, the rights granted in this section shall only apply to a person who was a beneficial owner under the trust or land trust; and 
2.  At the time of the above referenced sale, all of the other conditions set forth in subsections (J)1. through (J)4. of this section are met (with regard to subsection (J)4. of this section, the "subject parcel" is only the unimproved subject lot of record, and the adjacent whole lot of record shall count as an improved zoning lot); and 
3.  At the time of the above referenced sale, the improved adjacent lot of record has a minimum lot width of 50 feet and a minimum lot area of 6,534 square feet; and 
4.  At such time as a new house is constructed on the vacant whole lot of record, the total dimension of the combined adjacent side yards on the newly developed subject lot of record and the previously improved adjacent lot of record will be at least 13.2 feet; 
(L)  Notwithstanding the requirements of the preceding paragraphs of this section, in the event that a single-family dwelling is located on a zoning lot which lawfully existed on October 28, 1974, or which was lawfully established thereafter, such previously improved zoning lot may continue to be used as a zoning lot for single-family dwelling purposes, and repairs, additions to, enlargements of, structural alterations to, extensions of and reconstruction or replacement of the dwelling shall be permitted, provided all of the following conditions are met: 
1.  The lawfully existing zoning lot has a lot width of not less than 50 feet and a lot area of not less than 6,534 square feet; and 
2.  Any new construction, additions, enlargements, extensions, replacements or reconstruction and accessory structures erected on the lawfully existing zoning lot shall conform to all bulk requirements of the zoning district in which it is located, with the exception of minimum lot width and minimum lot area requirements; 
(M)  A single-family detached residence which exceeds the maximum height limitation may be enlarged not exceeding the existing height without a variation if the addition conforms with all other bulk requirements of the district in which such residence is located; 
(N)  The requirements of the individual zoning districts notwithstanding, the owner of a single- family detached house located in the R2 Residential District which existed prior to March 13, 1995, and which is located on a lot which does not meet the minimum required lot width or lot area, or which is nonconforming with respect to one or more of the following building setbacks: 
1.  Front yard: Provided the front perimeter wall encroaches five feet or less into the minimum required front yard; 
2.  Side yard: Provided the minimum setback of the affected side yard(s) is not less than four and one-half feet; 
3.  Corner side yard: Provided the minimum corner side yard setback is not less than 20 feet; 
4.  Rear yard: 
(a)  Interior lot: Provided the minimum rear yard setback is not less than 30 feet; 
(b)  Corner lot: Provided the minimum rear yard setback is not less than 25 feet; 
May construct a vertical addition over the perimeter walls of the house, or reconstruct or enclose an existing portion of the house which has an existing foundation or footing that complies with the requirements of the Village Building Code, provided, however: that such addition does not result in the front, side, corner side or rear yard setbacks being less than the minimum existing setback; that the addition does not extend the footprint of the house; that the existing nonconforming setback (s), lot area or lot width was not the result of a variation previously granted by the Village; and that all other applicable bulk regulations are met; 
(O)  On land hereafter annexed to, or consolidated with, the Village of Glen Ellyn, no building or structure shall be erected, enlarged or moved and no change in the use of land or existing buildings or structures shall be made until an ordinance designating the zoning district classification of such annexed land is duly adopted by the Village Board. If appropriate zoning is not approved concurrent with the annexation, then within 30 days of the annexation, the Plan Commission shall file an application for an amendment to establish the zoning district classification of such land. Action shall be taken by the Village Board regarding the classification of annexed land within 60 days of its receipt of the amendment application from the Plan Commission; 
(P)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, any lot with a preexisting nonconforming depth may be built upon provided that all other building, impervious surface, landscape and accessory structure setbacks set forth in this title are met. 
(Ord. 3617, 5-8-1989, eff. 6-1- 1989; amd. Ord. 3953, 9-28-1992; Ord. 4159, 7-11-1994; Ord. 4235, 2-13-1995; Ord. 4240, 3-13-1995; Ord. 4317, 11-27-1995; Ord. 5365, 6-13-2005; Ord. 5543, 1-22-2007) 
10-4-2. - Adoption of official schedule of regulations. 
District regulations shall be as set forth in the official schedule of district regulations hereby adopted and declared to be part of this title. All uses allowed within each of these districts must also comply with all applicable requirements contained in the "Supplementary District Regulations", as well as all other pertinent regulations in this title. 
(Ord. 3617, 5-8-1989, eff. 6-1-1989) 
10-4-3. - CR Conservation/Recreation District. 
(A)  Permitted uses: Only open space uses and passive recreation areas shall be allowed by permitted use in this district. All buildings, structures and principal activity areas shall be allowed by special use only, unless specifically waived by the Building and Zoning Official upon review and approval of the Director of Community Development. 
1.  Agriculture, including incidental agricultural structures, but excluding livestock operations. 
2.  Open space, public park and playground. 
All permitted uses must also comply with all applicable requirements contained in chapter 5, "Supplementary Regulations", of this title as well as all other pertinent regulations in this title. 
(B)  Special uses: Within this district, a primary consideration in the approval of special uses shall be public safety and the impact upon adjacent properties. No enumerated special use shall be considered to be an accessory use to any other permitted or special use, and a separate permit shall be required for each separate special use. 
1.  Cemetery. 
2.  Nursery, for the growing and sale of trees and shrubbery, but exclusive of retail sales. 
3.  Outdoor merchandise, storage, promotional activities, or tents. 
4.  Privately operated, not for profit, lake, swimming pool, or tennis court, on a site of not less than five acres. 
5.  Public or private recreational facility where buildings do not occupy more than ten percent of the site area including any parking lots located across a right-of-way provided they are within 300 feet of the property on which the facility is located. 
6.  Public school, elementary and high, or private school having a curriculum equivalent to a public school, elementary or high, and public office uses associated with the same, provided all such public or private schools have no rooms regularly used for housing or sleeping purposes, on a minimum eight acre parcel. 
All special uses must also comply with all applicable requirements contained in chapter 5, "Supplementary Regulations", of this title, as well as all other pertinent regulations in this title. 
(C)  Accessory Building and Uses: 
1.  See sections 10-5-4, "Accessory Structures and Uses", and 10-5-5, "Yards", of this title. 
2.  Food trucks, subject to the regulations set forth in section 10-5-20 of this title. 
(D)  Maximum height: 35 feet. 
(E)  Minimum yard and lot requirements: 
1.  Front yard: 50 feet in depth. 
2.  Rear yard: 60 feet in depth. 
3.  Side yard: 
(a)  Two side yards, neither of which is less than 15 percent of the width of the lot; 
(b)  A side yard abutting a street is not to be less than 40 feet wide. 
4.  Lots fronting on two nonintersecting streets: On lots fronting on two nonintersecting streets, a front yard must be provided on both streets. 
5.  Minimum width of side yard: The minimum width of each side yard for nonresidential uses shall be 25 feet. 
6.  Lot area: 18,000 square feet. 
7.  Lot width: 
(a)  Interior lot: 100 feet; 
(b)  Corner lot: 120 feet. 
8.  Land uses without buildings: Land uses without buildings or structures shall have no minimum lot area or lot width requirements. 
(F)  Signs, fences and obstructions in yards: 
1.  Signs as per sign ordinance. 
2.  See section 10-5-5, "Yards", of this title. 
(G)  Parking and loading requirements: 
1.  Public or private building owned by governmental agency: One space for each 250 square feet of floor area in the building. 
2.  Private recreational facility: One space for each 4,000 square feet of gross land area. 
3.  Nursery for the growing and sale of trees and shrubbery: One space for each 500 square feet of gross floor area, plus one space for each 4,000 square feet of gross land area. 
4.  Additional off street parking and loading requirements are found in chapter 5, "Supplementary Regulations", of this title. 
(Ord. 3617, 5-8-1989, eff. 6-1-1989; amd. Ord. 4282, 8-14-1995; Ord. 4673, 12-14-1998, eff. 3-1-1999; Ord. 4801, 1-10-2000; Ord. 5035, 1-14-2002, eff. 3-1-2002; Ord. 5543, 1-22-2007; Ord. 5591, 7-23-2007; Ord. 6263, 9-8-2014; Ord. 6303, 3-9-2015; Ord. 6674, 2-25-2019) 
10-4-4. - CC Community College District. 
(A)  Permitted uses: 
1.  Community colleges with master plans reviewed by the Village Board, including those uses and structures identified on the approved master plan. 
2.  Indoor and outdoor special events provided adequate traffic control devices are provided by the community college and that all parking is accommodated for on the college's property. 
3.  Open space, public park, playground, or garden. 
4.  Parking lots not shown on the approved master plan provided the design complies with the provisions of this title and/or the design of the parking lots as shown on the approved master plan. 
(B)  Special uses: Within this district, a primary consideration in the approval of special uses shall be public safety and the impact on adjacent properties. No enumerated special use shall be considered to be an accessory use to any other permitted or special use, and a separate permit shall be required for each separate special use. 
1.  Parking garage not shown on an approved master plan. 
2.  Private daycare center not associated with an educational instruction program offered by the community college. 
3.  Private nursery, prekindergarten, kindergarten, play, special and other private school not associated with an educational instruction program offered by the community college. 
4.  Public utility and public service use. 
(C)  Accessory buildings, structures and uses: Nonresidential buildings, structures and uses associated with and used to support the use of the property as a community college, including, but not limited to, buildings, structures and uses such as maintenance buildings, sheds, pavilions, satellite dishes, flagpoles and dugouts shall be permitted in this district. Any such building with an area of 5,000 square feet or less shall be considered an accessory building. Any such buildings with an area of 5,000 square feet or more shall be considered a principal building. 
Accessory buildings, structures and uses in this district must comply with the required setbacks set forth in subsection (D) of this section. 
Except as otherwise expressly stated in this chapter, accessory buildings, structures and uses in this district shall be exempt from the provisions in sections 10-5-4, "Accessory Structures and Uses", and 10-5-5, "Yards", of this title. 
(D)  Minimum yard and lot requirements: 
1.  Yards adjacent to certain boulevards and roads: 
Yards adjacent to Fawell Boulevard, Lambert Road and Park Boulevard: 80 feet in depth. 
2.  Interior side yard: 50 feet in depth. 
3.  Rear yard: 50 feet in depth. 
4.  Lot area: None. 
5.  Lot width: None. 
6.  Yard adjoining parking lots adjacent to residential uses: 50 feet in depth. 
Landscaping shall be provided between any parking lot and property line adjacent to residentially zoned property so as to minimize the trespass of noise and light onto adjoining residential properties. 
7.  Landscaping: An area 15 feet wide along any lot lines abutting a street shall be reserved for open space and appropriately planted and landscaped. 
(E)  Maximum height: 
1.  Buildings and structures set back between 50 feet and 80 feet from the property line: 35 feet. 
2.  Buildings and structures set back 80 feet or greater from the property line: 80 feet. 
(F)  Signs and fences: 
1.  Signs as per sign ordinance. 
2.  All fences within 100 feet of any property line shall comply with the provisions in section 10-5-5, "Yards", of this title. 
(G)  Parking and loading requirements: 
1.  The number of required parking spaces shall be as indicated on the master plan. 
2.  All loading spaces shall be adequately screened from adjacent public roadways and residential uses. Such screening shall consist of a wall, fence and/or landscaping that visually screens the loading area and minimizes the trespass of noise and light onto the street and/or adjoining residential properties. The college shall otherwise be exempt from the provisions in section 10-5-9, "Off Street Loading Requirements", of this title. 
(Ord. 3617, 5-8-1989, eff. 6-1-1989; amd. Ord. 5543, 1-22-2007; Ord. 5571, 4-23-2007) 
10-4-5. - RE Residential Estate District. 
(A)  Permitted uses: The only use permitted in the RE Residential Estate District shall be a detached single-family dwelling. 
(B)  Special uses: Group home (up to four residents). 
(C)  Accessory building and uses: See sections 10-5-4, "Accessory Structures and Uses", and 10-5-5, "Yards", of this title. 
(D)  Minimum yard and lot requirements: 
1.  Front yard: The front yard shall be measured from the front lot line to the closest enclosed point of the principal structure. 
(a)  Sixty feet in depth. 
(b)  Front yards necessary to comply with obligations assumed in nonexpired annexation agreements entered into prior to May 1, 2004. 
2.  Rear yard: 60 feet in depth. 
3.  Interior side yard: 
(a)  Minimum interior side yard setback: 30 feet. 
(b)  Interior side yards necessary to comply with obligations assumed in nonexpired annexation agreements entered into prior to May 1, 2004. 
4.  Corner side yard: 
(a)  Sixty feet in depth. 
(b)  Corner side yards necessary to comply with obligations assumed in nonexpired annexation agreements entered into prior to May 1, 2004. 
5.  Lots fronting on two nonintersecting streets: On lots fronting on two nonintersecting streets, with the exception of alleys, where access on both public ways is allowed, a front yard must be provided on both streets. Where a lot fronts on two nonintersecting streets, one of which is an improved or unimproved alley, the yard closest to the alley shall be considered a rear yard. 
6.  Lot area: 
(a)  Fifty thousand square feet. 
(b)  Vacant lots existing on January 1, 2004: 40,000 square feet. 
(c)  The lot area of improved lots with houses shall be considered conforming at the area existing on January 1, 2004. 
(d)  Lot areas necessary to comply with obligations assumed in nonexpired annexation agreements entered into prior to May 1, 2004. 
7.  Lot width: 
(a)  One hundred fifty feet. 
(b)  Lot widths necessary to comply with obligations assumed in nonexpired annexation agreements entered into prior to May 1, 2004. 
8.  Lot depth: 160 feet. 
(E)  Maximum lot coverage ratios: 
1.  Lot coverage ratio: Lot coverage ratio, single-family dwellings and accessory buildings: 15 percent up to a maximum of 7,500 square feet. 
2.  Lot coverage ratio bonuses: 
(a)  The first 500 square feet of the area of any detached garage shall be excluded from the lot coverage ratio calculation. 
(b)  The first 240 square feet of a porch, located in the front yard or in the corner side yard, which has a minimum depth of six feet with no more than one side of the porch enclosed by a vertical wall, shall be excluded from the lot coverage ratio; 
Or 
The first 140 square feet of the area of a porch, located in the front yard or in the corner side yard, which has a minimum depth of six feet and is open on at least two sides shall be excluded from the lot coverage ratio. 
(F)  Maximum height: 
1.  Building height: 
House Ridge House Ridge Maximum (With Bonus) Maximum House Eave 3 House Eave Maximum (With Bonus) 3 Maximum Detached Garage Ridge Maximum Detached Garage Eave 37 feet 42 feet 1,2 27 feet 32 feet 1,2 22 feet 12 feet  
Notes: 
1.  Setback bonus; ridge: An increase of both side yard setbacks and the front yard setback of five feet or more than the required setback allows one foot more of ridge height per five foot increment up to its maximum. 
2.  Setback bonus; eave: An increase of both side yard setbacks and the front yard setback of five feet or more than the required setback allows one foot more of eave height per five foot increment up to its maximum. 
3.  The eave height shall not apply to dormer(s) no greater than eight feet wide and the combined dormer width shall not exceed 25 percent of the length of the building side measured to the outside edges, provided the dormers are separated by a minimum of five feet. 
2.  Architectural features : The maximum height shall not apply to architectural features such as spires, weather vanes, turrets, 50 percent open guardrails or lightning rods provided the top of the feature does not exceed five feet, or ten feet in the case of a turret, above the highest permitted ridge height on a principal structure, and not more than one architectural feature shall be permitted above the permitted height on a building, excepting that a turret may have either a spire or a weather vane at its peak. A turret shall adhere to the same setback requirements as the principal structure on the lot. 
(G)  Signs, fences and obstructions in yards: 
1.  Signs as per sign ordinance. 
2.  See section 10-5-5, "Yards", of this title. 
(H)  Parking and loading requirements: 
1.  Single-family dwelling: Not less than two spaces. 
2.  Additional off street parking and loading requirements are found in chapter 5, "Supplementary Regulations", of this title. 
(Ord. 5271, 6-14-2004; amd. Ord. 5365, 6-13-2005; Ord. 5543, 1-22-2007; Ord. 5554, 2-26-2007; Ord. 6601, 5-14-2018; Ord. 6619, 8-27-2018) 
10-4-6. - R0 Residential District. 
(A)  Permitted uses: 
1.  Single-family dwelling. 
2.  Public park or playground. 
3.  Public school, elementary and high, or private school having a curriculum equivalent to a public school, elementary or high, and all such public or private schools having no rooms regularly used for housing or sleeping purposes. 
All permitted uses must also comply with all applicable requirements contained in chapter 5, "Supplementary Regulations", of this title as well as all other pertinent regulations in this title. 
(B)  Special uses: No enumerated special use shall be considered to be an accessory use to any other permitted or special use, and a separate permit shall be required for each separate special use. 
1.  Adult daycare center, in other than a dwelling. 
2.  Cemetery. 
3.  Church. 
4.  Convent, monastery and seminary. 
5.  Cultural facility. 
6.  Daycare center, in other than a dwelling. 
7.  Special uses: Group home (up to four residents). 
8.  Nursery, prekindergarten, stand-alone kindergarten, play, special and other private school. 
9.  Privately operated, not for profit, lake, swimming pool, or tennis court, on a site of not less than five acres. 
10.  Private recreational facility where buildings do not occupy more than ten percent of the site area. 
11.  Public use. 
12.  Public utility and public service use. 
13.  Television and radio tower, antenna support structure, church spire, belfry, monument, tank, water and fire tower, stage tower or scenery loft, cooling tower, ornamental tower, and spire, chimney, elevator bulkhead, conveyor and flagpole which exceed the maximum height. 
All special uses must also comply with all applicable requirements contained in chapter 5, "Supplementary Regulations", of this title, as well as all other pertinent regulations in this title. 
(C)  Accessory building and uses: See sections 10-5-4, "Accessory structures and uses", and 10-5-5, "Yards", of this title. 
(D)  Minimum yard and lot requirements: 
1.  Front yard: 50 feet in depth. 
The front yard setback distance shall be measured from the front lot line to the closest enclosed point of the principal structure. The initial principal structure erected on a lot in a subdivision recorded with the DuPage County Recorder of Deeds office after March 1, 1999, may be constructed to the minimum required front yard setback line of 50 feet. 
2.  Rear yard: 60 feet in depth. 
3.  Interior side yard : Minimum interior side yard setback: Each side yard shall be 15 feet or 15 percent of the lot width, whichever is greater. 
4.  Corner side yard setback: 40 feet. 
5.  Lots fronting on two nonintersecting streets: On lots fronting on two nonintersecting streets, with the exception of alleys, where access on both public ways is allowed, a front yard must be provided on both streets. Where a lot fronts on two nonintersecting streets, one of which is an improved or unimproved alley, the yard closest to the alley shall be considered a rear yard. 
6.  Minimum width: The minimum width of each side yard for schools and special uses shall be 25 feet. 
7.  Lot area: 18,000 square feet. 
8.  Lot width: 100 feet. 
9.  Lot depth: 150 feet. 
(E)  Maximum lot coverage ratios: 
1.  Lot coverage ratio, more than one story: Lot coverage ratio, single-family dwellings, more than one story, and accessory buildings: 20 percent of the lot. 
2.  Lot coverage ratio, one-story and accessory buildings: Lot coverage ratio, single- family dwellings, one-story and accessory buildings: 35 percent of the lot. 
3.  Lot coverage ratio bonuses: 
(a)  The first 500 square feet of the area of any detached garage shall be excluded from the lot coverage ratio calculation. 
(b)  The first 240 square feet of a porch, located in the front yard or in the corner side yard, which has a minimum depth of six feet with no more than one side of the porch enclosed by a vertical wall, shall be excluded from the lot coverage ratio; 
Or 
The first 140 square feet of the area of a porch, located in the front yard or in the corner side yard, which has a minimum depth of six feet and is open on at least two sides shall be excluded from the lot coverage ratio. 
(F)  Maximum height: 
1.  For single-family dwellings, see subsection 10-4-8(F), "Maximum height", of this chapter. 
2.  Special uses and schools: Special uses and schools may be erected to a height not exceeding 45 feet, and churches and temples may be erected to a height not exceeding 75 feet, if the building is set back from each yard line at least two feet for each foot of additional building height above the height limit otherwise permitted in the district. 
3.  The height of a television or radio tower, antenna support structure, church spire, belfry, monument, tank, water and fire tower, stage tower or scenery loft, cooling tower, ornamental tower, and spire, chimney, elevator bulkhead, conveyor and flagpole shall be specified in the ordinance granting a special use permit. 
4.  Architectural features: See subsection 10-4-8(F)3. of this chapter. 
(G)  Signs, fences and obstructions in yards: 
1.  Signs as per sign ordinance. 
2.  See section 10-5-5, "Yards", of this title. 
(H)  Parking and loading requirements: 
1.  Single-family dwelling: Not less than two spaces. 
2.  Church: One space for each four seats in the main auditorium. 
3.  School: For high schools - one space for each employee, plus one space for each five students, based on design capacity; for elementary schools - one space for each employee plus eight additional visitor spaces. 
4.  Public building erected by governmental agency: One space for each 250 square feet of floor area in the building. 
5.  Daycare center and preschool facility: One space for each 800 square feet of gross floor area. 
6.  Private recreational facility: One space for each 4,000 square feet of land area. 
7.  Cultural facility: Two spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
8.  Additional off street parking and loading requirements are found in chapter 5, "Supplementary Regulations", of this title. 
(Ord. 3617, 5-8-1989, eff. 6-1-1989; amd. Ord. 3815, 2-25-1991; Ord. 4235, 2-13-1995; Ord. 4282, 8-14-1995; Ord. 4673, 12-14- 1998, eff. 3-1-1999; Ord. 5035, 1-14-2002, eff. 3-1-2002; Ord. 5365, 6-13-2005; Ord. 5543, 1-22-2007; Ord. 5554, 2-26-2007; Ord. 6144, 6-24-2013; Ord. 6601, 5-14-2018; Ord. 6619, 8-27-2018) 
10-4-7. - R1 Residential District. 
(A)  Permitted uses: 
1.  Single-family dwelling. 
2.  Public parks or playground. 
3.  Public school, elementary and high, or private school having a curriculum equivalent to a public school, elementary or high, and all such public or private schools having no rooms regularly used for housing or sleeping purposes. 
All permitted uses must also comply with all applicable requirements contained in chapter 5, "Supplementary Regulations", of this title as well as all other pertinent regulations in this title. 
(B)  Special uses: No enumerated special use shall be considered to be an accessory use to any other permitted or special use, and a separate permit shall be required for each separate special use. 
1.  Adult daycare center, in other than a dwelling. 
2.  Cemetery. 
3.  Church. 
4.  College and university. 
5.  Convent, monastery and seminary. 
6.  Cultural facility. 
7.  Daycare center, in other than a dwelling. 
8.  Special uses: Group home (up to four residents). 
9.  Planned residential development on a site of one acre or more, in accordance with the provisions of the "planned unit development regulations", provided, however, that no planned residential development shall have a building height in excess of 35 feet. 
10.  Nursery, prekindergarten, stand-alone kindergarten, play, special and other private school. 
11.  Privately operated, not for profit, lake, swimming pool, or tennis court, on a site of not less than five acres. 
12.  Private recreational facility where buildings do not occupy more than ten percent of the site area. 
13.  Public use. 
14.  Public utility and public service use. 
15.  Television and radio tower, antenna support structure, church spire, belfry, monument, tank, water and fire tower, stage tower or scenery loft, cooling tower, ornamental tower, and spire, chimney, elevator bulkhead, conveyor and flagpole which exceed the maximum height. 
All special uses must also comply with all applicable requirements contained in chapter 5, "Supplementary Regulations", of this title, as well as all other pertinent regulations in this title. 
(C)  Accessory building and uses: See sections 10-5-4, "Accessory structures and uses", and 10-5-5, "Yards", of this title. 
(D)  Minimum yard and lot requirements: 
1.  Front yard: The front yard setback distance shall be measured from the front lot line to the closest enclosed point of the principal structure. The initial principal structure erected on a lot in a subdivision recorded with the DuPage County Recorder of Deeds office after March 1, 1999, may be constructed to the minimum required front yard setback line of 40 feet. 
(a)  Forty feet in depth; and 
(b)  The proposed principal structure (or addition thereto) shall be no closer to the street than the closest principal structure on either adjacent lot on the same block and same side of the street; but 
(c)  The proposed principal structure (or addition thereto) need not be farther than 50 feet from the front lot line. 
2.  Rear yard: 50 feet in depth. 
3.  Interior side yard : Minimum interior side yard setback: Each side yard shall be nine feet or 10 percent of the lot width, whichever is greater. 
4.  Corner side yard setback: 40 feet. 
5.  Lots fronting on two nonintersecting streets: On lots fronting on two nonintersecting streets, with the exception of alleys, where access on both public ways is allowed, a front yard must be provided on both streets. Where a lot fronts on two nonintersecting streets, one of which is an improved or unimproved alley, the yard closest to the alley shall be considered a rear yard. 
6.  Minimum width: The minimum width of each side yard for schools and special uses shall be 25 feet. 
7.  Lot area: 14,500 square feet. 
8.  Lot width: 
(a)  Interior lot: 90 feet; 
(b)  Corner lot: 108 feet. 
9.  Lot depth: 130 feet. 
(E)  Maximum lot coverage ratio: 
1.  Lot coverage ratio, more than one story: Lot coverage ratio, single-family dwellings, more than one story, and accessory buildings: 20 percent of the lot. 
2.  Lot coverage ratio, one-story and accessory buildings: Lot coverage ratio, single-family dwellings, one-story and accessory buildings: 35 percent of the lot. 
3.  Lot coverage ratio bonuses: 
(a)  The first 500 square feet of the area of any detached garage shall be excluded from the lot coverage ratio calculation. 
(b)  The first 240 square feet of a porch, located in the front yard or in the corner side yard, which has a minimum depth of six feet with no more than one side of the porch enclosed by a vertical wall, shall be excluded from the lot coverage ratio; 
Or 
The first 140 square feet of the area of a porch, located in the front yard or in the corner side yard, which has a minimum depth of six feet and is open on at least two sides shall be excluded from the lot coverage ratio. 
(F)  Maximum height: 
1.  For single-family dwellings, see subsection 10-4-8(F), "Maximum Height", of this chapter. 
2.  Special uses and schools may be erected to a height not exceeding 45 feet, and churches and temples may be erected to a height not exceeding 75 feet, if the building is set back from each yard line at least two feet for each foot of additional building height above the height limit otherwise permitted in the district. 
3.  The height of a television or radio tower, antenna support structure, church spire, belfry, monument, tank, water and fire tower, stage tower or scenery loft, cooling tower, ornamental tower, and spire, chimney, elevator bulkhead, conveyor and flagpole shall be specified in the ordinance granting a special use permit. 
4.  Architectural features: See subsection 10-4-8(F)3. of this chapter. 
(G)  Signs, fences and obstructions in yards: 
1.  Signs as per sign ordinance. 
2.  See section 10-5-5, "Yards", of this title. 
(H)  Parking and loading requirements: 
1.  Single-family dwelling: Not less than two parking spaces. 
2.  Church: One parking space for each four seats in the main auditorium. 
3.  College and university: One space for each employee, plus one space for each three students, based on design capacity. 
4.  Cultural facility: Two spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
5.  Daycare center and preschool facility: One space for each 800 square feet of gross floor area. 
6.  Private recreational facility: One space for each 4,000 square feet of gross land area. 
7.  Public building erected by governmental agency: One space for each 250 square feet of floor area in the building. 
8.  School: For high schools - one space for each employee, plus one space for each five students, based on design capacity; for elementary schools - one space for each employee plus eight additional visitor spaces. 
9.  Additional off street parking and loading requirements are found in chapter 5, "Supplementary Regulations", of this title. 
(Ord. 3617, 5-8-1989, eff. 6-1-1989; amd. Ord. 3815, 2-25-1991; Ord. 4194, 9-12-1994; Ord. 4195, 9-12-1994; Ord. 4235, 2-13- 1995; Ord. 4282, 8-14-1995; Ord. 4673, 12-14-1998, eff. 3-1-1999; Ord. 5035, 1-14- 2002, eff. 3-1-2002; Ord. 5365, 6-13-2005; Ord. 5543, 1-22-2007; Ord. 5554, 2-26- 2007; Ord. 6144, 6-24-2013; Ord. 6601, 5-14-2018; Ord. 6619, 8-27-2018) 
10-4-8. - R2 Residential District. 
(A)  Permitted uses: 
1.  Single-family dwelling. 
2.  Public park or playground. 
3.  Public school, elementary and high, or private school having a curriculum equivalent to a public school, elementary or high, and all such public or private schools having no rooms regularly used for housing or sleeping purposes. 
All permitted uses must also comply with all applicable requirements contained in chapter 5, "Supplementary Regulations", of this title as well as all other pertinent regulations in this title. 
(B)  Special uses: No enumerated special use shall be considered to be an accessory use to any other permitted or special use, and a separate permit shall be required for each separate special use. 
1.  Adult daycare center, in other than a dwelling. 
2.  Cemetery. 
3.  Church. 
4.  Convent, monastery and seminary. 
5.  Cultural facility. 
6.  Daycare center, in other than a dwelling. 
7.  Special uses: Group home (up to four residents). 
8.  Planned residential development on a site of one acre or more, in accordance with the provisions of the "planned unit development regulations", provided, however, that no planned residential development shall have a building height in excess of 35 feet. 
9.  Nursery, prekindergarten, stand alone kindergarten, play, special and other private school. 
10.  Privately operated, not for profit, lake, swimming pool, or tennis court, on a site not less than five acres. 
11.  Private recreational facility where buildings do not occupy more than ten percent of the site area. 
12.  Public use. 
13.  Public utility and public service use. 
14.  Television and radio tower, antenna support structure, church spire, belfry, monument, tank, water and fire tower, stage tower or scenery loft, cooling tower, ornamental tower, and spire, chimney, elevator bulkhead, conveyor and flagpole which exceed the maximum height. 
All special uses must also comply with all applicable requirements contained in chapter 5, "Supplementary Regulations", of this title, as well as all other pertinent regulations in this title. 
(C)  Accessory building and uses: See sections 10-5-4, "Accessory structures and uses", and 10-5-5, "Yards", of this title. 
(D)  Minimum yard and lot requirements: 
1.  Front yard: The front yard setback distance shall be measured from the front lot line to the closest enclosed point of the principal structure. The initial principal structure erected on a lot in a subdivision recorded with the DuPage County Recorder of Deeds office after March 1, 1999, may be constructed to the minimum required front yard setback line of 30 feet. 
(a)  Thirty feet in depth, and 
(b)  The proposed principal structure (or addition thereto) shall be no closer to the street than the closest principal structure on either adjacent lot on the same block and same side of the street, but 
(c)  The proposed principal structure (or addition thereto) need not be farther than 50 feet from the front lot line. 
2.  Rear yard: Forty feet in depth. 
3.  Interior side yard: Minimum interior side yard setback: Each side yard shall be six and one-half feet or ten percent of the lot width, whichever is greater. 
4.  Corner side yard setback: 
(a)  Thirty feet except 
(b)  On a parcel with a nonconforming lot width, the minimum corner side yard setback shall be 30 percent of the lot width. 
5.  Lots fronting on two nonintersecting streets: On lots fronting on two nonintersecting streets, with the exception of alleys, where access on both public ways is allowed, a front yard must be provided on both streets. Where a lot fronts on two nonintersecting streets, one of which is an improved or unimproved alley, the yard closest to the alley shall be considered a rear yard. 
6.  Minimum width: The minimum width of each side yard for schools and special uses shall be 25 feet. 
7.  Lot area: 8,712 square feet. 
8.  Lot width: 
(a)  Interior lot: 66 feet and 
(b)  Corner lot: 80 feet. 
9.  Lot depth: 110 feet. 
(E)  Maximum lot coverage ratio: 
1.  Lot coverage ratio, more than one story: Lot coverage ratio, single-family dwellings, more than one story, and accessory buildings: 20 percent of the lot. 
2.  Lot coverage ratio, one-story and accessory buildings: Lot coverage ratio, single- family dwellings, one-story and accessory buildings: 35 percent of the lot. 
3.  Lot coverage ratio bonuses: 
(a)  The first 500 square feet of the area of any detached garage shall be excluded from the lot coverage ratio calculation provided there is no attached garage unless the attached garage doors are oriented perpendicular (90 degrees or greater away from the street) to the front or corner side lot line. For an arc shaped front or corner side lot line, garage doors shall be oriented perpendicular (90 degrees or greater oriented away from the street) to the tangent or chord dimension measured in the interior of the lot. 
(b)  The first 240 square feet of a porch, located in the front yard or in the corner side yard, which has a minimum depth of six feet with no more than one side of the porch enclosed by a vertical wall, shall be excluded from the lot coverage ratio; 
Or 
The first 140 square feet of the area of a porch, located in the front yard or in the corner side yard, which has a minimum depth of six feet and is open on at least two sides shall be excluded from the lot coverage ratio. 
(F)  Maximum height: 
1.  Building height: (For additional information regarding building height or mansard roofs, see the definition of "eave" in section 10-2-2 of this title and refer to section 10-11-2, figure 5 of this title.) 
Lot Width Maximum Ridge Ridge Maximum (With Bonus) Maximum Eave, Parapet Or Low Sloped Roof Eave Parapet Or Low Sloped Roof Maximum (With Bonus) 4 Maximum Detached Garage Ridge Maximum Detached Garage Eave Parapet Or Low Sloped Roof 50' or less 32' n/a 22' 4 n/a 17' 12' 4 >50' to <66' 32' 35' 1 22' 4 n/a 17' 12' 4 =66' to =90' 35' 40' 1,3 25' 4 30 2,4 22' 12' 4 >90 37' 42' 1,3 27' 4 32' 2,4 22' 12' 4  
Ridge height bonus (not to be used in the combination of a "setback" and "raised front porch"): 
Notes: 
1.  Setback bonus; ridge: An increase of both side yard setbacks of one foot more than the required setback allows one foot more of ridge height up to its maximum. 
2.  Setback bonus; eave: An increase of both side yard setbacks of one foot more than the required setback allows one foot more of eave height up to its maximum. 
3.  Raised front porch bonus: A "raised front porch" of at least two feet above grade allows up to two feet more ridge height. A "raised front porch" of at least three feet above grade allows up to three feet more ridge height. 
4.  Dormer bonus eave: The eave height shall not apply to dormer(s) no greater than eight feet wide and the combined dormer width shall not exceed 25 percent of the length of the building side measured to the outside edges, provided the dormers are separated by a minimum of five feet. 
2.  Special uses and schools: Special uses and schools may be erected to a height not exceeding 45 feet, and churches and temples may be erected to a height not exceeding 75 feet, if the building is set back from each yard line at least two feet for each foot of additional building height above the height limit otherwise permitted in the district. 
3.  Architectural features : The maximum height shall not apply to architectural features such as spires, weather vanes, turrets, 50 percent open guardrails or lightning rods provided the top of the feature does not exceed five feet, or ten feet in the case of a turret, above the highest permitted ridge height on a principal structure, and not more than one architectural feature shall be permitted above the permitted height on a building, excepting that a turret may have either a spire or a weather vane at its peak. A turret shall adhere to the same setback requirements as the principal structure on the lot. 
(G)  Signs, fences and obstructions in yards: 
1.  Signs as per sign ordinance. 
2.  See section 10-5-5, "Yards", of this title. 
(H)  Parking and loading requirements: 
1.  Single-family dwelling: Not less than two parking spaces. 
2.  Church: One parking space for each four seats in the main auditorium. 
3.  Cultural facility: Two spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
4.  Daycare center and preschool facility: One space for each 800 square feet of gross floor area. 
5.  Private recreational facility: One space for each 4,000 square feet of gross land area. 
6.  Public building erected by governmental agency: One space for each 250 square feet of floor area in the building. 
7.  School: For high schools - one space for each employee, plus one space for each five students, based on design capacity; for elementary schools - one space for each employee plus eight additional visitor spaces. 
8.  Additional off street parking and loading requirements are found in chapter 5, "Supplementary Regulations", of this title. 
(Ord. 3617, 5-8-1989, eff. 6-1-1989; amd. Ord. 3815, 2-25-1991; Ord. 4194, 9-12-1994; Ord. 4195, 9-12-1994; Ord. 4235, 2-13- 1995; Ord. 4282, 8-14-1995; Ord. 4673, 12-14-1998, eff. 3-1-1999; Ord. 5035, 1-14- 2002, eff. 3-1-2002; Ord. 5365, 6-13-2005; Ord. 5543, 1-22-2007; Ord. 5554, 2-26- 2007; Ord. 6144, 6-24-2013; Ord. 6601, 5-14-2018; Ord. 6619, 8-27-2018) 
10-4-9. - R2B Residential District. 
(A)  Permitted uses: 
1.  Single-family dwelling. 
2.  Public park or playground. 
3.  Public school, elementary and high, or private school having a curriculum equivalent to a public school, elementary or high, and all such public or private schools having no rooms regularly used for housing or sleeping purposes. 
All permitted uses must also comply with all applicable requirements contained in chapter 5, "Supplementary Regulations", of this title as well as all other pertinent regulations in this title. 
(B)  Special uses: No enumerated special use shall be considered to be an accessory use to any other permitted or special use, and a separate permit shall be required for each separate special use. 
1.  Adult daycare center, in other than a dwelling. 
2.  Cemetery. 
3.  Church. 
4.  Convent, monastery and seminary. 
5.  Cultural facility. 
6.  Daycare center, in other than a dwelling. 
7.  Special uses: Group home (up to four residents). 
8.  Planned residential development on a site of one acre or more, in accordance with the provisions of the "planned unit development regulations", provided, however, that no planned residential development shall have a building height in excess of 35 feet. 
9.  Nursery, prekindergarten, stand-alone kindergarten, play, special and other private school. 
10.  Privately operated, not for profit, lake, swimming pool, or tennis court, on a site not less than five acres. 
11.  Private recreational facility where buildings do not occupy more than ten percent of the site area. 
12.  Public use. 
13.  Public utility and public service use. 
14.  Television and radio tower, antenna support structure, church spire, belfry, monument, tank, water and fire tower, stage tower or scenery loft, cooling tower, ornamental tower, and spire, chimney, elevator bulkhead, conveyor and flagpole which exceed the maximum height. 
All special uses must also comply with all applicable requirements contained in chapter 5, "Supplementary Regulations", of this title, as well as all other pertinent regulations in this title. 
(C)  Accessory building and uses: See sections 10-5-4, "Accessory structures and uses", and 10-5-5, "Yards", of this title. 
(D)  Minimum yard and lot requirements: 
1.  Front yard: The front yard setback distance shall be measured from the front lot line to the closest enclosed point of the principal structure. The initial principal structure erected on a lot in a subdivision recorded with the DuPage County Recorder of Deeds office after March 1, 1999, may be constructed to the minimum required front yard setback line of 30 feet. 
(a)  Thirty feet in depth, and 
(b)  The proposed principal structure (or addition thereto) shall be no closer to the street than the closest principal structure on either adjacent lot on the same block and same side of the street, but 
(c)  The proposed principal structure (or addition thereto) need not be farther than 50 feet from the front lot line. 
2.  Rear yard: Forty feet in depth. 
3.  Interior side yard: Minimum interior side yard setback: Each side yard shall be seven and one-half feet or ten percent of the lot width, whichever is greater. 
4.  Corner side yard setback: 
(a)  Thirty feet except 
(b)  On a parcel with a nonconforming lot width, the minimum corner side yard setback shall be 30 percent of the lot width. 
5.  Lots fronting on two nonintersecting streets: On lots fronting on two nonintersecting streets, with the exception of alleys, where access on both public ways is allowed, a front yard must be provided on both streets. Where a lot fronts on two nonintersecting streets, one of which is an improved or unimproved alley, the yard closest to the alley shall be considered a rear yard. 
6.  Minimum width: The minimum width of each side yard for schools and special uses shall be 25 feet. 
7.  Lot area: 10,000 square feet. 
8.  Lot width: 
(a)  Interior lot: 75 feet and 
(b)  Corner lot: 90 feet. 
9.  Lot depth: 110 feet. 
(E)  Maximum lot coverage ratio: 
1.  Lot coverage ratio, more than one story: Lot coverage ratio, single-family dwellings, more than one story, and accessory buildings: 20 percent of the lot. 
2.  Lot coverage ratio, one-story and accessory buildings: Lot coverage ratio, single- family dwellings, one-story and accessory buildings: 35 percent of the lot. 
3.  Lot coverage ratio bonuses: 
(a)  The first 500 square feet of the area of any detached garage shall be excluded from the lot coverage ratio calculation. 
(b)  The first 240 square feet of a porch, located in the front yard or in the corner side yard, which has a minimum depth of six feet with no more than one side of the porch enclosed by a vertical wall, shall be excluded from the lot coverage ratio; 
Or 
The first 140 square feet of the area of a porch, located in the front yard or in the corner side yard, which has a minimum depth of six feet and is open on at least two sides shall be excluded from the lot coverage ratio. 
(F)  Maximum height: 
1.  For single-family dwellings, see subsection 10-4-8(F), "Maximum Height", of this chapter. 
2.  Special uses and schools may be erected to a height not exceeding 45 feet, and churches and temples may be erected to a height not exceeding 75 feet, if the building is set back from each yard line at least two feet for each foot of additional building height above the height limit otherwise permitted in the district. 
3.  The height of a television or radio tower, antenna support structure, church spire, belfry, monument, tank, water and fire tower, stage tower or scenery loft, cooling tower, ornamental tower, and spire, chimney, elevator bulkhead, conveyor and flagpole shall be specified in the ordinance granting a special use permit. 
4.  Architectural features: See subsection 10-4-8(F)3. of this chapter. 
(G)  Signs, fences and obstructions in yards: 
1.  Signs as per sign ordinance. 
2.  See section 10-5-5, "Yards", of this title. 
(H)  Parking and loading requirements: 
1.  Single-family dwelling: Not less than two parking spaces. 
2.  Church: One parking space for each four seats in the main auditorium. 
3.  Cultural facility: Two spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
4.  Daycare center and preschool facility: One space for each 800 square feet of gross floor area. 
5.  Private recreational facility: One space for each 4,000 square feet of gross land area. 
6.  Public building erected by governmental agency: One space for each 250 square feet of floor area in the building. 
7.  School: For high schools - one space for each employee, plus one space for each five students, based on design capacity; for elementary schools - one space for each employee plus eight additional visitor spaces. 
8.  Additional off street parking and loading requirements are found in chapter 5, "Supplementary Regulations", of this title. 
(Ord. 5487, 6-26-2006; amd. Ord. 5543, 1-22-2007; Ord. 5554, 2-26-2007; Ord. 6144, 6-24-2013; Ord. 6619, 8-27-2018) 
10-4-10. - R3 Residential District. 
(A)  Permitted uses: 
1.  Single-family dwelling. 
2.  Attached single-family dwelling of not more than four units. 
3.  Two-family dwelling. 
4.  Group home (up to four residents). 
5.  Public park or playground. 
6.  Public school, elementary and high, or private school having a curriculum equivalent to a public school, elementary or high, and all such public or private schools having no rooms regularly used for housing or sleeping purposes. 
All permitted uses must also comply with all applicable requirements contained in chapter 5, "Supplementary Regulations", of this title as well as all other pertinent regulations in this title. 
(B)  Special uses: No enumerated special use shall be considered to be an accessory use to any other permitted or special use, and a separate permit shall be required for each separate special use. 
1.  Adult daycare center. 
2.  Attached single-family dwelling unit of more than four units but not exceeding six. 
3.  Church. 
4.  Congregate housing for the elderly. 
5.  Convent, monastery and seminary. 
6.  Cultural facility. 
7.  Daycare center. 
8.  Group home (five or more residents). 
9.  Nursing home and educational, philanthropic or religious institution, provided not more than fifty percent (50%) of the site area may be occupied by buildings. 
10.  Large scale planned residential development, in accordance with the provisions of the "planned unit development regulations". 
11.  Nursery, prekindergarten, stand-alone kindergarten, play, special and other private school. 
12.  Privately operated, not for profit, lake, swimming pool, or tennis court, on a site of not less than five (5) acres. 
13.  Private recreational facility where buildings do not occupy more than ten percent (10%) of the site area. 
14.  Public use. 
15.  Public utility and public service use. 
16.  Sheltered care facility. 
17.  Television and radio tower, antenna support structure, church spire, belfry, monument, tank, water and fire tower, stage tower or scenery loft, cooling tower, ornamental tower, and spire, chimney, elevator bulkhead, conveyor and flagpole which exceed the maximum height. 
All special uses must also comply with all applicable requirements contained in chapter 5, "Supplementary Regulations", of this title, as well as all other pertinent regulations in this title. 
(C)  Accessory building and uses: See sections 10-5-4, "Accessory structures and uses", and 10-5-5, "Yards", of this title. 
(D)  Minimum yard and lot requirements: 
1.  Front yard: The front yard setback distance shall be measured from the front lot line to the closest enclosed point of the principal structure. The initial principal structure erected on a lot in a subdivision recorded with the DuPage County Recorder of Deeds office after March 1, 1999, may be constructed to the minimum required front yard setback line of 30 feet. 
(a)  Thirty feet in depth, and 
(b)  The proposed principal structure (or addition thereto) shall be no closer to the street than the closest principal structure on either adjacent lot on the same block and same side of the street, but 
(c)  The proposed principal structure (or addition thereto) need not be farther than 50 feet from the front lot line. 
2.  Rear yard: 40 feet in depth. 
3.  Interior side yard: Minimum interior side yard setback: Each side yard shall be six and six-tenths feet or ten percent of the lot width, whichever is greater. 
4.  Corner side yard setback: 
(a)  Thirty feet except 
(b)  On a parcel with a nonconforming lot width, the minimum corner side yard setback shall be 30 percent of the lot width. 
5.  Lots fronting on two nonintersecting streets: On lots fronting on two nonintersecting streets, with the exception of alleys, where access on both public ways is allowed, a front yard must be provided on both streets. Where a lot fronts on two nonintersecting streets, one of which is an improved or unimproved alley, the yard closest to the alley shall be considered a rear yard. 
6.  Minimum width: The minimum width of each side yard for schools and special uses shall be 25 feet. 
7.  Single-family dwellings and nonresidential special uses: 
(a)  Lot area: 8,712 square feet; 
(b)  Lot width: 
(1)  Interior lot: 66 feet; 
(2)  Corner lot: 80 feet. 
(c)  Lot depth: 110 feet. 
8.  Attached single-family dwellings and two-family dwellings: 
(a)  Lot area per family in square feet: 4,950; 
(b)  Lot width: 
(1)  Interior lot: 75 feet; 
(2)  Corner lot: 90 feet; 
(c)  Lot depth: 110 feet. 
(d)  Side yard: Ten percent of the lot width or ten feet per side, whichever is greater. 
(E)  Maximum lot coverage ratio: 
1.  Lot coverage ratio, more than one story: Lot coverage ratio, single-family dwellings, more than one story, and accessory buildings: 20 percent of the lot. 
2.  Lot coverage ratio, one-story and accessory buildings: Lot coverage ratio, single-family dwellings, one-story and accessory buildings: 35 percent of the lot. 
3.  Lot coverage ratio bonuses: 
(a)  The first 500 square feet of the area of any detached garage shall be excluded from the lot coverage ratio calculation. 
(b)  The first 240 square feet of a porch, located in the front yard or in the corner side yard, which has a minimum depth of six feet with no more than one side of the porch enclosed by a vertical wall, shall be excluded from the lot coverage ratio; 
Or 
The first 140 square feet of the area of a porch, located in the front yard or in the corner side yard, which has a minimum depth of six feet and is open on at least two sides shall be excluded from the lot coverage ratio. 
(F)  Maximum height: 
1.  For single-family dwellings, see subsection 10-4-8(F), "Maximum Height", of this chapter. 
2.  Special uses may be erected to a height not exceeding 45 feet, and churches and temples may be erected to a height not exceeding 75 feet, if the building is set back from each yard line at least two feet for each foot of additional building height above the height limit otherwise permitted in the district; 
3.  The height of a television or radio tower, antenna support structure, church spire, belfry, monument, tank, water and fire tower, stage tower or scenery loft, cooling tower, ornamental tower, and spire, chimney, elevator bulkhead, conveyor and flagpole shall be specified in the ordinance granting a special use permit. 
4.  Architectural features: See subsection 10-4-8(F)3. of this chapter. 
(G)  Signs, fences and obstructions in yards: 
1.  Signs as per sign ordinance. 
2.  See section 10-5-5, "Yards", of this title. 
(H)  Parking and loading requirements: 
1.  Single-family dwelling and two-family dwelling: Not less than two parking spaces per unit. 
2.  Church: One parking space for each four seats in the main auditorium. 
3.  Cultural facility: Two spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
4.  Congregate housing: One space for each two bedrooms. 
5.  Daycare center and preschool facility: One space for each 800 square feet of gross floor area. 
6.  Group home: One space for each 800 square feet of gross floor area. 
7.  Nursing home: One parking space for each three beds. 
8.  Private recreational facility: One space for each 4,000 square feet of land area. 
9.  Public building erected by governmental agency: One space for each 250 square feet of floor area in the building. 
10.  School: For high schools - one space for each employee, plus one space for each five students, based on design capacity; for elementary schools - one space for each employee plus eight additional visitor spaces. 
11.  Sheltered care facility: One space for each 1,200 square feet of gross floor area. 
12.  Additional off street parking and loading requirements are found in chapter 5, "Supplementary Regulations", of this title. 
(Ord. 3617, 5-8-1989, eff. 6-1-1989; amd. Ord. 3815, 2-25-1991; Ord. 4235, 2-13-1995; Ord. 4673, 12-14-1998, eff. 3-1-1999; Ord. 5035, 1-14-2002, eff. 3-1-2002; Ord. 5365, 6-13-2005; Ord. 5543, 1-22-2007; Ord. 5554, 2-26-2007; Ord. 6144, 6-24-2013; Ord. 6619, 8-27-2018) 
10-4-11. - R4 Residential District. 
(A)  Permitted uses: 
1.  Attached single-family dwelling of not more than six units. 
2.  Multiple-family dwelling. 
3.  Group home (up to four residents). 
4.  Public park or playground. 
5.  Public school, elementary and high, or private school having a curriculum equivalent to a public school, elementary or high, and all such public or private schools having no rooms regularly used for housing or sleeping purposes. 
All permitted uses must also comply with all applicable requirements contained in chapter 5, "Supplementary Regulations", of this title as well as all other pertinent regulations in this title. 
(B)  Special uses: No enumerated special use shall be considered to be an accessory use to any other permitted or special use, and a separate permit shall be required for each separate special use. 
1.  Adult daycare center. 
2.  Church. 
3.  Congregate housing for the elderly. 
4.  Convent, monastery and seminary. 
5.  Cultural facility. 
6.  Daycare center. 
7.  Group home (five or more residents). 
8.  Hospital, nursing home and educational, philanthropic or religious institution on a site of not less than five acres, provided not more than 50 percent of the site area may be occupied by buildings, and provided further that the buildings shall be set back from all required yard lines an additional foot for each foot of building height. 
9.  Large scale planned residential development, in accordance with the provisions of the "planned unit development regulations". 
10.  Medical clinic. 
11.  Nursery, prekindergarten, stand-alone kindergarten, play, special and other private school. 
12.  Privately operated, not for profit, lake, swimming pool, or tennis court, on a site not less than five acres. 
13.  Private recreational facility where buildings do not occupy more than ten percent of the site area. 
14.  Private club, fraternity, sorority, or lodge, excepting when the chief activity of which is a service customarily carried on as a business. 
15.  Public use. 
16.  Public utility and public service use. 
17.  Sheltered care facility. 
18.  Single-family dwelling. 
19.  Television and radio tower, antenna support structure, church spire, belfry, monument, tank, water and fire tower, stage tower or scenery loft, cooling tower, ornamental tower, and spire, chimney, elevator bulkhead, conveyor and flagpole which exceed the maximum height. 
20.  Two-family dwelling. 
All special uses must also comply with all applicable requirements contained in chapter 5, "Supplementary Regulations", of this title, as well as all other pertinent regulations in this title. 
(C)  Accessory building and uses: See sections 10-5-4, "Accessory structures and uses", and 10-5-5, "Yards", of this title. 
(D)  Minimum yard and lot requirements: 
1.  Front yard: The front yard setback distance shall be measured from the front lot line to the closest enclosed point of the principal structure. The initial principal structure erected on a lot in a subdivision recorded with the DuPage County Recorder of Deeds office after March 1, 1999, may be constructed to the minimum required front yard setback line of 30 feet. 
(a)  Thirty feet in depth, and 
(b)  The proposed principal structure (or addition thereto) shall be no closer to the street than the closest principal structure on either adjacent lot on the same block and same side of the street, but 
(c)  The proposed principal structure (or addition thereto) need not be farther than 50 feet from the front lot line. 
2.  Rear yard: 30 feet in depth. 
3.  Interior side yard: Minimum interior side yard setback: Each side yard shall be six and six-tenths feet or ten percent of the lot width, whichever is greater. 
4.  Corner side yard setback: 
(a)  Thirty feet except 
(b)  On a parcel with a nonconforming lot width, the minimum corner side yard setback shall be 30 percent of the lot width. 
5.  Lots fronting on two nonintersecting streets: On lots fronting on two nonintersecting streets, with the exception of alleys, where access on both public ways is allowed, a front yard must be provided on both streets. Where a lot fronts on two nonintersecting streets, one of which is an improved or unimproved alley, the yard closest to the alley shall be considered a rear yard. 
6.  Minimum width: The minimum width of each side yard for schools and special uses shall be 35 feet. 
7.  Single-family dwellings: 
(a)  Lot area: 8,712 square feet. 
(b)  Lot width: 
(1)  Interior lot: 66 feet; 
(2)  Corner lot: 80 feet. 
(c)  Lot depth: 100 feet. 
8.  Attached single-family dwellings and two-family dwellings: 
(a)  Lot area per family in square feet: 4,950; 
(b)  Lot width: 
(1)  Interior lot: 75 feet; 
(2)  Corner lot: 90 feet. 
(c)  Lot depth: 100 feet. 
9.  Multiple-family dwellings: 
(a)  Lot area per family unit: 2,500 square feet; 
(b)  Lot width: 
(1)  Interior lot: 75 feet; 
(2)  Corner lot: 90 feet. 
(c)  Lot depth: 100 feet. 
10.  Nonresidential special uses: 
(a)  Lot area: 8,712 square feet. 
(b)  Lot width: 
(1)  Interior lot: 66 feet; 
(2)  Corner lot: 80 feet. 
(c)  Lot depth: 100 feet. 
(E)  Maximum height: 
1.  Thirty five feet. 
2.  Special uses may be erected to a height not exceeding 45 feet, and churches and temples may be erected to a height not exceeding 75 feet, if the building is set back from each yard line at least two feet for each foot of additional building height above the height limit otherwise permitted in the district. 
3.  The height of a television or radio tower, antenna support structure, church spire, belfry, monument, tank, water and fire tower, stage tower or scenery loft, cooling tower, ornamental tower, and spire, chimney, elevator bulkhead, conveyor and flagpole shall be specified in the ordinance granting a special use permit. 
(F)  Signs, fences and obstructions in yards: 
1.  Signs as per sign ordinance. 
2.  See section 10-5-5, "Yards", of this title. 
(G)  Parking and loading requirements: 
1.  Single-family dwelling and two-family dwelling: Not less than two parking spaces per unit. 
2.  Church: One parking space for each four seats in the main auditorium. 
3.  Cultural facility: Two spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
4.  Congregate housing: One space for each two bedrooms. 
5.  Daycare center: One space for each 800 square feet of gross floor area. 
6.  Group home: One space for each 800 square feet of gross floor area. 
7.  Hospital: Two spaces for each bed. 
8.  Medical clinic: One space for each 200 square feet of the gross area used for clinic. 
9.  Multiple-family dwelling: Two spaces per unit, except efficiency units, which require one and one-half spaces. 
10.  Nursing home: One parking space for each three beds. 
11.  Private club, fraternity, sorority, or lodge: One space for each 3,000 square feet of floor area. 
12.  Private recreational facility: One space for each 4,000 square feet of gross land area. 
13.  Public building erected by governmental agency: One space for each 250 square feet of floor area in the building. 
14.  School: For high schools - one space for each employee, plus one space for each five students, based on design capacity; for elementary schools - one space for each employee plus eight additional visitor spaces. 
15.  Sheltered care facility: One space for each 1,200 square feet of gross floor area. 
16.  Additional off street parking and loading requirements are found in chapter 5, "Supplementary Regulations", of this title. 
(Ord. 3617, 5-8-1989, eff. 6-1-1989; amd. Ord. 3815, 2-25-1991; Ord. 4673, 12-14-1998, eff. 3-1-1999; Ord. 5035, 1-14-2002, eff. 3-1-2002; Ord. 5123, 12-16-2002, eff. 1-1-2003; Ord. 5365, 6-13-2005; Ord. 5543, 1-22-2007; Ord. 6144, 6-24-2013; Ord. 6619, 8-27-2018) 
10-4-12. - R5 Residential District. 
Development within this district shall be by planned development only, and shall be consistent with the Glen Ellyn Comprehensive Plan. All development shall comply with the requirements contained in chapter 7, "Planned Unit Developments", of this title, as well as all other pertinent regulations in this title. 
(A)  Uses allowed: 
Residential uses of a type and density compatible with surrounding residential areas and consistent with the objectives of the Glen Ellyn Comprehensive Plan and all approved supplemental reports and graphics. Residential uses shall be limited to single-family dwellings, attached or detached, two-family dwellings, group homes and senior housing. Congregate care facilities and group homes with five or more residents shall be considered special uses, and a separate special use permit shall be required. 
(B)  Special design considerations: As contained in the Comprehensive Plan and all approved supplemental reports and graphics. 
(C)  Accessory building and uses: See sections 10-5-4, "Accessory structures and uses", and 10-5-5, "Yards", of this title. 
(D)  Building bulk requirements: Standards for lot size, setbacks, building height and open space shall be consistent with requirements in adjacent zoning districts and in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan and all approved supplemental reports and graphics. 
(E)  Signs, fences and obstructions in yards: 
1.  Signs as per sign ordinance. 
2.  See section 10-5-5, "Yards", of this title. 
(F)  Parking and loading requirements: 
1.  Off street parking and loading shall conform to the design considerations contained in the Comprehensive Plan and all approved supplemental reports and graphics. 
2.  Parking spaces for dwellings shall be provided as follows: 
(a)  Single-family and two-family dwelling: Not less than two spaces per unit; 
(b)  Multi-family dwelling: Two spaces per unit, except that efficiency units require one and one-half spaces per unit; 
(c)  Congregate housing: One space for each two bedrooms. 
3.  Additional off street parking and loading requirements are found in chapter 5, "Supplementary Regulations", of this title. 
(Ord. 3617, 5-8-1989, eff. 6-1-1989; amd. Ord. 4611, 7-13-1998; Ord. 4673, 12-14-1998, eff. 3-1-1999; Ord. 5035, 1-14-2002, eff. 3-1-2002; Ord. 5543, 1-22-2007; Ord. 6303, 3-9-2015; Ord. 6619, 8-27-2018) 
10-4-13. - C1 District. 
Reserved. 
(Ord. 3617, 5-8-1989, eff. 6-1-1989; amd. Ord. 5543, 1-22-2007) 
10-4-14. - C2 Community Commercial District. 
(A)  Permitted uses: 
1.  Animal daycare. 
2.  Animal grooming. 
3.  Animal training. 
4.  Bakery where not more than 50 percent of the floor area is devoted to processing. 
5.  Commodities sales uses for basic living needs of neighborhoods, such as: art and school supply store; bicycle sale and repair shop; bookstore; camera and photographic supply store; candy and ice cream store; furniture, upholstery, carpet, china or glass store; clothing store; department store; toy and hobby shop; hardware store; jewelry or leather goods store; liquor store; garden supply shop; electrical and household appliance sales; coin and philatelic store; interior decorating including making of draperies, slip covers and other similar articles; sporting goods; musical instrument sale and repair; paint and wallpaper store; variety store. 
6.  Community support service uses such as: music and dance school; antique shop; health spa; mail order store; newspaper office; office supply; pet shop; indoor theater; catering; laundry retail; mortuary; photographic and art studio; food store; and employment agency. 
7.  Service uses performed on the premises for needs of a neighborhood, such as: barber and beauty shop; dressmaking; tailoring; shoe repair; household appliance repair; radio or television sales, service and repair; frozen food locker; locksmith; millinery shop; travel agency; telegraph office; furrier storage, conditioning or sales; picture framing. 
8.  Office, business, medical or professional. 
9.  Antenna attachments to existing antenna towers, buildings or other structures which do not exceed the permitted height in the zoning district or the height established by a special use permit. 
10.  Restaurant and eating place (except drive-in and carryout establishments) without entertainment and dancing and including outdoor seating on private property as an accessory use provided such outdoor seating complies with the provisions in section 10-5-15 of this title. 
11.  Historical facility. 
12.  Nail salon. 
All permitted uses must also comply with all applicable requirements contained in chapter 5, "Supplementary Regulations", of this title, as well as all other pertinent regulations in this title. 
(B)  Special uses: No enumerated special use shall be considered to be an accessory use to any other permitted or special use, and a separate permit shall be required for each separate special use. 
1.  Adult daycare center. 
2.  Automobile car wash. 
3.  Automobile repair. 
4.  Automobile and automotive sale and service use, including open sale lots, parking lots and public garages and storage garages. 
5.  Automotive vehicle rental. 
6.  Bank or financial institution. 
7.  Church or temple. 
8.  Club or lodge, private, fraternal or religious. 
9.  Commercial planned development in accordance with the provisions of the "planned unit development regulations". 
10.  Congregate housing for the elderly. 
11.  Daycare center. 
12.  Drive-in commercial facility. 
13.  Garage/service station. 
14.  Heating equipment and fixture repair uses. 
15.  Medical or dental clinic. 
16.  Outdoor merchandise, storage, promotional activities, or tents. 
17.  Private school. 
18.  Public park and playground. 
19.  Public use. 
20.  Public utility and public service use. 
21.  School, commercial or trade. 
22.  Sheltered care facility. 
23.  Television and radio tower, antenna support structure, church spire, belfry, monument, tank, water and fire tower, stage tower or scenery loft, cooling tower, ornamental tower, and spire, chimney, elevator bulkhead, conveyor and flagpole which exceed the maximum height. 
All special uses must also comply with all applicable requirements contained in chapter 5, "Supplementary Regulations", of this title as well as all other pertinent regulations in this title. 
(C)  Accessory building and uses: 
1.  Storage garage and parking lot. 
2.  Accessory buildings may be located in a rear yard but not occupy more than 30 percent of a rear yard. If within ten feet of a principal building, then it must observe the same side yard requirements for a principal building. If more than ten feet from a principal building, then it must be at least 60 feet from the front street line and three feet from both the side and rear yards. 
(D)  Minimum yard and lot requirements: 
1.  Front yard: None. 
2.  Rear yard: Ten feet in depth. 
3.  Side yard: None. A 20-foot side yard is required when the property adjoins or is across the alley from a residential district. 
4.  Lot area: 9,000 square feet. 
5.  Lot width: 
(a)  Interior lot: 75 feet; 
(b)  Corner lot: 90 feet. 
6.  Lot depth: 125 feet. 
(E)  Maximum height: 
1.  Thirty-five feet. 
2.  Special uses may be erected to a height not exceeding 45 feet, and churches and temples may be erected to a height not exceeding 75 feet, if the building is set back from each yard line at least two feet for each foot of additional building height above the height limit otherwise permitted in the district. 
3.  The height of a television or radio tower, antenna support structure, church spire, belfry, monument, tank, water and fire tower, stage tower or scenery loft, cooling tower, ornamental tower, and spire, chimney, elevator bulkhead, conveyor and flagpole shall be specified in the ordinance granting a special use permit. 
(F)  Signs, fences and obstructions in yards: 
1.  Signs as per sign ordinance. 
2.  Screening required pursuant to subsection 10-5-13(L) of this title. 
3.  See section 10-5-5, "Yards", of this title. 
(G)  Parking and loading requirements: 
1.  All buildings except those specified below: One space for each 250 square feet of floor area. 
2.  Automobile sales: Three spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area, plus one space for each 2,000 square feet of gross land area. 
3.  Car wash: One space for each two employees, plus reservoir parking space or stacking space equal to five times the maximum capacity of the washing unit. 
4.  Club and lodge: One space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area. 
5.  Commercial or trade school: One space for each two students, based on design capacity. 
6.  Daycare center: One space for each 800 square feet of gross floor area. 
7.  Eating or restaurant establishment: One space for each three seats provided in eating or drinking areas. 
8.  Indoor theater: One space for each three seats. 
9.  Medical and dental clinic: One space for each 200 square feet of the gross area used for clinic. 
10.  Private school: One space for each four students, based on design capacity. 
11.  Sheltered care facility: One space for each 1,200 square feet of gross floor area. 
12.  Congregate housing: One space for each two bedrooms. 
13.  Additional off street parking and loading requirements are found in chapter 5, "Supplementary Regulations", of this title. 
(Ord. 3617, 5-8-1989, eff. 6-1-1989; amd. Ord. 4004, 3-22-1993; Ord. 4673, 12-14-1998, eff. 3-1-1999; Ord. 5035, 1-14-2002, eff. 3-1-2002; Ord. 5271, 6-14-2004; Ord. 5543, 1-22-2007; Ord. 5591, 7-23-2007; Ord. 6015, 3-26-2012; Ord. 6043, 6-25-2012; Ord. 6303, 3-9-2015; Ord. 6601, 5-14-2018; Ord. 6619, 8-27-2018) 
10-4-15. - C3 Service Commercial District. 
(A)  Permitted uses: 
1.  Animal daycare. 
2.  Animal grooming. 
3.  Animal training. 
4.  Automobile and automotive sale and service use, including open sales lots, parking lots and public garages and storage garages. 
5.  Bakery where not more than 50 percent of the floor area is devoted to processing. 
6.  Bank, loan office, and financial institution but not including payday lending service, check cashing service, or currency exchange. 
7.  Building material sales establishment; plumbing, heating, ventilating and electrical equipment and fixture service and repair uses; machinery and equipment sales, service and rental; cabinetmaking and custom woodworking uses. 
8.  Commodities sales uses for basic living needs of a neighborhood, such as: art and school supply store; bicycle sale and repair shop; bookstore; camera and photographic supply store; candy and beauty shop; furniture, upholstery, carpet, china or glass store; clothing store; department store; toy and hobby shop; hardware store; jewelry or leather goods store; liquor store; garden supply shop; electrical and household appliance sales; coin and philatelic store; interior decorating including making of draperies, slip covers and other similar articles; sporting goods; musical instrument sales and repair; paint and wallpaper store; variety store; video sales and rental store. 
9.  Community support service uses such as: music and dance school; antique shop; health spa; mail order store; newspaper office; office supply; pet shop; indoor theater; catering; laundry retail; mortuary; photographic and art studio; food store; and employment agency. 
10.  Drugstore and pharmacy, retail. 
11.  Engraving, printing, publishing, lithography, blueprinting and photocopying establishment. 
12.  Greenhouse, including retail and wholesale sale of plants. 
13.  Hotel or motel. 
14.  Indoor recreational facility. 
15.  Laundry, commercial. 
16.  Mail order house, retail. 
17.  Medical or dental clinic. 
18.  Monument establishment. 
19.  Movie theater. 
20.  Nail salon. 
21.  Office, business, medical or professional. 
22.  Research activity. 
23.  Restaurant and eating place, including outdoor seating on private property as an accessory use provided such outdoor seating complies with the provisions in section 10-5-15 of this title. 
24.  Service uses performed on premises for needs of a neighborhood, such as: barber and beauty shop; dressmaking; tailoring; shoe repair; household appliance repair; radio or television sales, service and repair; frozen food locker; locksmith; millinery shop; travel agency; telegraph office; furrier storage, conditioning and sales; picture framing. 
25.  Telephone exchange. 
26.  Used car, trailer or boat sales. 
27.  Veterinarian or animal hospital. 
28.  Antenna attachments to existing antenna towers, buildings or other structures which do not exceed the permitted height in the zoning district or the height established by a special use permit. 
All permitted uses must also comply with all applicable requirements contained in chapter 5, "Supplementary Regulations", of this title as well as all other pertinent regulations in this title. 
(B)  Special uses: No enumerated special use shall be considered to be an accessory use to any other permitted or special use, and a separate permit shall be required for each separate special use. 
1.  Automobile car wash. 
2.  Automobile repair. 
3.  Automotive vehicle rental. 
4.  Cartage, express, parcel delivery or motor freight terminal. 
5.  Church or temple. 
6.  Commercial planned development in accordance with the provisions of the "planned unit development regulations". 
7.  Compounding of cosmetics, toiletries, dyes and pharmaceuticals. 
8.  Contractor's yard for storage of vehicles and materials. 
9.  Drive-in commercial facility. 
10.  Garage/service station. 
11.  Kennel or cattery. 
12.  Light manufacturing assembly of previously manufactured parts, fabricating, cleaning, testing, assembling, repairing or servicing. 
13.  Outdoor amusement establishment. 
14.  Outdoor merchandise, storage, promotional activities, or tents. 
15.  Payday lending service, check cashing service, and currency exchange. 
16.  Private school. 
17.  Public park and playground. 
18.  Public use. 
19.  Public utility and public service use. 
20.  School, commercial or trade. 
21.  Television and radio tower, antenna support structure, church spire, belfry, monument, tank, water and fire tower, stage tower or scenery loft, cooling tower, ornamental tower, and spire, chimney, elevator bulkhead, conveyor and flagpole which exceed the maximum height. 
22.  Vehicle storage lot. 
23.  Wholesale merchandising and storage warehousing. 
All special uses must also comply with all applicable requirements contained in chapter 5, "Supplementary Regulations", of this title, as well as all other pertinent regulations in this title. 
(C)  Accessory building and uses: 
1.  Storage garage and parking lot. 
2.  Accessory buildings may be located in a rear yard but not occupy more than 30 percent of a rear yard. If within ten feet of a principal building, then it must observe the same side yard requirements for a principal building. If more than ten feet from a principal building, then it must be at least 60 feet from the front street line and three feet from both the side and rear yards. 
(D)  Minimum yard and lot requirements: 
1.  Front yard: 40 feet in depth. 
2.  Rear yard: 30 feet in depth. 
3.  Side yard: Ten feet; a 20 foot side yard is required when the property adjoins or is across the alley from a residential district; and such transitional yard shall be appropriately landscaped; a side yard abutting a street (corner side yard) shall be 30 feet in depth. 
4.  Lot area: 10,000 square feet. 
5.  Lot width: 
(a)  Interior lot: 80 feet; 
(b)  Corner lot: 100 feet. 
6.  Lot depth: 140 feet. 
7.  Landscaping: An area ten feet wide along the front lot line and any side lot line abutting a street shall be reserved for open space and appropriately planted and landscaped. 
(E)  Maximum height: 
1.  Forty five feet, except that by special use a building may be erected to a height not exceeding 55 feet if the building is set back from each yard line at least two additional feet for each additional foot of building height above 45 feet. Churches and temples may, by special use permit, be erected to a height not exceeding 75 feet if such structure is set back from each yard line at least two additional feet for each additional foot of building height above 45 feet. 
2.  The height of a television or radio tower, antenna support structure, church spire, belfry, monument, tank, water and fire tower, stage tower or scenery loft, cooling tower, ornamental tower, and spire, chimney, elevator bulkhead, conveyor and flagpole shall be specified in the ordinance granting a special use permit. 
(F)  Signs, fences and obstructions in yards: 
1.  Signs as per sign ordinance. 
2.  Screening required pursuant to subsection 10-5-13(L) of this title. 
3.  See section 10-5-5, "Yards", of this title. 
(G)  Parking and loading requirements: 
1.  The following design standards shall apply within this district: 
(a)  No vehicle shall be parked within ten feet of the front property line, and such unobstructed ten foot setback shall be appropriately planted and landscaped; 
(b)  All parking areas shall be appropriately landscaped; 
(c)  Driveways shall be located no closer than 40 feet to another driveway, or an intersecting street. 
2.  All buildings except those specified below: One space for each 250 square feet of gross floor area. 
3.  Automobile sales: Three spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area, plus one space for each 2,000 square feet of gross land area. 
4.  Car wash: One space for each two employees, plus reservoir parking space or stacking space equal to five times the maximum capacity of the washing unit. 
5.  Commercial or trade school: One space for each two students, based on design capacity. 
6.  Hotel and motel: One space for each lodging unit. 
7.  Indoor theater: One space for each three seats. 
8.  Light manufacturing: Two spaces for each three employees. 
9.  Medical and dental clinic: One space for each 200 square feet of the gross floor area. 
10.  Private school: One space for each four students, based on design capacity. 
11.  Bowling alley: Four spaces for each bowling lane. 
12.  Other indoor recreation: One space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area. 
13.  Outdoor amusement establishment: Three spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross land area. 
14.  Restaurant (drive-in and/or carryout where the restaurant has no inside seating) : One space for each 100 square feet of gross floor area. 
15.  Restaurant (sit down): One space for each three seats provided in eating or drinking areas. 
16.  Additional off street parking and loading requirements are found in chapter 5, "Supplementary Regulations", of this title. 
(Ord. 3617, 5-8-1989, eff. 6-1-1989; amd. Ord. 3815, 2-25-1991; Ord. 4673, 12-14-1998, eff. 3-1-1999; Ord. 5035, 1-14-2002, eff. 3-1-2002; Ord. 5543, 1-22-2007; Ord. 5591, 7-23-2007; Ord. 5886, 9-13-2010; Ord. 6015, 3-26-2012; Ord. 6601, 5-14-2018) 
10-4-16. - C4 Office District. 
(A)  Permitted uses: 
1.  Bank or financial institution. 
2.  Blueprinting and photocopying establishment. 
3.  Business, medical or professional office. 
4.  Medical or dental clinic. 
5.  Office, general or professional: private, semiprivate or public. 
6.  Private school. 
7.  Research laboratory. 
8.  Sales and personal service facility within an office building, but limited to not more than 50 percent of the gross ground floor area of the building. 
9.  School, commercial or trade. 
10.  Studio for artist, photographer, sculptor or musician. 
11.  Television or radio broadcasting studio. 
12.  Antenna attachments to existing antenna towers, buildings or other structures which do not exceed the permitted height in the zoning district or the height established by a special use permit. 
13.  Health spa. 
All permitted uses must also comply with all applicable requirements contained in chapter 5, "Supplementary Regulations", of this title as well as all other pertinent regulations in this title. 
(B)  Special uses: No enumerated special use shall be considered to be an accessory use to any other permitted or special use, and a separate permit shall be required for each separate special use. 
1.  Adult daycare center. 
2.  Automobile repair. 
3.  Church or temple. 
4.  Congregate housing for the elderly. 
5.  Daycare center. 
6.  Office planned development in accordance with the provisions of the "planned unit development regulations". 
7.  Outdoor merchandise, storage, promotional activities, or tents. 
8.  Printing and publishing establishment. 
9.  Public park and playground. 
10.  Public use. 
11.  Public utility and public service use. 
12.  Sheltered care facility. 
13.  Television and radio tower, antenna support structure, church spire, belfry, monument, tank, water and fire tower, stage tower or scenery loft, cooling tower, ornamental tower, and spire, chimney, elevator bulkhead, conveyor and flagpole which exceed the maximum height. 
14.  Vehicle storage lot. 
15.  Warehouse. 
16.  Medical cannabis dispensary (in accordance with section 10-5-19 of this title). 
All special uses must also comply with all applicable requirements contained in chapter 5, "Supplementary Regulations", of this title, as well as all other pertinent regulations in this title. 
(C)  Accessory building and uses: 
1.  Storage garage and parking lot. 
2.  Accessory buildings may be located in a rear yard but not occupy more than 30 percent of a rear yard. If within ten feet of a principal building, then it must observe the same side yard requirements for a principal building. If more than ten feet from a principal building, then it must be at least 60 feet from the front street line and three feet from both the side and rear yards. 
(D)  Minimum yard and lot requirements: 
1.  Front yard: 40 feet in depth. The front ten feet shall be reserved for open space and be appropriately planted and landscaped. 
2.  Rear yard: 20 feet in depth. 
3.  Side yard: Ten feet for each side yard. A 20-foot side yard is required when the property adjoins or is across the alley from a residential district; such transitional yard shall be appropriately landscaped. 
4.  Lot area: 10,000 square feet. 
5.  Lot width: 
(a)  Interior lot: 80 feet; 
(b)  Corner lot: 100 feet. 
6.  Lot depth: 140 feet. 
(E)  Maximum height: 
1.  Forty five feet, except that by special use a building may be erected to a height not exceeding 55 feet if the building is set back from each yard line at least two additional feet for each additional foot of building height above 45 feet. Churches and temples may, by special use permit, be erected to a height not exceeding 75 feet if such structure is set back from each yard line at least two additional feet for each additional foot of building height above 45 feet. 
2.  The height of a television or radio tower, antenna support structure, church spire, belfry, monument, tank, water and fire tower, stage tower or scenery loft, cooling tower, ornamental tower, and spire, chimney, elevator bulkhead, conveyor and flagpole shall be specified in the ordinance granting a special use permit. 
(F)  Signs, fences and obstructions in yards: 
1.  Signs as per sign ordinance. 
2.  Screening required pursuant to subsection 10-5-13(L) of this title. 
3.  See section 10-5-5, "Yards", of this title. 
(G)  Parking and loading requirements: 
1.  No vehicle shall be parked within ten feet of the front property line, and such unobstructed ten foot setback shall be appropriately planted and landscaped. All parking areas shall be appropriately landscaped, and effectively screened from adjacent residential areas. 
2.  All buildings except those specified below: One space for each 250 square feet of gross floor area. 
3.  Bank and office: One space for each 250 square feet of gross floor area. 
4.  Broadcasting studio: One space for each three spectator seats, plus one space for each two employees. 
5.  Church: One space for each four seats in the main auditorium. 
6.  Commercial or trade school: One space for each two students, based on design capacity. 
7.  Eating or restaurant establishment: One space for each three seats provided in eating or drinking areas. 
8.  Medical and dental clinic: One space for each 200 square feet of the gross area used for clinic. 
9.  Printing and publishing: One space for each employee. 
10.  Private school: One space for each four students, based on design capacity. 
11.  Sales and services within office building: One space for each 600 square feet of gross floor area. 
12.  Sheltered care facility: One space for each 1,200 square feet of gross floor area. 
13.  Warehouse: Two spaces for each three employees. 
14.  Congregate housing: One space for each two bedrooms. 
15.  Additional off street parking and loading requirements are found in chapter 5, "Supplementary Regulations", of this title. 
(Ord. 3617, 5-8-1989, eff. 6-1-1989; amd. Ord. 4331, 12-18-1995; Ord. 4673, 12-14-1998, eff. 3-1-1999; Ord. 5035, 1-14-2002, eff. 3-1-2002; Ord. 5543, 1-22-2007; Ord. 5591, 7-23-2007; Ord. 5894, 10-25-2010; Ord. 6015, 3-26-2012; Ord. 6208, 1-13-2014; Ord. 6228, 4-14-2014; Ord. 6303, 3-9- 2015; Ord. 6619, 8-27-2018) 
10-4-17. - C5 Central Business District. 
10-4-17-1. - C5A Central Retail Core Subdistrict. 
(A)  Permitted uses: 
1.  Antique shop. 
2.  Apparel store. 
3.  Art and school supplies store. 
4.  Bakery. 
5.  Bicycle sale, repairs. 
6.  Bookstore. 
7.  Camera store. 
8.  Coin and philatelic sales. 
9.  Dressmaking, tailoring. 
10.  Drugstore and pharmacy, retail. 
11.  Dry cleaning. 
12.  Dwelling units: above the ground floor, but only where commercial uses are located on the ground floor. 
13.  Electrical and household appliance sales and repair. 
14.  Florist shop. 
15.  Food store. 
16.  Furniture, upholstery, carpet, china or glass store. 
17.  Furrier shop, storage and conditioning. 
18.  Garden supply shop. 
19.  Gift shop. 
20.  Hardware store. 
21.  Indoor theater. 
22.  Interior decorating, including making of draperies, slipcovers, and other similar articles. 
23.  Jewelry or leather goods store. 
24.  Laundry. 
25.  Liquor store. 
26.  Locksmith. 
27.  Musical instrument sales and repair. 
28.  Office supply store. 
29.  Outdoor beautification displays in compliance with the provisions in section 10-5-16 of this title. 
30.  Paint and wallpaper sales. 
31.  Pet shop. 
32.  Photographic and art studio. 
33.  Picture framing. 
34.  Printing. 
35.  Radio and television sales, service and repair. 
36.  Restaurant and eating place (except drive-in establishments) without entertainment or dancing, and including outdoor seating on private property as an accessory use provided such outdoor seating complies with the provisions in section 10-5-15 of this title. 
37.  Retail, mail order store. 
38.  Shoe repair. 
39.  Shoe store. 
40.  Sporting goods. 
41.  Tobacco shop. 
42.  Toy and hobby shop. 
43.  Typewriter shop. 
44.  The following uses shall be allowed as permitted uses only above the ground floor, below the ground floor or in ground floor spaces that are set back a minimum of 40 feet from a front or corner building facade and which do not have storefront windows facing public property or a public right-of-way: 
(a)  Beauty and barber shop. 
(b)  Club and lodge, private, fraternal or religious. 
(c)  Engraving, printing, publishing, lithography, blueprinting and photocopy establishment 
(d)  Health spa. 
(e)  Music and dance school. 
(f)  Nail salon. 
(g)  Newspaper office and distribution center. 
(h)  Office: business, medical, professional or public. 
(i)  Trade school. 
(j)  Travel agency. 
45.  Antenna attachments to existing antenna towers, buildings or other structures which do not exceed the permitted height in the zoning district or the height established by a special use permit. 
All permitted uses within the C5A district that are constructed on unimproved land and all additions to existing structures in this district which increase the square footage of a structure that is 4,000 square feet or greater, or increase a structure of any size by more than 25 percent, must be developed as a planned unit development. All permitted uses in this district must also comply with all applicable requirements contained in chapter 5, "Supplementary Regulations", of this title, as well as all other pertinent regulations in this title. 
(B)  Special uses: No enumerated special use shall be considered to be an accessory use to any other permitted or special use, and a separate permit shall be required for each separate special use. 
1.  Adult daycare center. 
2.  Automobile and automotive sales and service uses. 
3.  Automobile car wash. 
4.  Automobile repair. 
5.  Automobile vehicle rental (or automotive vehicle rental). 
6.  Bank and financial institution. 
7.  Beauty and barber shop. 
8.  Building material sales establishment, plumbing, heating, ventilating and electrical equipment and fixtures service and repair uses; machinery and equipment sales, service and rental; cabinetmaking and custom woodworking uses. 
9.  Catering service. 
10.  Church. 
11.  Club and lodge, private, fraternal or religious. 
12.  Communication exchange. 
13.  Compounding of cosmetics, toiletries, dyes and pharmaceutical products. 
14.  Congregate housing for the elderly. 
15.  Daycare center. 
16.  Drive-in commercial facility. 
17.  Drive-in or carryout eating place. 
18.  Engraving, printing, publishing, lithography, blueprinting and photocopy establishment. 
19.  Greenhouse, including retail and wholesale sale of plants. 
20.  Health spa. 
21.  Hospital. 
22.  Hotel, motel and apartment hotel. 
23.  Indoor amusement. 
24.  Indoor recreational facility. 
25.  Laundry and dry cleaning (commercial). 
26.  Light manufacturing assembly of previously manufactured parts, fabricating, cleaning, testing, repairing or servicing. 
27.  Medical or dental clinic. 
28.  Monument establishment. 
29.  Mortuary. 
30.  Music and dance school. 
31.  Nail salon. 
32.  Newspaper office and distribution center. 
33.  Office: business, medical, professional or public. 
34.  Outdoor merchandise, storage, promotional activities, or tents. 
35.  Private school. 
36.  Public or private garage and parking lot. 
37.  Public park or playground. 
38.  Public school. 
39.  Public use. 
40.  Public utility and public services use. 
41.  Research activities and/or laboratory. 
42.  Television and radio tower, antenna support structure, church spire, belfry, monument, tank, water and fire tower, stage tower or scenery loft, cooling tower, ornamental tower, and spire, chimney, elevator bulkhead, conveyor and flagpole which exceed the maximum height. 
43.  Trailer or boat sales. 
44.  Travel agency. 
45.  Veterinarian or animal hospital. 
46.  Wholesale merchandising and storage warehousing. 
All special uses within the C5A district that are constructed on unimproved land and all additions to existing structures in this district which increase the square footage of a structure that is 4,000 square feet or greater, or increase a structure of any size by more than 25 percent, must be developed as a planned unit development. All special uses in this district must also comply with all applicable requirements contained in chapter 5, "Supplementary Regulations", of this title as well as all other pertinent regulations in this title. 
(C)  Accessory building and uses: 
1.  See sections 10-5-4, "Accessory structures and uses", and 10-5-5, "Yards", of this title. 
2.  Commercial accessory buildings and uses are limited to storage garages and parking lots. 
3.  Commercial accessory buildings and uses must also conform to the following regulations: 
(a)  Area: The total area of all accessory buildings on a lot shall be limited to no more than 30 percent of a rear yard. 
(b)  Distance between structures: Accessory buildings must be separated from each other by a minimum of five feet. 
(c)  Location: Accessory buildings shall be located only in a rear yard. 
(d)  Setbacks: 
(1)  An accessory building which is less than ten feet from a principal building shall observe the same side yard requirements for a principal building. 
(2)  An accessory building which is greater than ten feet from a principal structure must maintain a distance of 60 feet from a front property line, 18 feet from a corner side property line, and a distance equal to five percent of the lot width but no less than three feet from both the side and rear property lines. 
(D)  Minimum yard and lot requirements: The following minimum yard setbacks shall be provided for all uses in the C5A zoning district: 
1.  Front and corner side yard: None required. If a front and/or corner side yard setback is provided, it shall not exceed five feet. 
2.  Rear yard: A minimum rear yard of 20 feet shall be required if the rear yard is located adjacent to a lot which is zoned for residential use. The required rear yard shall be landscaped to provide a visual buffer between the two uses. 
3.  Side yard: A minimum side yard of 20 feet shall be required if the side yard is located adjacent to a lot which is zoned for residential use. The required side yard shall be landscaped to provide a visual buffer between the two uses. 
(E)  Maximum height: All buildings shall not exceed a height limitation of 45 feet or four stories (with a maximum height of 45 feet); and, in addition: 
1.  Because of their similarity of design, bulk, and contiguity, no building constructed at the following addresses shall exceed a height limitation of 45 feet or three stories (with a maximum height of 45 feet). See map in section 10-11-2, figure 11 of this title. 
Address PIN 520-526 Crescent Boulevard 05-11-316-005 528-530 Crescent Boulevard 05-11-317-007 532-534 Crescent Boulevard 05-11-317-008 538-540 Crescent Boulevard 05-11-317-013 -014 and -027 542 Crescent Boulevard 05-11-317-015 544 - 550 Crescent Boulevard 05-11-317-016 552 Crescent Boulevard 05-11-317-025 478 Forest Avenue 05-11-317-025 522-526 Hillside 05-11-328-010 401-409 Main Street 05-11-328-010 411 Main Street 05-11-328-009 413 Main Street 05-11-328-008 417 Main Street 05-11-328-006 419 - 421 Main Street 05-11-328-005 and -004 423 Main Street 05-11-328-003 426 Main Street 05-11-327-015 427 Main Street 05-11-328-002 and -001 428 Main Street 05-11-327-022 430 Main Street 05-11-327-021 434-438-440 Main Street (405 Duane Street) 05-11-327-012 443 and 449 Main Street 05-11-321-001 448 Main Street 05-11-316-005 460 Main Street 05-11-315-023 466 Main Street 05-11-315-021 473 Main Street and 520-526 Crescent Boulevard 05-11-317-006 474 - 476 Main Street 05-11-315-020 475 - 477 Main Street 05-11-317-005 479 Main Street 05-11-317-028 480 Main Street 05-11-315-019 481 - 483 Main Street 05-11-317-003 482 - 484 Main Street 05-11-315-018 485 - 491 Main Street 05-11-317-002 486 Main Street 05-11-315-017 488 - 490 Main Street 05-11-315-016 492 Main Street 05-11-315-015 493 - 499 and 523 Main Street 
May also use 523 Pennsylvania 
Avenue 05-11-317-001 494 Main Street 05-11-315-014 496 Main Street 05-11-315-013 505 - 509 Pennsylvania Avenue 05-11-315-012  
2.  Churches and temples may be erected to a height not exceeding 75 feet if the building is set back from each yard line at least two feet for each foot of additional height above the height limit otherwise permitted in the district. 
3.  The height of a television or radio tower, antenna support structure, church spire, belfry, monument, tank, water and fire tower, stage tower or scenery loft, cooling tower, ornamental tower, and spire, chimney, elevator bulkhead, stock, conveyor, flagpole or other facility servicing the building shall be specified in the ordinance granting a special use permit in excess of the maximum height. 
The ordinance granting the special use may impose conditions where appropriate, including, but not limited to, screening and placement of any structure built as to not be visible from the ground level public right-of-way adjacent to the site. 
(F)  Signs, fences and obstructions in yards: 
1.  Signs as per sign ordinance. 
2.  Screening as required pursuant to subsection 10-5-13(L) of this title. 
3.  See section 10-5-5, "Yards", of this title. 
(G)  Parking and loading requirements: For the purpose of minimizing disruptive curb cuts and driveways, and to encourage the consolidation of parking spaces in appropriate locations, accessory off street parking is not required within the C5A core retail area as reflected on the zoning district map. 
(Ord. 3617, 5-8-1989, eff. 6-1-1989; amd. Ord. 4641, 10-12-1998; Ord. 4673, 12-14-1998, eff. 3-1-1999; Ord. 5035, 1-14-2002, eff. 3-1-2002; Ord. 5365, 6-13-2005; Ord. 5543, 1-22-2007; Ord. 5591, 7-23-2007; Ord. 5650, 1-28- 2008; Ord. 5785, 8-10-2009; Ord. 5886, 9-13-2010; Ord. 6015, 3-26-2012; Ord. 6520, 7-24-2017; Ord. 6601, 5-14-2018; Ord. 6607, 6-4-2018; Ord. 6619, 8-27-2018; Ord. 6669, 1-28-2019) 
10-4-17-2. - C5B Central Service Subdistrict. 
(A)  Permitted uses within existing buildings: 
1.  Animal grooming. 
2.  Animal training. 
3.  Antenna attachments to existing antenna towers, buildings or other structures which do not exceed the permitted height in the zoning district or the height established by a special use permit. 
4.  Antique shop. 
5.  Apparel store. 
6.  Art and school supplies. 
7.  Bakery. 
8.  Bank and financial institution. 
9.  Beauty and barber shop. 
10.  Bicycle sale, repairs. 
11.  Bookstore. 
12.  Camera store. 
13.  Catering services. 
14.  Clubs and lodges: private, fraternal or religious. 
15.  Coin and philatelic sales. 
16.  Communication exchange. 
17.  Dressmaking, tailoring. 
18.  Drugstore and pharmacy, retail. 
19.  Dry cleaning. 
20.  Electrical and household appliance sales and repair. 
21.  Florist shop. 
22.  Food store. 
23.  Furniture, upholstery, carpet, china or glass store. 
24.  Furrier shop, storage and conditioning. 
25.  Garden supply shop. 
26.  Gift shop. 
27.  Hardware store. 
28.  Health spa. 
29.  Indoor theater. 
30.  Interior decorating, including making of draperies, slipcovers, and other similar articles. 
31.  Jewelry or leather goods store. 
32.  Laundry. 
33.  Liquor store. 
34.  Locksmith. 
35.  Mortuary. 
36.  Music and dance schools. 
37.  Musical instrument sales and repair. 
38.  Nail salon. 
39.  Newspaper office. 
40.  Office supply store. 
41.  Outdoor beautification displays in compliance with the provisions in section 10-5-16 of this title. 
42.  Offices: business, medical, professional or public. 
43.  Paint and wallpaper sales. 
44.  Pet shop. 
45.  Photographic and art studio. 
46.  Picture framing. 
47.  Printing. 
48.  Radio and television: service, repair and studios. 
49.  Restaurant and eating place (except drive-in establishments) without entertainment or dancing, and including outdoor seating on private property as an accessory use provided such outdoor seating complies with the provisions in section 10-5-15 of this title. 
50.  Retail mail order store. 
51.  Shoe repair. 
52.  Shoe store. 
53.  Sporting goods. 
54.  Tobacco shop. 
55.  Toy and hobby shop. 
56.  Travel agency. 
57.  Typewriter shop. 
All permitted uses within the C5B district that are constructed on unimproved land and all additions to existing structures in this district which increase the square footage of a structure that is 4,000 square feet or greater, or increase a structure of any size by more than 25 percent, must be developed as a planned unit development. All permitted uses in this district must be developed as a planned unit development and must also comply with all applicable requirements contained in chapter 5, "Supplementary Regulations", of this title, as well as all other pertinent regulations in this title. 
However, the owner of an existing single-family residence may construct those accessory buildings or conduct those uses set forth in the R2 district regulations and may maintain those permitted obstructions set forth in the supplemental district regulations without the need for a special use for planned unit development, provided such structures comply with all standards and regulations applicable to the same as if the residence were in the R2 district. 
(B)  Special uses: No enumerated special use shall be considered to be an accessory use to any other permitted or special use, and a separate permit shall be required for each separate special use. 
1.  Adult daycare center. 
2.  Automobile and automotive sales and service use. 
3.  Automobile car wash. 
4.  Automobile repair. 
5.  Automobile vehicle rental (or automotive vehicle rental). 
6.  Building material sales establishment, plumbing, heating, ventilating and electrical equipment and fixtures service and repair uses; machinery and equipment sales, service and rental; cabinetmaking and custom woodworking uses. 
7.  Church. 
8.  Compounding of cosmetics, toiletries, dyes and pharmaceutical products. 
9.  Congregate housing for the elderly. 
10.  Daycare center. 
11.  Designated historical landmark, site, or structure. 
12.  Drive-in commercial facility. 
13.  Drive-in or carryout eating place. 
14.  Dwellings: single-family attached (provided that no more than six units are attached), single-family detached, two-family and multi-family. 
15.  Engraving, printing, publishing, lithography, blueprinting and photocopy establishment. 
16.  Greenhouse, including retail and wholesale sale of plants. 
17.  Hospital. 
18.  Hotel, motel and apartment hotel. 
19.  Indoor recreational facility. 
20.  Laundry and dry cleaning (commercial). 
21.  Light manufacturing assembly of previously manufactured part, fabricating, cleaning, testing, repairing or servicing. 
22.  Medical or dental clinic. 
23.  Monument establishment. 
24.  Outdoor merchandise, storage, promotional activities or tents. 
25.  Private school. 
26.  Public or private garage and parking lot. 
27.  Public park or playground. 
28.  Public school. 
29.  Public use. 
30.  Public utility and public services use. 
31.  Research activities and/or laboratory. 
32.  Television and radio tower, antenna support structure, church spire, belfry, monument, tank, water and fire tower, stage tower or scenery loft, cooling tower, ornamental tower and spire, chimney, elevator bulkhead, conveyor and flagpole which exceed the maximum height. 
33.  Trailer or boat sales. 
34.  Veterinarian or animal hospital. 
35.  Wholesale merchandising and storage warehousing. 
All special uses within the C5B district that are constructed on unimproved land and all additions to existing structures in this district which increase the square footage of a structure that is 4,000 square feet or greater, or increase a structure of any size by more than 25 percent, must be developed as a planned unit development. All special uses in this district must be developed as a planned unit development and must also comply with all applicable requirements contained in chapter 5, "Supplementary Regulations", of this title as well as all other pertinent regulations in this title. 
However, the owner of an existing single-family residence may construct those accessory buildings or conduct those uses set forth in the R2 district regulations and may maintain those permitted obstructions set forth in the supplemental district regulations without the need for a special use for planned unit development, provided such structures comply with all standards and regulations applicable to the same as if the residence were in the R2 district. 
(C)  Accessory building and uses: 
1.  See section 10-5-4, "Accessory structures and uses", of this title. 
2.  Commercial accessory buildings and uses are limited to storage garages and parking lots. 
3.  Commercial accessory buildings and uses must also conform to the following regulations: 
(a)  Area: The total area of all accessory buildings on a lot shall be limited to no more than 30 percent of a rear yard. 
(b)  Distance between structures: Accessory buildings must be separated from each other by a minimum of five feet. 
(c)  Location: Accessory buildings shall be located only in a rear yard. 
(d)  Setbacks: 
(1)  An accessory building which is less than ten feet from a principal building shall observe the same side yard requirements for a principal building. 
(2)  An accessory building which is greater than ten feet from a principal structure must maintain a distance of 60 feet from a front property line, 18 feet from a corner side property line, and a distance equal to five percent of the lot width but no less than three feet from both the side and rear property lines. 
(D)  Minimum yard and lot requirements: 
1.  Commercial use: 
(a)  Front yard: None required. 
(b)  Corner side yard: None required. 
(c)  Rear yard: A minimum rear yard of 20 feet shall be required if the rear yard is located adjacent to a lot which is zoned for residential use. The required rear yard shall be landscaped to provide a visual buffer between the two uses. 
(d)  Side yard: A minimum side yard of 20 feet shall be required if the side yard is located adjacent to a lot which is zoned for residential use. The required side yard shall be landscaped to provide a visual buffer between the two uses. 
2.  Ground floor commercial use (with residential and/or office uses above): 
(a)  Front yard: Zero feet for the retail facade of the building, or the building shall align with the setback of either adjacent structure. 
(b)  Corner side yard: Zero feet for the retail facade of the building, or the building shall align with the setback of either adjacent structure. 
(c)  Rear yard: A minimum rear yard of 20 feet shall be required if the rear yard is located adjacent to a lot which is zoned for residential use. The required rear yard shall be landscaped to provide a visual buffer between the two uses. 
(d)  Side yard: A minimum side yard of 20 feet shall be required if the side yard is located adjacent to a lot which is zoned for residential use. The required side yard shall be landscaped to provide a visual buffer between the two uses. 
3.  Residential use, multiple-family dwellings (including planned unit developments): 
(a)  Front yard: 20 feet in depth with an additional five feet of front yard setback for each floor over three. On lots fronting on two nonintersecting streets, a front yard must be provided on both streets. 
(b)  Corner side yard: 20 feet in depth with an additional five feet of front yard setback for each floor over three. 
(c)  Rear yard: A minimum rear yard of 30 feet shall be required. 
(d)  Side yard: A minimum side yard of ten feet shall be required with an additional five feet of side yard setback for each floor over three. 
4.  Residential use, single-family attached (including townhomes, two-family structures, and planned unit developments): 
(a)  Front yard: 20 feet in depth. On lots fronting on two nonintersecting streets, a front yard must be provided on both streets. 
(b)  Corner side yard: A side yard abutting a street shall be no less than 30 feet in depth. 
(c)  Rear yard: A minimum rear yard of 30 feet shall be required. 
(d)  Side yard: Two side yards, neither of which is less than ten percent of the lot width. 
5.  Residential use, single-family detached: 
(a)  Front yard: 20 feet in depth. On lots fronting on two nonintersecting streets, a front yard must be provided on both streets. 
(b)  Corner side yard: A side yard abutting a street shall be no less than 30 feet in depth. 
If a corner lot, subdivided and duly recorded on the effective date hereof has insufficient width to provide such yard of 30-foot width and still maintain a buildable width of 35 feet, excluding the side yard along the opposite lot line, then the side yard abutting the street may be reduced in width by the distance necessary to maintain such buildable width of 35 feet, provided the side yard abutting the street is not reduced to less than 30 percent of the width of the lot. 
(c)  Rear yard: A minimum rear yard of 30 feet shall be required. 
(d)  Side yard: Two side yards, neither of which is less than ten percent of the lot width. 
(e)  Lot area: A minimum area of 8,712 square feet shall be provided. 
(f)  Lot width: A minimum total lot width of 66 feet shall be provided. 
6.  Schools and other special uses not listed above: 
(a)  Front yard: 20 feet in depth. On lots fronting on two nonintersecting streets, a front yard must be provided on both streets. 
(b)  Corner side yard: A side yard abutting a street shall be no less than 30 feet in depth. 
(c)  Rear yard: A minimum rear yard of 30 feet shall be required. 
(d)  Side yard: A minimum side yard of 25 feet shall be provided. 
(E)  Maximum height: All buildings shall not exceed a height limitation of 55 feet, and, in addition: 
1.  That portion of the structure over 45 feet must be stepped back from the front building facade(s) not less than 15 feet. 
2.  Bonus provision for all structures: An additional five feet of height is permitted if at least 75 percent of the floor area of the building at grade or below grade level is used for parking, provided that said parking is screened from public view and abutting landowners. 
3.  Additional bonus provision for solely residential structures: An additional five feet of height is permitted if the building is set back from the front lot line by at least an additional 15 feet more than the required front yard setback. 
4.  Churches and temples may be erected to a height not exceeding 75 feet if the building is set back from each yard line at least two feet for each foot of additional height above the height limit otherwise permitted in the district. 
5.  The height of a television or radio tower, antenna support structure, church spire, belfry, monument, tank, water and fire tower, stage tower or scenery loft, cooling tower, ornamental tower, and spire, chimney, elevator bulkhead, stock, conveyor, flagpole or other facility servicing the building shall be specified in the ordinance granting a special use permit in excess of the maximum height. 
The ordinance granting the special use may impose conditions where appropriate, including, but not limited to, screening and placement of any structure built as to not be visible from the ground level public right-of-way adjacent to the site. 
(F)  Signs, fences and obstructions in yards: 
1.  Signs as per sign ordinance. 
2.  Screening required pursuant to subsection 10-5-13(L) of this title. 
3.  Residential uses except planned unit developments: 
(a)  See subsections 10-5-5(B)1. and (B)2. of this title. 
(b)  See section 10-5-5, table 10-5-5(B)4. of this title for "fence". 
(c)  The following may be maintained in any yard: 
(1)  Chimneys; 
(2)  Overhanging roof eaves not exceeding 24 inches; 
(3)  An open terrace or porch not having a permanent roof, marquee or awning when it adjoins the principal building and does not exceed ten percent of the depth of the yard; 
(4)  Ornamental light standards; 
(5)  Flagpoles. 
(G)  Parking and loading requirements: Each existing use within the C5B subdistrict shall be treated as though it meets the parking regulations of this section. Each building or site shall be credited with the number of parking spaces necessary to meet the applicable parking requirement for the existing use of that building or site, regardless of whether or not the number of required parking spaces actually exist. Any new use which is subject to the same parking requirement as the previous use which occupied the building or site shall not be required to provide additional parking spaces. Any new use which is subject to a different parking requirement shall provide only the additional number of parking spaces above the number of spaces credited to that site necessary to meet the applicable parking requirement. New buildings that involve the demolition or reconstruction of 50 percent or more of the exterior surface of the existing building shall include parking spaces as provided for below. Additional parking spaces shall also be required for all building additions, but the number shall be based solely on the square footage of the addition. 
1.  All buildings except those specified below: One space for each 250 square feet of gross floor area. 
2.  Automobile sales: Three spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area, plus one space for each 2,000 square feet of gross land area. 
3.  Bowling alley: Four spaces for each bowling lane. 
4.  Car wash: One space for each two employees, plus reservoir space equal to five times the maximum capacity of the washing unit. 
5.  Church: One space for each four seats in the main auditorium. 
6.  Club and lodge: One space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area. 
7.  Congregate housing: One space for each two bedrooms. 
8.  Dwelling unit: Efficiency - one space; one bedroom - one and one-half spaces; two bedrooms and over - two spaces. 
9.  Group home: One space for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
10.  Hospital: Two spaces for each bed. 
11.  Hotel: One space for each lodging unit. 
12.  Indoor theater: One space for each three seats. 
13.  Light manufacturing: Two spaces for each three employees. 
14.  Medical and dental clinic: One space for each 200 square feet of the gross area used for clinic. 
15.  Mortuary: One space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area. 
16.  Other indoor recreation: One space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area. 
17.  Private school: One space for each four students, based on design capacity. 
18.  Public schools: For high schools - one space for each employee, plus one space for each five students, based on design capacity; for elementary schools - one space for each employee plus eight additional visitor spaces. 
19.  Restaurant (sit down): One space for each three seats provided in eating or drinking areas. 
20.  Restaurant (drive-in and/or carryout): One space for each 40 square feet of gross floor area. 
21.  Additional off street parking and loading requirements are found in chapter 5, "Supplementary Regulations", of this title. 
(Ord. 3617, 5-8-1989, eff. 6-1-1989; amd. Ord. 3815, 2-25-1991; Ord. 4425, 10-14-1996; Ord. 4641, 10-12-1998; Ord. 4673, 12- 14-1998, eff. 3-1-1999; Ord. 5035, 1-14-2002, eff. 3-1-2002; Ord. 5365, 6-13-2005; Ord. 5543, 1-22-2007; Ord. 5591, 7-23-2007; Ord. 5886, 9-13-2010; Ord. 6015, 3-26-2012; Ord. 6520, 7-24-2017; Ord. 6601, 5-14-2018; Ord. 6619, 8-27-2018) 
10-4-18. - C6 Commercial/Multiuse Planned Development District. 
Development within this district shall be by planned development only, and shall be consistent with the Glen Ellyn Comprehensive Plan. All development shall comply with requirements contained in chapter 7, "Planned Unit Developments", of this title, as well as all other pertinent regulations in this title. 
(A)  Uses: The following uses may be allowed, subject to the review and approval of the development plan: 
1.  The complete range of primary retail and service uses. 
2.  Offices: business, professional, headquarters and governmental. 
3.  Auto oriented commercial uses. 
4.  Institutional uses, consistent with the predominantly commercial/multiuse plan for the site. 
5.  Residential uses, consistent with the predominantly commercial/multiuse plan for the site. 
6.  Outdoor merchandise, storage, promotional activities, or tents. 
(B)  Special design considerations: As contained in the Glen Ellyn Comprehensive Plan and all approved supplemental reports and graphics. 
To be emphasized within this district are the following design considerations: 
The coordination of land use areas; 
Building sites; 
Access points; 
Internal circulations; 
Parking areas; 
Flood control facilities; 
Drainage; 
Open space systems. 
(C)  Building bulk requirements: Building bulk requirements, including maximum building height and/or floor area ratio shall be subject to the review and approval of the development plan. 
Standards for lot area, setbacks and structure height shall be consistent with requirements in adjacent zoning districts, and in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan and all approved supplemental reports and graphics. 
Minimum lot size for a development within this district shall be as determined by the Plan Commission and Village Board of Trustees, upon review of property ownership, requirements of the Glen Ellyn Comprehensive Plan, and any supplemental area plans. 
(D)  Signs, fences and obstructions in yards: 
1.  Signs as per sign ordinance. 
2.  Screening and landscaping required pursuant to subsection 10-5-13(L) of this title and as contained in the Comprehensive Plan and all approved supplemental reports and graphics. 
(E)  Parking and loading requirements: 
1.  Off street parking and loading shall conform to the design considerations contained in the Comprehensive Plan and all approved supplemental reports and graphics. 
2.  Parking spaces shall be provided as specified herein, except as may be modified by the approved development plan: 
(a)  Automobile sales: Three spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area, plus one space for each 2,000 square feet of gross land area; 
(b)  Banks, offices and institutional use: One space for each 250 square feet of gross floor area; 
(c)  Dwelling unit: 
Efficiency 1 space 1 bedroom 11/2 spaces 2 bedrooms and over 2 spaces  
(d)  Restaurant (sit down): One space for each three seats provided in eating or drinking areas; 
(e)  Restaurant (drive-in and/or carryout): One space for each 40 square feet of gross floor area; 
(f)  All other retail and service uses: One space for each 250 square feet of gross floor area; 
(g)  Additional off street parking and loading requirements are found in chapter 5, "Supplementary Regulations", of this title. 
(Ord. 3617, 5-8-1989, eff. 6-1-1989; amd. Ord. 5035, 1-14-2002, eff. 3-1-2002; Ord. 5543, 1-22-2007; Ord. 5591, 7-23-2007) 
10-4-19. - I1 Light Industrial District. 
(A)  Permitted uses: 
1.  Artist studio. 
2.  Automobile car wash. 
3.  Automobile repair and service. 
4.  Automotive vehicle rental. 
5.  Building material sales establishment; plumbing, heating, ventilating and electrical equipment and fixture service and repair; machinery and equipment sales, service and rental; household appliance repair; cabinetmaking and custom woodworking uses. 
6.  Business, medical or professional office, including contractor's offices. 
7.  Commercial or trade school. 
8.  Community support services uses such as: mail order store, newspaper office, office supply, catering, laundry retail and mortuary. 
9.  Compounding of cosmetics, toiletries, dyes and pharmaceuticals. 
10.  Dry cleaning and/or commercial laundry establishments including dry cleaning plants and operations primarily serving satellite drop off dry cleaning establishments in other districts. 
11.  Engraving, printing, publishing, lithography, blueprinting, film processing and photocopying establishments. 
12.  Exterminating services. 
13.  Furniture upholstery. 
14.  Greenhouse, including retail and wholesale sale of plants. 
15.  Ice sales and storage. 
16.  Light manufacturing assembly of previously manufactured parts, fabricating, cleaning, testing, assembling, repairing and servicing. 
17.  Medical cannabis dispensary (in accordance with section 10-5-19 of this title). 
18.  Overnight and weekend parking. 
19.  Radio and television: service, repair and studios. 
20.  Research laboratory. 
21.  Indoor self-storage facility. 
22.  Sheet metal shop. 
23.  Veterinarian and animal hospital. 
24.  Antenna attachments to existing antenna towers, buildings or other structures which do not exceed the permitted height in the zoning district or the height established by special use permit. 
25.  Accessory retail use associated with another permitted use where the floor area taken up by retail does not exceed 25 percent. 
All permitted uses must also comply with all applicable requirements contained in chapter 5, "Supplementary Regulations", of this title as well as all other pertinent regulations in this title. 
(B)  Special uses: No enumerated special use shall be considered to be an accessory use to any other permitted or special use, and a separate permit shall be required for each separate special use. 
1.  Animal daycare. 
2.  Cartage, express or parcel delivery. 
3.  Church, temple or other religious institution. 
4.  Club or lodge; private, fraternal or religious. 
5.  Compost collection facility. 
6.  Concrete and cast stone fabrication and molding, including monument establishments. 
7.  Contractor's yard for storage of vehicles and materials. 
8.  Glass products production. 
9.  Indoor amusement. 
10.  Indoor recreation facility. 
11.  Kennel or cattery. 
12.  Micro food and beverage manufacturing. 
13.  Outdoor storage. 
14.  Private utility use or facility. 
15.  Public use. 
16.  Public utility and public service use. 
17.  Recycling collection center. 
18.  Television and radio tower, antenna support structure, water and fire tower, cooling tower, etc., which exceed the maximum height. 
19.  Vehicle storage yard. 
20.  Warehouse. 
21.  Wholesale merchandising and storage warehousing. 
All special uses must also comply with all applicable requirements contained in chapter 5, "Supplemental Regulations", of this title as well as all other pertinent regulations in this title. 
(C)  Accessory buildings, structures and uses: See sections 10-5-4, "Accessory structures and uses", and 10-5-5, "Yards", of this title. 
(D)  Minimum yard and lot requirements: 
1.  Front or corner side yard: 30 feet in depth. The front ten feet shall be landscaped. 
2.  Rear yard: 20 feet in depth. The rear ten feet shall be landscaped if adjacent to a residential zone or use or property located in the CR zoning district. 
3.  Side yard: 20 feet, such yard shall be landscaped if adjacent to a residential zone or use. 
4.  Lot area: 20,000 square feet. 
5.  Lot width: 100 feet. 
6.  Lot depth: 200 feet. 
(E)  Maximum height: 
1.  Forty five feet; 
2.  Churches and temples may be erected to a height not exceeding 75 feet, if the building is set back from each yard line at least two feet for each foot of additional building height above the height limit otherwise permitted in the district; 
3.  The height of a television or radio tower, antenna support structure, church spire, belfry, monument, tank, water and fire tower, stage tower or scenery loft, cooling tower, ornamental tower, and spire, chimney, elevator bulkhead, conveyor and flagpole shall be specified in the ordinance granting a special use permit. 
(F)  Signs and fences: 
1.  Signs as per sign ordinance. 
2.  Screening required pursuant to subsection 10-5-13(L) of this title. 
3.  See section 10-5-5, "Yards", of this title. 
(G)  Parking and loading requirements: 
1.  All buildings except those specified below: One space for each 250 square feet of floor area. 
2.  Car wash: One space for each two employees, plus reservoir parking space or stack space equal to five times the maximum capacity of the washing unit. 
3.  Club and lodge: One space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area. 
4.  Commercial or trade school: One space for each two students based on design capacity. 
5.  Additional off street parking and loading requirements are found in chapter 5, "Supplementary Regulations", of this title. 
(Ord. 6207, 1-13-2014; amd. Ord. 6228, 4-14-2014) 
Chapter 5 - SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS 

10-5-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of supplementary district regulations is to set specific conditions for various uses, classification of uses, or areas where problems are frequently encountered. 
(Ord. 3617, 5-8-1989, eff. 6-1-1989) 
10-5-2. - Home occupations. 
The following regulations shall apply to all home occupations: 
(A)  No person other than members of the family residing on the premises shall be engaged in such occupation; 
(B)  The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its occupants, and not more than 25 percent of floor area of the dwelling unit shall be used in the conduct of the home occupation; 
(C)  There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises, or other visible evidence of the conduct of such home occupation other than one sign, not exceeding two square feet in area, nonilluminated and mounted flat against the wall of the principal building; 
(D)  No home occupation shall be conducted in any accessory building; 
(E)  No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in greater volume than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood, and any need for parking generated by the conduct of such home occupation shall meet the off street parking requirements as specified in this title, and shall not be located in a required front yard; and 
(F)  No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses off the lot, if the occupation is conducted in a single-family residence, or outside of the dwelling unit if conducted in other than a single-family residence. There shall be no storage of hazardous or toxic materials. In the case of electrical interference, no equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or television receivers off the premises, or causes fluctuations in line voltage off the premises. 
(Ord. 3617, 5-8-1989, eff. 6-1-1989; amd. Ord. 3953, 9-28-1992) 
10-5-3. - Public swimming pools. 
Public swimming pools may be allowed as special uses in all districts, with the exception of the residential estate district, but shall comply with applicable Village regulations. The pool and accessory structures thereto, including the areas used by the bathers, shall not be closer than 50 feet to any property line. 
(Ord. 5543, 1-22-2007) 
10-5-4. - Accessory structures and uses. 
(A)  Accessory structure (or building): 
1.  Location: Accessory structures in required yard setbacks shall be subject to the provisions of subsection 10-5-5(B), "Permitted Obstructions In Required Yard Setbacks", of this chapter. 
2.  Area: 
(a)  The total combined area of all freestanding accessory structures on a zoning lot shall be limited to 1,000 square feet, but no more than 30 percent of a required rear yard, whichever is less. For all corner lots, the size of the rear yard shall be the area bounded by the side lot line, rear lot line, corner side lot line, and rear setback line. See Figure 15 in Section 10-11-2. 
(b)  Single-family residences constructed in the R0, R1, R2 and R3 zoning districts shall be granted an allowance of up to 100 square feet for the construction of one accessory structure with the exception of a detached garage, notwithstanding the existing lot coverage ratio provided that the total lot coverage ratio shall be no more than 25 percent for a single-family dwelling of more than one story or 35 percent for a single-family dwelling of one story. Said single accessory structure shall have a peaked roof with a ridge height of nine feet or less and be constructed so that no wall of the structure is more than 12 feet in length. 
3.  Number: The total number of accessory buildings on a zoning lot shall be limited to three, and no more than one of each type unless authorized by a special use permit. 
4.  Setbacks: 
(a)  Location to front property line : Accessory structures shall be located no closer to the front property line than the principal structure on the lot. On reversed corner lots, accessory structures shall observe the same setbacks as the principal structure on the zoning lot. Accessory structures located on corner lots shall be located no less than 20 feet from the corner side lot line, except in the residential estate district where all accessory structures shall be located no closer to the front or corner side yard property line than the principal structure on the lot. 
(b)  Structures less than ten feet from principal structure : Accessory structures less than ten feet from a principal structure shall observe the same setbacks as the principal structure on the zoning lot. 
(c)  Structures greater than ten feet from principal structure : Accessory structures greater than ten feet from the principal structure shall maintain a distance equal to five percent of the lot width (and no less than three feet) from the side and rear property lines, and no less than 20 feet from a corner side property line. 
(d)  Distance between buildings: Accessory buildings must be separated from each other by a minimum of five feet measured from wall to wall. 
(B)  Accessory use: 
1.  Garage sale: 
(a)  Limited to no more than two per year for each dwelling unit. 
(b)  Shall comply with all pertinent Village laws and regulations. 
(c)  Shall be limited to a period of no more than three consecutive days. 
(C)  Trash containers and dumpsters: All trash containers and dumpsters associated with nonresidential and multi-family uses must be enclosed in accordance with the provisions in subsection 10-5-5(B)4. of this chapter for "Wall, screen (including refuse and recycling, loading dock, and mechanical equipment)". 
(Ord. 3617, 5-8-1989, eff. 6-1-1989; amd. Ord. 4673, 12-14-1998, eff. 3-1-1999; Ord. 5035, 1-14-2002, eff. 3-1-2002; Ord. 5123, 12-16-2002, eff. 1-1-2003; Ord. 5271, 6-14-2004; Ord. 5365, 6-13-2005; Ord. 5543, 1-22-2007; Ord. 6144, 6-24-2013; Ord. 6601, 5-14-2018) 
10-5-5. - Yards. 
(A)  Minimum yard space: The minimum yard space required for one structure shall not again be considered as yard space for another structure; 
(B)  Permitted obstructions in required yard setbacks: 
1.  Walls, fences, signs, landscape plant material (excluding grass, ground cover, or other approved ground stabilizing material), and other obstructions shall be prohibited in those portions of a lot: 
(a)  Where the vision of drivers of motor vehicles and bicycles, and the safety of pedestrians walking along the sidewalk or street is unreasonably obstructed or interfered with; 
(b)  Encumbered by a detention, drainage, or access easement. 
2.  Landscape plant materials and trees shall be further restricted in the visibility triangle on corner lots. Shrubs shall be maintained to a maximum height of 36 inches and tree branches shall be eight feet or higher. Heights shall be measured above the average grade at the centerline of the adjacent street pavement. 
3.  The eaves of all accessory structures shall not exceed 12 feet above the structure's grade. 
4.  The following table outlines detached obstructions that are permitted in required setbacks. The regulations column applies to all accessory structures, regardless of whether they are located in a required yard. Roofed over structures shall be located a distance equal to five percent of the lot width and no less than three feet from the rear and side property lines and 20 feet from the corner side property line or as further restricted or allowed in this section and table 10-5-5(B)4 of this section. 
TABLE 10-5-5(B)4 
PERMITTED OBSTRUCTIONS AND ACCESSORY STRUCTURES IN REQUIRED SETBACKS 
Obstruction Front 
(Corner) Side Rear Regulations 1. Air conditioner X X X Limitations:  (a) Window unit only  (b) Projecting 1.5' or less into yard 2. Animal shelter X Limitations: Small 3. Arbor (trellis, pergola, 
ornamental gate and other 
similar structures) X X X (a) Limitations: Constructed of open material 
(b) Height: 10' maximum 
(c) Length: 20' maximum total 
(d) Area: Shall not exceed 250 sq. ft. 4. Balcony X Limitations:  (a) Must be open and uncovered  (b) Projecting no more than 4' into yard 5. Bay window X X Limitations:  (a) One story bay  (b) Projecting 3' or less into yard  (c) Cantilevered 6. Breezeway X Limitations: Provided said connection is open 
on all sides 7 Chimney X X X (a) Limitations: Projecting 2' or less into yard 8. Deck X (a) Limitations: Must be open and uncovered 
(b) Height: Not over 7 feet above the average level of the adjoining ground when located in the required rear yard setback. Decks constructed outside of a required rear yard shall not be limited in height. 
(c) Location: No closer to a rear property line than 10% of the lot width 
(d) Allowances: A non-conforming deck located in the required rear yard may be replaced and rebuilt to the same height as the existing non-conforming deck provided the only non-conformity of the deck is the height 9.  Eave X X X Limitations: Projecting 3' or less into yard 
and no closer than 1.5' from the lot line 10. Emergency generator X 
(corner 
side only) X X (a) Limitations: All sides of the equipment visible from a public way shall be obscured by a variety of plant material or a screen wall 
(b) Location: An emergency generator may be located 5% of the lot width (but not less than 2.5 feet) away from the side or rear property line provided it is tested only between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. once a week for a maximum of 30 minutes 
(c) Allowances: The Community Development Director may allow an emergency generator to be located in a front yard if he/she determines that there is no other reasonably viable location on the site to place the generator 11. Fence X X X (a) Limitations:  (1) 33.3% open in front and corner side 
yard setbacks  (2) Material (such as barbed wire, 
electrified, or any matter) that creates a 
system that is inherently dangerous to a 
pedestrian using the public sidewalks or 
public rights-of-way is prohibited  (3) Exposed structural elements shall face 
toward the property on which the fence is 
constructed  (4) In the residential estate district, 
chain-link fences shall be prohibited in the 
front yard and corner side yard (b) Height:  (1) Measured from ground level on the 
inside of the fence to the highest point of 
the fence  (2) 3' maximum in visibility triangle  (3) 6' maximum for fence located no closer 
to the street than the principal structure on 
a lot  (4) 4' maximum all other areas of the lot (c) Additional allowances:  (1) On lots fronting on 2 nonintersecting streets, a 6' tall fence shall be permitted if a "no access" provision has been recorded for that frontage and if the rear of the homes on both adjacent lots are facing the same street. Unless the fence will be located along a street that is under the jurisdiction of either DuDOT or IDOT, or is a public alleyway, such fence shall be positioned 4' inside the property and maintained with viable shrubs planted 4' on center along the outside of the fence in perpetuity.  (2) Masonry columns no greater than 2' x 
2' in size and placed no closer than 8' on 
center  (3) Fence posts and top caps may 
extend up to 6" above the fence height. The 
height of a cap located on top of a 
masonry column shall be no higher than 
the height of the column or a maximum of 
9' tall measured from ground level  (4) The bottom of a fence may be located 
up to 4" above ground level. Such distance 
shall not be counted toward the fence 
height 12. Fireplace, facing lot line X X Limitations: Projecting 2' or less into yard 13. Flagpole X X (a) Limitations: No more than 3 poles 
(b) Height: Shall not exceed the maximum height permitted for the principal structure on the lot in the subject zoning district 14. Garage, detached X X X (a) Limitations: Per definition 
(corner 
side only) (b) Height: Per zoning district, measured from the top of the slab at the midpoint of the front of the garage to the highest point of the structure (c) 660 sq. ft. maximum area, except in the residential estate district, where a maximum of 750 sq. ft. shall be permitted (d) Detached garages shall only be permitted in the corner side yard on corner lots (e) Detached garages shall be prohibited in the front yard and in the corner side yard of reversed corner lots 15. Gazebo X (a) Limitations: Constructed primarily of open 
sides that may have screens (b) Height: 15' maximum above its finished 
grade (c) Area: Shall not exceed 250 sq. ft. in area 16. Greenhouse, noncommercial X (a) Limitations: Constructed primarily of glass (b) Height: 15' maximum above its finished 
grade (c) Area: Shall not exceed 250 sq. ft. in area 17. Gutter or downspout X X X Limitations: Projecting 3' or less into yard 
and no closer than 1.5' from the lot line 18. Impervious Surface X X X (a) Limitations: Expansion of existing or new impervious surface is prohibited except as defined herein. 
(b) Distance: Pervious surface must be maintained as identified in 10-5-5(C). 
(c) Area: 
 (1) 50% or less of each required front, corner side, and rear yard (calculated independently) may be impervious surface in the R0, R1, R2, and R3 zoning districts. For all corner lots, the size of the rear yard shall be the area bounded by the side lot line, rear lot line, corner side lot line, and rear setback line. See Figure 15 in Section 10-11-2. 
 (2) 35% or less of the front yard may be impervious surface in the R4 zoning district 
 (3) In the Residential Estate district, 25% or less of each required front, corner side and rear yard (calculated independently) may be impervious surface. For all corner lots, the size of the rear yard shall be the area bounded by the side lot line, rear lot line, corner side lot line, and rear setback line. See Figure 16 in Section 10-11-2. 
(d) Allowances: 
 (1) Field adjustments to accommodate existing site conditions may be allowed subject to approval and documentation by the appropriate Village staff 
 (2) Structures used for primarily commercial uses in the C5A and C5B zoning districts shall be exempt from the distance to lot line regulation 
 (3) An existing impervious surface which does not meet the provisions of this section may be reconstructed, replaced or repaired in the current location within the property limits provided an accurate plat of survey dated prior to March 1, 1999, identifying the existence of the nonconforming surface is provided 19. Mechanical and electrical equipment, private (such as HVAC units and pool equipment) X (a) Limitations: 
 (1) Must be a distance equal to 10% of the lot width from any property line 
 (2) All sides of the equipment visible from a public way shall be obscured by a variety of plant material or a screen wall 
(3) Existing HVAC units which do not meet the provisions of this section may be maintained or replaced in the same location if documentation or evidence dated prior to January 1, 2007 is submitted verifying the existing location of the HVAC unit and the required screening is installed 20. Mechanical equipment, public utility X X Limitations: All sides of the equipment visible 
from a public way shall be obscured by a 
variety of plant material or a screen wall 21. Parking space, off street X X X Limitations: Provided spaces comply with all 
paving, impervious surface and screening 
regulations of this title 22. Pond X X Limitations:  (1) Must be located 10% of lot width away 
from any property line  (2) Must comply with all building and 
Zoning Code regulations for swimming 
pools if depth of water is 2' or greater, 
unless otherwise approved by special use 
permit for a PUD 23. Pool house (cabana) X (a) Height: 15' maximum above finished 
grade (b) Area: Shall not exceed 250 sq. ft. 24. Porch X Limitations:  (a) Must be open sided and shall be 
permanently roofed over  (b) May project up to 25% into required 
yard  (c) Floor area above porch may not be 
enclosed  (d) Porch must be on first floor level only 25. Portable storage (i.e., PODS) X X Limitations: 
 (a) May be located on a property not more 
than 30 days in a calendar year and not 
greater than 15 consecutive days at any 
one time  (b) Must be located on a hard surface 26. Portable toilet X X X Limitations:  (a) May be located on a zoning lot during 
construction only, and for which a building 
permit has been issued  (b) No less than 10' from front and corner 
side property lines and 10% of lot width 
from all side and rear property lines 27. Ramps, accessibility X X (a) Limitations: Must be needed to provide access to a permitted building or zoning lot from an alley or street 
(b) Height: 4' or less 28. Recreational equipment X Limitations: Must be located 10% of lot width 
away from any property line 29. Shed (see subsection 
10-5-4(A)2(b) of this chapter) X X (a) Limitations: Used for storage purposes 
only 
(b) Height: 15' maximum ridge (c) Area: 150 sq. ft. maximum 30. Sign X X X Limitations:  (a) In accordance with the sign code 
ordinance  (b) Provided they are not within the 
visibility triangle on corner lots and at 
driveway approaches 31. Solar Energy System, Ground-Mounted X Limitations: A ground-mounted solar energy system shall be located a distance equal to or greater than 10% of the lot width from a property line 32. Solar Energy System, Structure-Mounted X Limitations: 
 (1) A structure-mounted solar energy system shall maintain the same setbacks as the structure the system is mounted on 
 (2) A three foot (3') clearance shall be maintained between the top of the solar energy system and the ridge height of the building 33. Residential sport court X Limitations:  (a) All courts, appurtenances and 
equipment must be 10% of the lot width 
away from the property line  (b) Accessories shall not exceed 15' in 
height  (c) The intensity of lighting shall not be 
greater than 0.5 foot- candle measured at 
the ground at the lot line 34. Stairs or steps X X Limitations: Must be needed to provide 
access to a permitted building or zoning lot 
from an alley or street and not exceed 4' in 
height 35. Swimming pools (private) X Limitations: 
 (a) All pools, equipment, appurtenances 
and associated walks must be 10% of the 
lot width away from the property line  (b) Associated decks shall comply with the 
deck requirements above  (c) In the residential estate district, private 
swimming pools shall only be permitted in 
the rear yard with a minimum of a 30' 
setback from the rear lot line 36. Tent X X Limitations:  (a) Requires Village Board approval for 
nonresidential use  (b) Shall be limited to 48 hour maximum 
duration per year per zoning lot  (c) All tents (except if used exclusively for 
recreational camping purposes) are 
subject to this code 37. Terrace (patio) X X (a) Limitations: Open and uncovered (b) Height: Not over 3' above the average 
level of the adjoining ground 38. Wall, retaining X X X Limitations:  (1) Retaining wall 3' or less in height must 
be set back from any property line a 
minimum distance equal to 5% of the lot 
width  (2) Retaining wall greater than 3' in height 
shall be considered a structure and must 
be set back a distance equal to 10% of the 
lot width (side yard setback) from all 
property lines  (3) If deemed necessary and approved by 
a Village Engineer, the setback 
requirement for retaining walls may be 
reduced provided the site grading plan is 
designed to have no adverse impact of 
stormwater runoff to adjacent properties 39. Wall, screen (including refuse and recycling, loading dock, and mechanical equipment) X X (a) Limitations: 
 (1) Required for commercial uses, 
multi-family and nonresidential uses  (2) Constructed of the same material as 
the walls of principal structure on zoning 
lot  (3) Must be open on top (b) Height: Sufficient to screen all containers 
within the walls and no greater than 8' unless 
authorized as part of a special use or PUD (c) Shall not be located in the front of a 
building 40. Wells; access, area and window X X X Limitations: All portions of the structure must 
be 8" or less above grade level  
(C)  Impervious surfaces setback: 
1.  New construction, class II and III alterations, class III additions: 
Lot Width Distance (Between Edge Of 
Impervious Surface And Lot Line) 66' and less 2% of lot width More than 66' to 90' or less 3% of lot width More than 90' to 100' or less 4% of lot width More than 100' 5% of lot width  
2.  All other property: The expansion of an existing impervious surface and new impervious surfaces on improved lots shall not be permitted unless the proposed surface is in conformance with the percentages outlined above. The location of an existing impervious surface which does not conform to the provisions of this section may be maintained in the same location provided the property owner can either present an accurate plat of survey dated prior to March 1, 1999, indicating the location of the impervious surface or demonstrate they have owned the property prior to March 1, 1999. 
3.  Exceptions: 
(a)  Structures used for primarily commercial purposes in the C5A and C5B zoning districts shall be exempt from this regulation. 
(b)  Driveways and pedestrian walkways that traverse a property line at generally a 90-degree angle and which are intended to provide a connection between the adjacent street or sidewalk and a principal or accessory use or structure on a lot provided the width of the surface is equal at each side of the lot line. 
(c)  A single-family detached residential driveway located on a lot with a lot width greater than 100 feet need not be located further than five feet from a property line. 
(d)  Existing, primary shared residential driveways between two homes shall be exempt from this regulation, provided that all other requirements of the Zoning Code are met. 
(Ord. 3617, 5-8- 1989, eff. 6-1-1989; amd. Ord. 5035, 1-14-2002, eff. 3-1-2002; Ord. 5271, 6-14- 2004; Ord. 5365, 6-13-2005; Ord. 5543, 1-22-2007; Ord. 6015, 3-26-2012; Ord. 6208, 1-13-2014; Ord. 6601, 5-14-2018; Ord. 6607, 6-4-2018; Ord. 6674, 2-25-2019; Ord. 6684, 3-11-2019) 
10-5-6. - Buildings. 
(A)  Temporary structures and materials: The provisions of this section shall be considered in conjunction with an approved site development (tree preservation) plan and are not intended to require a developer to secure off site storage during construction. 
1.  Temporary construction storage and activities: Temporary storage and construction activities shall include mechanical equipment and machinery, construction material and debris, litter, refuse and refuse containers, stockpile, spoil, backfill, vehicles, material staging and preparation areas, open and contained burning, propane and other similar heating devices, and portable toilets. 
2.  Duration: Temporary storage and construction activities, buildings, construction and sales trailers, portable toilets, equipment, and materials used in conjunction with construction work only are permitted in any district during the period construction work is in progress and being actually pursued, but such temporary facilities shall be removed upon completion of the construction. 
3.  Location: Temporary storage and construction activities shall be located or conducted a minimum distance equal to the side yard setback from all side and rear property lines and so as not to create a nuisance or safety hazard to any adjacent property. Portable toilets must also be located no less than ten feet from front and corner side lot lines. 
(Ord. 3617, 5-8-1989, eff. 6-1-1989; amd. Ord. 4673, 12-14-1998, eff. 3-1-1999; Ord. 5365, 6-13-2005) 
10-5-7. - Parking and storage of certain vehicles. 
(A)  Unless parked within an enclosed building no more than one recreational vehicle, trailer or boat of any kind or type may be parked in the open, and then only behind the front building line and not in a required side yard; 
(B)  The storage of semitrailers is prohibited in all districts at all times; 
(C)  Commercial vehicles may not be parked overnight in any residential district, other than in completely enclosed buildings or garages, except when the vehicle is present for the purpose of providing a required service to the residence where parked, except in the residential estate district where no recreational vehicle, trailer or boat of any kind or type may be parked in the open for no more than 30 consecutive days. 
(Ord. 3617, 5-8-1989, eff. 6-1-1989; amd. Ord. 5271, 6-14-2004) 
10-5-8. - Off street parking regulations. 
(A)  Parking for the handicapped: Within all parking lots or garages, parking spaces shall be reserved for the handicapped as required by the State of Illinois Capital Development Board, as contained within the Illinois Accessibility Code; 
(B)  Location of required parking spaces: 
1.  The parking spaces required for residential buildings or uses shall be hard surfaced and shall be located on the same zoning lot with the building or use served. Any parking spaces for residential buildings or uses that are located in a required front yard or in a required side yard which abuts a street must be located either on an approved driveway or on an approved off street parking space accessible from an approved driveway; 
2.  The parking spaces required for any other building or use may be located on an area within 300 feet of said building and two or more owners of buildings may join together in providing the required parking spaces. Where the required parking spaces are not located on the same zoning lot with the building or use serviced, the usage of the lot or tract upon which said parking spaces are provided shall be restricted by an instrument of record describing the premises for which said parking is provided and assuring the retention of such parking so long as required by this title. In no event may such parking spaces be eliminated or terminated if such would cause the building or use served to become a nonconforming use. The provisions of this subsection (B)2. shall be applicable only where the lots or parts thereof which are used to provide required parking spaces are located in the same zoning district as is the principal use; 
3.  Prior to the excavation, forming, pouring of cement, asphalt, sand bituminous mix, gravel or any other material, and/or prior to any construction of any required parking space, approved driveway or approved parking space as herein defined, a building permit must first be secured from the Building and Zoning Department of the Village; 
4.  As a condition precedent to the issuance of the building permit required under subsection (B)3. of this section, the owner of the land and the contractor must certify in writing: 
(a)  That the drainage of surface waters will not be changed from approved, existing drainage grades, as the Village may determine theretofore from time to time, by the construction of any such required parking space, approved driveway or approved parking space, or any part thereof; or if changed from any such approved existing drainage grade, such owner and contractor must certify in writing that such surface waters will not be deposited on the property of any adjoining landowners; and 
(b)  That not more than 50 percent of the required front yard in zoning districts R1, R2, and R3, or not more than 35 percent of the front yard in zoning district R4 shall be impermeable as a consequence of any construction of any required parking space, approved driveway, or approved parking space; 
(C)  Use of off street spaces: Except as may otherwise be provided for the parking of trucks or for special uses, required off street parking facilities required as accessory to uses listed herein, shall be solely for the parking of passenger automobiles of patrons, occupants or employees; 
(D)  Repair and service work prohibited: No motor vehicle repair or service work of any kind shall be permitted in any open parking spaces; 
(E)  Rules for computing parking spaces: In computing the number of required off street parking spaces, the following rules shall apply: 
1.  Floor area shall mean the gross floor area of the specific use, excluding any floor or portion thereof used for parking as herein defined; 
2.  Where a fractional space results, a full parking space shall be provided in lieu thereof; 
3.  In the case of mixed uses, the parking spaces required shall equal the sum of the requirements of the various uses computed separately; and 
4.  Whenever a building or use constructed or established after the effective date hereof is changed or enlarged in floor area, number of dwelling units, seating capacity, classrooms or otherwise, additional parking spaces shall be provided on the basis of the enlargement or change. Whenever a building or use existing prior to the effective date hereof is reconstructed or enlarged to the extent of 20 percent or more in floor area, said building or use in its entirety shall then and thereafter comply with all the parking requirements set forth herein. However, any enlargement or change in use of less than 20 percent of the gross floor area shall be provided with increased parking based solely on the enlargement or change; 
(F)  Minimum size: A required off street parking space shall be at least nine feet in width and at least 19 feet in length, exclusive of access drives, aisles, ramps, columns and office or work area. Such space shall have vertical clearance of at least seven feet. For parallel parking, the length of the parking space shall be increased to a minimum of 24 feet. All other requirements as to size shall be as set forth in the off street parking chart; 
(G)  Minimum improvements and maintenance standards for parking lots and garages: All new parking lots and garages, any parking lot where the number of parking spaces is expanded by ten percent or more or any project site where a building is expanded or a new building constructed shall conform with the following improvement and maintenance standards: 
1.  All parking lots shall be curbed around the perimeter of the lot and around all islands located within the lot unless the Village Engineer and Community Development Director determine that a waiver from this requirement will provide for significantly improved stormwater management; 
2.  Parking lots shall be surfaced either with concrete not less than six inches in thickness or with bituminous surface of not less than two inches in depth on top of a compacted, crushed stone base not less than six inches in depth, or with any surface equal or superior to either of these types. Such surfacing requirements shall be applied to all existing unsurfaced parking lots at the time of change or enlargement of the nonconforming use; 
3.  Adequate provision shall be made for the disposal of stormwater to ensure that such water shall not flow onto adjoining property or public way in a quantity or manner that would be detrimental to the normal use thereof; 
4.  A structurally sound wall or other abutment to ensure safety shall be installed around each side of the parking lot wherever such lot adjoins a public way. Wherever necessary to prevent the washing of soil to and from adjoining property, an adequate retaining wall shall be provided; 
5.  All open vehicle parking areas containing more than four parking spaces shall be effectively screened on each side adjoining or fronting on property situated in a residence district or any institutional premises by a wall, fence or densely planted compact hedge not less than four feet in height; 
6.  The entrances and exits to and from the lot or garage shall be of such number, location and width as to avoid traffic congestion and interference; 
7.  The location of each parking space and the direction of movement along the driveways thereof shall be indicated by painting upon the surface, raised directional signs, or markers placed on the surfacing; 
8.  Parking lots or garages used during darkness shall have a system of floor lighting to provide an adequate standard of illumination over the entire parking areas. All floodlights shall be shielded so that glare will not extend to neighboring properties. However, in no case shall such lighting exceed three foot-candles measured at the lot line; 
9.  The parking lot or garage shall be maintained in a manner to keep it as free as practical from dust, paper and other loose particles, and snow and ice shall be promptly removed by the operator. All adjacent sidewalks shall be kept free from dirt, ice, sleet and snow and in a safe condition for use by pedestrians. All signs, markers or any other methods used to indicate direction of traffic movement and location of parking spaces shall be maintained in a neat and legible condition. Likewise, any walls, trees and shrubbery, as well as surfacing of the parking lot or garage, shall be maintained in good condition throughout its use for parking purposes; 
(H)  Landscape islands: A landscaped island shall be provided at the end of every row of parking stalls and at least one intermediate landscaped island shall be provided for every 20 parking spaces located in the same consecutive row of parking. Such landscape islands shall have a minimum width and length equal to the size of the parking spaces in the subject lot. 
(I)  Off street parking chart: All off street parking spaces required by this title, except those required for single-family and two-family dwellings, shall be designed in accordance with the off street parking chart. Upon review and recommendation of the Director of the Community Development Department and the Village Engineer, or the approval of the Plan Commission, the provisions of an approved parking plan may be modified, so long as the general intent of the design standards is maintained. The Village may require the submittal of a traffic engineering study. 
OFF STREET PARKING CHART 

Upon review and recommendation of the Director of the Community Development Department and the Village Engineer, or the approval of the Plan Commission, the provisions of an approved parking plan may be modified, so long as the general intent of the design standards are maintained. The Village may require the submittal of a traffic engineering study. 
TABLE OF DIMENSIONS 
(In Feet) 
Legend: 
O Parking angle D Perpendicular length of stalls (overlap)] S Parking space width E Aisle width P Parking space length F Turnaround aisle width A Curb length of parking space depth G Overhang of curb length at periphery B Curb length of parking space width H Setback C Perpendicular length of stalls (against wall) J Wall to wall dimension  
O S P A B C D E 1 F G H J 0° 9 
9 24 
24 0 
0 24 
26 9 
9 9 
9 11 
10 - 
- 0 
0 0 
0 29 
28 30° 9 19 30 18 17.3 13.4 9 - 13.5 6 43.6 45° 9 
9.5 
10 19 
19 
19 19.8 
20.1 
20.5 12.7 
13.4 
14.1 19.8 
20.1 
20.4 16.6 
16.7 
16.9 10 
9.5 
9 16 
16.5 
17 6.4 
6.7 
7 9 
8.5 
8 49.6 
49.7 
49.8 60° 9 
9.5 
10 19 
19 
19 12.1 
12.3 
12.4 10.4 
11 
11.5 21 
21.3 
21.5 18.8 
18.9 
19 17 
15.5 
14 15 
15 
15 2.6 
2.8 
2.9 12 
11.5 
11 59 
58.1 
57 90° 9 
9.5 
10 19 
19 
19 0 
0 
0 9 
9.5 
10 19 
19 
19 19 
19 
19 25 
24 
23 20 
20 
20 0 
0 
0 0 
0 
0 63 
62 
61  
Note: 
1.  Except that on residential lots, all aisles or driveways shall be at least 12 feet in width. 
(Ord. 3617, 5-8-1989, eff. 6-1-1989; amd. Ord. 3953, 9-28-1992; Ord. 5365, 6-13-2005; Ord. 5543, 1-22-2007; Ord. 6674, 2-25-2019) 
10-5-9. - Off street loading requirements. 
In connection with any building or structure which is to be erected or altered, and which requires the receipt or distribution of materials or merchandise by trucks or similar vehicles, there shall be provided off street loading space not less than the minimum requirements specified in this section. 
(A)  Location of required loading space: All required loading space shall be located on the same zoning lot as the use to be served and no portion of the vehicles thereon shall project into a street, alley or sidewalk. No loading space shall be located within 25 feet of the nearest point of intersection of any two streets, nor shall it be located in a required front yard. It may be located in a side or rear yard adjoining property in a residential district provided such yard is screened as required in subsection 10-5-13(L) of this chapter; 
(B)  Minimum size: A required off street loading space shall be at least 12 feet in width by at least 50 feet in length, exclusive of aisle and maneuvering space, and shall have vertical clearance of at least 14 feet; 
(C)  Access: Each required off street loading space shall be designed with appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley in a manner which will least interfere with traffic movements; 
(D)  Surfacing: All open off street loading spaces shall be improved with a Portland cement concrete pavement not less than nine inches thick or a compacted crushed stone or gravel base not less than nine inches thick surface with not less than two inches of asphalt concrete; 
(E)  Repair and service work prohibited: No storage of any kind nor motor vehicle repair work or service of any kind shall be permitted within any loading space; 
(F)  Space allowed: Space allowed to any off street loading space while so allocated shall not be used to satisfy the space requirements for any off street parking facilities or portions thereof; 
(G)  Screening: All off street loading space shall be so located and/or screened by a landscape or architectural feature as not to be visible from any public right-of-way or adjoining property in a residential district; 
(H)  Required loading spaces: For the uses herein listed, loading spaces shall be provided as specified: 
1.  Auditoriums; banks; business and professional offices; public administration buildings; bowling alleys; hospitals, schools, colleges, sanatoriums, and other similar institutional uses; hotels or private clubs and lodges: For such a building containing 10,000 to 100,000 square feet of floor area or fraction thereof in such a building, one loading space. For each additional 100,000 square feet of floor area or fraction thereof in such a building, one additional loading space; 
2.  Warehousing; storing; cleaning; servicing; testing; and repairing establishments: For such a building containing 5,000 to 40,000 square feet of floor area, one loading space. For such a building containing 40,000 to 100,000 square feet of floor area, two loading spaces plus one additional loading space for each additional 100,000 square feet of floor area or fraction thereof; 
3.  Establishments engaged in retail or wholesale trade and establishments handling the sale and consumption of food on the premises: Loading spaces in accordance with the following schedule: 
Square Feet Of Floor Area Minimum Number Of Spaces 5,000 to 10,000 1 10,000 to 25,000 2 25,000 to 40,000 3 40,000 to 100,000 4  
For each additional 100,000 square feet of floor area or fraction thereof in such a building, one additional loading berth. The sum of all retail floor area in a unified development shall be counted in determining the number of loading spaces even if none of the individual tenant areas exceed 5,000 square feet; 
4.  Other uses: Off street loading spaces shall be provided in accordance with requirements determined by the Board of Trustees based upon requirements heretofore set forth for the most similar cases. 
(Ord. 3617, 5-8-1989, eff. 6-1-1989; amd. Ord. 3815, 2-25-1991) 
10-5-10. - Stacking spaces for drive-through facilities. 
(A)  Drive-through establishments such as fast food restaurants, car washes, banks and other establishments shall provide a minimum of five stacking spaces per drive- through lane. Such stacking spaces shall be provided in addition to the required number of parking spaces for the use. 
(B)  Stacking spaces must be provided entirely on the private property occupied by the drive- through establishment. 
(C)  Each stacking space shall be at least eight feet wide and 18 feet long exclusive of access drives and parking aisles and shall not interfere with parking circulation. 
(D)  A maximum number of four drive-through lanes shall be permitted per establishment. 
(Ord. 3617, 5-8-1989, eff. 6-1-1989; amd. Ord. 5365, 6-13-2005; Ord. 5543, 1-22-2007) 
10-5-11. - Driveway and access regulations. 
Each zoning lot shall have direct access to a public or private street or roadway in accordance with the following regulations: 
(A)  General: 
1.  The access control standards contained in this section are intended to promote safe and efficient operation of driveway approaches and to minimize vehicular delays and accidents. The policies and standards for land use and urban design relating to access control as stated in the Glen Ellyn Comprehensive Plan and in the arterial highway development policies and standards for DuPage County shall apply; 
2.  Each required off street parking space shall open directly upon an all weather, hard surfaced aisle or driveway of such width and design as to provide safe and efficient means of vehicular access to such parking space. Such driveway and driveway approach must be maintained as an all weather hard surface material; 
3.  The Village Engineer is authorized to waive the geometric design requirements when the DuPage County or Illinois department of transportation has provided written approval of plans prepared by a professional engineer. 
(B)  Maximum number of driveway approaches: With the exceptions listed below, one driveway approach is permitted per zoning lot. If a use is a listed special use in a district, then additional driveway approaches may be considered during the review of the special use permit provided documentation of a traffic study is supplied. Otherwise, requests for additional driveway approaches shall be considered as variations. 
The following exceptions may have additional driveway approaches: 
1.  Attached single-family dwellings may have one driveway approach per dwelling unit; 
2.  Through lots may have one driveway approach on each parallel street; 
3.  Detached single-family dwellings may have two driveway approaches only where the lot width equals or exceeds 132 feet. 
(C)  Corner clearance: 
1.  Minimum separation of a driveway approach from an adjacent intersecting street shall be 40 feet from the centerline of the driveway approach to the nearest right-of-way line of the intersecting street; 
2.  With the exception of detached single-family and two-family uses, the minimum separation of a driveway approach from an adjacent intersection of a major arterial street with another arterial or collector street shall be the greater of: 
(a)  Two hundred feet; or 
(b)  Length of full left turn storage on the arterial; or 
(c)  Length of full left turn storage and taper for a major driveway approach. 
(D)  Property line clearance: Driveway approaches shall be located so that the required curb return lies entirely within the interior side property lines (as if they were extended from the zoning lot served by the driveway approach), unless the driveway is being shared with the adjacent zoning lot or an exception is granted by the Public Works Director. 
(E)  Curb return radius and flares: 
1.  CR, R0, R1, R2, R3 districts: A return radius shall not be required; and between the sidewalk lines (six feet from lot line) and the pavement edge of the street there may be provided a four-foot flare; 
2.  R4, R5, C2, C3, C4, C6 districts: 
(a)  Two-way drives: The minimum curb return radius shall be 25 feet. The basis for design shall include the truck design vehicle for that drive; 
(b)  One-way drives: 25-foot outside radius; 
3.  C5 district: Between the sidewalk line (six feet from the property line) and the pavement edge of the street, there shall be a ten-foot flare, except that the angle between the back of curb and the edge of the driveway approach shall not exceed 45 degrees. 
(F)  Driveway approach width: Driveway approach width shall be measured at right angles to the driveway curb or edge of pavement at the property line exclusive of the curb return radius. This includes consolidated or shared driveways: 
1.  Maximum permitted driveway approach width: 
(a)  Twenty-four-foot width is permitted on all categories of streets; 
(b)  Thirty-six-foot (undivided three lanes), major arterial streets only; 
(c)  Forty-eight-foot maximum (divided-two 24-foot drives excluding median), major arterial streets only. 
2.  Minimum permitted driveway approach width: 
(a)  One-way drives: 
(1)  Nine feet for all drives intended to provide access for cars only. 
(2)  Twelve feet for all drives intended to provide access for trucks. 
(b)  Two-way drives: 
(1)  Nineteen feet for all drives intended to provide access for cars only. 
(2)  Twenty-four feet for all drives intended to accommodate truck traffic. 
3.  Private driveway width: The width of any private driveway at the property line shall not be wider than the driveway approach where the two connect. 
(G)  Curbs and gutters: Either the street curb shall extend across the entire driveway approach or a depressed gutter shall be installed across the driveway approach. On streets without curb and gutter, provision shall be made for street side drainage. 
(H)  Limited turn driveway approaches: 
1.  Driveway approaches which are designed to prohibit left turns in and out shall have a channelizing island and the following minimum dimensions: 
(a) Width of channelizing island (measured parallel to the street) 40 feet (b) Length 25 feet (c) Offset 5 feet (d) Curb return 50 feet (e) Driveway approach width 30 feet (f) Lane width at island 14 feet  
2.  Minimum signage shall include a "stop" sign and "no left turn" sign at the exit lane, and a "no left turn" sign on the road right-of-way opposite the driveway approach, visible to oncoming traffic. 
(I)  Angle of intersection: 
1.  Two-way drive: 70 degrees minimum; 
2.  One-way drive (right-in or right-out): 60 degrees minimum. 
(J)  Driveway approach separation on arterials: 
1.  Two-way drives: 
(a)  One hundred eighty five feet minimum. Separation is based on speed limit as determined in the table below: 
DRIVEWAY APPROACH SEPARATION TABLE 
Speed Limit (mph) Driveway Approach Separation 1 35 185' 40 200' 45 230' 50 275' 55 335'  
Note: 
1.  Centerline to centerline of drives. 
(b)  Three hundred feet minimum where, in the opinion of the appropriate Village authority, weaving movement between driveway approaches is or will be significant; 
2.  The Village Engineer shall increase the minimum separation for high volume generators such as shopping centers, office or industrial parks, etc., in order to prevent overlapping of left turn lanes or other driveway approach interference; 
3.  Where driveway approaches cannot meet minimum separation requirements, the appropriate highway authority will determine spacing based on the location, design and traffic volumes of adjacent driveway approaches; 
4.  One-way drives: 80-foot minimum between a one-way driveway pair serving the same land use. 
(K)  Driveway median: 
1.  Minimum of: Four feet wide; 25 feet long; and five feet offset from the nearest edge of an arterial through lane, right turn lane, or paved shoulder. 
2.  Use of medians on two or three lane driveways shall be permitted only after the appropriate highway authority determines that the median will not interfere with vehicle turning paths. 
(L)  Minimum driveway width: A minimum driveway width of nine feet shall be required for all attached single-family, detached single-family and two-family developments. 
(M)  Driveway material: All driveways shall be surfaced with asphalt, concrete, brick, paver stone or another similar hard surface material. All existing driveways that are either enlarged or expanded and any property on which the principal structure or garage is expanded must be brought into compliance with this standard. 
(Ord. 3617, 5-8-1989, eff. 6-1-1989; amd. Ord. 3815, 2-25-1991; Ord. 5035, 1-14-2002, eff. 3-1-2002; Ord. 5365, 6-13-2005; Ord. 5543, 1-22-2007) 
10-5-12. - Utility lines. 
All new secondary utility lines for class II and III alterations and all new and existing utility secondary lines for class III additions and new construction shall be placed underground. The Village Board may waive this requirement provided the applicant pays a fee to cover all costs of future placement of the wires underground in a comprehensive manner by the Village. The fee shall be based on an itemized cost estimate prepared by the applicant and approved by the Village Engineer, and shall be paid prior to any permits being issued. 
(Ord. 5543, 1-22-2007) 
10-5-13. - Performance standards and other requirements for industrial uses, commercial uses, planned unit developments, special uses, and non-residential uses in residential zoning districts. 
The following standards shall apply to industrial uses, commercial uses, planned unit developments, special uses (excluding single-family residences) and nonresidential uses in residential zoning districts. The property owner shall be responsible for submitting documentation prepared by a professional in the applicable area of expertise upon written request of the Village to verify that any standard has been satisfied. 
(A)  Noise: 
1.  At no point on or beyond the boundary of any commercial zoning lot shall the sound pressure level resulting from any use or activity not hereafter specifically exempted, whether open or enclosed, exceed the maximum permitted decibel levels for the designated octave band as set forth in the following tables; 
2.  Sound levels shall be measured with a sound level meter and associated octave band analyzer manufactured according to standards prescribed by the American Standards Association. The flat network "slow" meter response of the sound level meter shall be used. Impulsive type noises shall be measured with an impact noise analyzer, and the peak values so measured shall not exceed the maximum permitted sound pressure levels by more than three decibels. The reference level for the decibel is 0.0002 microbar: 
Octave Band Frequencies 
(Cycles Per Second) Maximum Permitted Sound Pressure 
Level In Decibels 20 - 75 70 75 - 150 65 150 - 300 58 300 - 600 51 600 - 1200 45 1200 - 2400 39 2400 - 4800 34 4800 and over 32  
3.  The following uses and activities shall be exempt from the noise level regulations: 
(a)  Noises not directly under the control of the property user; 
(b)  Between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and sunset, noises customarily resulting from construction and the maintenance of grounds; 
(c)  The noises of safety signals, warning devices, aircraft and railroads, snowplowing, and mosquito abatement; and 
(d)  Church bells, chimes and carillons; 
(B)  Vibration: 
1.  Earthborne vibrations from any industrial or commercial operation, equipment, or process shall not constitute a nuisance nor exceed the limits set forth herein. Vibrations shall be expressed as displacement in inches and shall be measured with a three component measuring system; 
2.  No industrial or commercial activity shall be responsible for the transmission of earthborne vibrations across any property line in excess of the displacement limits established through use of the following formula: 
D = 0.003 
 f 
Where D = The maximum allowable displacement in inches 
Where f = The vibration frequency in cycles per second 
(C)  Smoke and particulate matter: The emission, from all sources within any commercial zoning lot, of particulate matter containing more than five percent by weight, of particles having a particle diameter larger than 44 microns is prohibited. The rate of emission of particulate matter from all sources within the boundaries of any lot shall not exceed a net figure of one-half pound per acre of lot size during any one hour. Dust and other types of air pollution borne by the wind from such sources as storage areas, yards and roads within the boundaries of any lot shall be kept to a minimum by appropriate landscaping, paving, oiling, wetting or other acceptable means. The emission of smoke or particulate matter of a density greater than no. 1 on the Ringelmann chart, as published by the U.S. bureau of mines, is prohibited, except that Ringelmann no. 2 will be permitted for five minutes or Ringelmann no. 3 for three minutes during any eight-hour period, for the purpose of building fires or soot blowing; 
(D)  Odor: The emission of odorous matter in such quantity as to be offensive at a point along or outside any lot line shall not be permitted. In determining such quantities of offensive odors, table III (odor thresholds) in chapter 5 of the "Air Pollution Abatement Manual" (copyright 1951), by Manufacturing Chemists Association, Inc., Washington D.C., shall be used as a guide; 
(E)  Toxic and noxious matter: No emission which would be demonstrably injurious to human health, animals or plant life common to the region, on the ground at or beyond any lot line, will be permitted. Where such emission could be produced as a result of accident or equipment malfunction, adequate safeguards considered standard for safe operation in the industry involved shall be taken. This shall not be construed to prohibit lawful spraying of pesticides on public or private property; 
(F)  Radiation hazards: The handling of radioactive materials, the discharge of such materials into air and water and the disposal of radioactive wastes shall be in conformance with: 
1.  The applicable regulations of the United States environmental protection agency and the United States department of energy; and 
2.  The applicable regulations of the Illinois environmental protection agency and the Illinois department of energy and natural resources; 
(G)  Fire and explosive hazards: 
1.  The storage, utilization or manufacture of solid materials or products with the potential for free or active burning to intense burning (excluding household items in quantities customarily found in the home) is prohibited unless storage, utilization and manufacture takes place within completely enclosed buildings having incombustible exterior walls. All such buildings shall be set back at least 40 feet from all lot lines or, in lieu thereof, shall be protected throughout by an automatic fire extinguishing system installed in accordance with the standards and regulations of the Village of Glen Ellyn and the National Fire Protection Association; 
2.  Activities involving the transportation, storage or utilization of materials or products which decompose by detonation are prohibited unless specifically licensed by the Village of Glen Ellyn. Such materials shall include, but not be limited to: all primary explosives such as lead azide, lead styphnate, fulminates, and tetracene; all high explosives such as TNT, RDX, HMX, PETN and picric acid; propellants and components thereof such as nitrocellulose, black powder, boron hydrides, hydrozine and its derivatives, pyrotechnics and fireworks such as magnesium powder, potassium chloride and potassium nitrate; blasting explosives such as dynamite and nitroglycerin; unstable organic compounds such as acetylides, tetrazoles and ozonides; strong oxidizing agents such as liquid oxygen, perchloric acid, perchlorates, and hydrogen peroxide in concentrations greater than 35 percent; and nuclear fuels, fissionable materials and products and reactor elements such as uranium 235 and plutonium 239; 
3.  The storage or utilization of flammable liquids or materials which produce flammable or explosive vapors shall be permitted in accordance with the following limitation-Exclusive of storage in underground tanks and exclusive of storage of finished products in original sealed containers: 
(a)  Solid materials or products shall be stored or utilized within completely enclosed buildings or structures having incombustible exterior walls and handled in accordance with the standards and regulations of the Village of Glen Ellyn and the National Fire Protection Association; 
(b)  All such buildings shall be set back at least 40 feet from all lot lines or in lieu thereof, shall be protected throughout by an automatic fire extinguishing system installed in accordance with the standards and regulations of the Village of Glen Ellyn and the National Fire Protection Association; 
(c)  The capacity of flammable liquids in excess of the following quantities shall not be permitted: 
Closed Cup Flash Quantity (Gallons) Less than 24°F 1,000 24°F to less than 105°F 10,000 105°F to less than 187°F 50,000 Total of all flammable liquids permitted 50,000  
(H)  Heat: Every use and activity shall be so operated that it does not raise the ambient temperature at or beyond the boundary of any lot line; 
(I)  Glare: Any operation producing intense glare shall be conducted so that direct and indirect illumination from the source of light shall not cause illumination beyond the boundary of any lot line; 
(J)  Electromagnetic interference: There shall be no electromagnetic interference that: 
1.  Adversely affects at any point the operation of any equipment other than that belonging to the creator of such interference; or that 
2.  Is not in conformance with the regulations of the federal communications commission; 
(K)  Storage: All storage shall be enclosed within a building, or within a concrete or masonry wall of sufficient height to screen such storage unless a special use permit has been issued for the subject property. No premises shall be used for auto wrecking, junkyards and similar storage or salvage, or for bulk storage of oils, petroleum, or similar flammable liquids and chemicals; 
(L)  Landscaping: 
1.  All portions of the building site, exclusive of structures, parking and storage areas, driveways and walkways shall be landscaped and maintained with viable lawn areas, standard trees, and standard shrubs as outlined below unless otherwise recommended by the Village Forester. 
(a)  Trees: 
(1)  Quantity: A minimum of 24 trees per acre of green space on a site shall be provided. 
(2)  Distribution: The required quantity of trees on a site shall be in the distribution below (all portions thereof shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number). Larger trees may be substituted for smaller trees in the same "type" category identified below. 
Type Size Quantity Deciduous shade 2" - 2.5" caliper 6 x (acres of green space) = required number 3" - 4" caliper 5 4.5" caliper and larger 3 Ornamental 6' - 8' tall 3 8.5' tall and larger 2 Evergreen 6' - 8' tall 2 8.5' - 10' tall 2 10.5' tall and larger 1  
(3)  Spacing: Ornamental and evergreen trees may be used as individual specimens at building or site entrances or shall be in a group of three minimum trees at a spacing not to exceed 14 feet on center. 
(b)  Shrubs: Shrubs with a mature height three feet and less shall be planted four feet on center. Shrubs with a mature height greater than three feet shall be planted six feet on center. Shrubs shall be planted in groups of three minimum. 
2.  All such landscaping shall conform to the standards contained within the Glen Ellyn "Appearance Guide And Criteria"; 
3.  An opaque screen shall be installed and maintained along all lot lines, other than streets, abutting areas zoned for residential use. Except as otherwise provided, it shall have a total height of not less than six feet nor more than seven feet. Where there is a difference in elevation on opposite sides of the screen, the height shall be measured from the highest elevation. A screen shall consist of one or more of the following types: 
(a)  Walls: A wall shall consist of concrete, stone, brick, tile or similar type of masonry material a minimum of eight inches thick; 
(b)  Berms: A berm may be banked on both sides, or with one side banked toward the lot line with a retaining wall. A berm shall not be less than 20 feet wide at the base and shall have an undulating contour and shall be sloped for ease of maintenance. It shall be constructed of earthen materials and shall be landscaped; 
(c)  Planting: Plant materials, when used as a screen, shall consist of a mixture of standard shrubs, compact evergreen plants and taller deciduous plants. They shall be of a kind, and used in such a manner, so as to provide screening having a minimum width of three feet, within 18 months after initial installation. Plant materials shall not be limited to a maximum height. A wall or berm as described in subsections (L)3.(a) and (L)3.(b) of this section will be required, if after 18 months after installation, plant materials have not formed an opaque screen, or if an opaque screen is not maintained; 
(d)  Fence: The exposed structural elements of a fence, when visible only from one side, shall face toward the property on which the fence is constructed (see section 10-2-2, "Terms Defined", of this title); 
4.  (a)  Visibility on all lots: No wall, fence, sign, landscape plant material, tree, or other obstruction shall be erected, planted or maintained in any yard which unreasonably obstructs or interferes with the vision of the drivers of motor vehicles and bicycles or which endangers the safety of pedestrians walking along the sidewalk or street. 
(b)  Visibility triangle on corner lots: No landscaping except trees on a corner lot shall exceed three feet in height, and tree branches shall not be lower than eight feet above the average grade of the centerline of the adjacent street pavement when such trees or shrubs are located within 30 feet of the lot corner formed by the intersection of any two street lines; 
(M)  Exterior illumination standards: 
1.  General requirements: All applications for development review or building permits which include exterior site or building lighting shall be required to submit the following information for review: 
(a)  Photometric plan: Prepared by a professional lighting consultant. Said plan shall accurately indicate the level of illumination at all property lines and five feet beyond based on all proposed light fixtures. 
(b)  Cut sheet of each proposed light style: All styles (ground, sign, wall, pole, recessed can, bollard) of lights proposed on the building and site must be identified. 
(c)  Shielding: The type of refractor, louver, or side shield to cut off direct light to adjacent properties must also be provided. On all nonresidential and multi-family uses, said shield shall cover the top and sides to completely block passage of light and shall extend downward vertically below the lowest point of the illumination source. 
(d)  Lamp type: Incandescent, quartz-halogen, fluorescent, low pressure sodium, mercury vapor, metal halide, or approved equal. 
(e)  Lamp wattage: Lamp wattage. 
(f)  Pole height: Pole height. 
(g)  Site plan: Indicating the location of each proposed light by style. 
2.  Specific requirements: 
(a)  Intensity of light (at lot line as measured at ground level): 
(1)  Adjacent to a residential use: one-half foot-candle. 
(2)  Adjacent to a nonresidential use: three foot-candles. 
(3)  Lighting levels which exceed the above standards may be requested as a part of a special use permit for athletic fields, special events, and other nontraditional uses. 
(b)  Location : Light poles shall be located where they are not susceptible to collision strikes and shall not create hazards for pedestrians or vehicles. 
(c)  Height: The height of a light pole shall be equal to or less than the maximum height of the principal building on a site. 
3.  Exceptions: 
(a)  Emergency lighting: All temporary lighting needed by the police, fire department or any other public safety or utility emergency services shall be exempt from the illumination standards. 
(b)  Safety and security: A higher intensity of illumination in a safety or security problem area as defined by the chief of police may be authorized. 
(c)  Public rights-of-way: The standard streetlights installed and maintained by the Village in the public rights-of-way shall be permitted. 
(d)  Temporary holiday lighting: Traditional holiday lighting is exempt from the provisions of the general requirements section of this Code, provided said lighting is reasonable and shall not constitute a public safety hazard or nuisance; 
(N)  General requirements: All business, service, storage, merchandise, display and where permitted, repair and processing, shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed building, except as otherwise expressly permitted herein, or as otherwise provided in the ordinances of the Village; 
(O)  Developer donations: Any development that increases the number of dwelling units within the Village shall be required to make land or cash contributions to the school, library, fire, and park districts within which the dwelling units are located; 
(P)  Recycling and refuse area: Adequate space shall be provided for refuse and recycling on a site for all class II and III alterations, class III additions, and new construction or redevelopment. Exterior screens shall be constructed of the same primary material used in the principal building on the site or per a landscaping plan approved by the Community Development Department; 
(Q)  Emergency warning sirens: Emergency warning sirens, operated by an authorized emergency service and disaster agency, not exceeding 75 feet in mounted height, shall be a permitted use in every zoning district. 
(Ord. 3617, 5-8-1989, eff. 6-1- 1989; amd. Ord. 3815, 2-25-1991; Ord. 3953, 9-28-1992; Ord. 4673, 12-14-1998, eff. 3-1-1999; Ord. 5035, 1-14-2002, eff. 3-1-2002; Ord. 5365, 6-13-2005; Ord. 5543, 1-22-2007; Ord. 6207, 1-13-2014; Ord. 6601, 5-14-2018; Ord. 6674, 2-25-2019) 
10-5-14. - Indoor live entertainment. 
Indoor live entertainment may be permitted in businesses and restaurants in the C2, C3, C4, C5A, C5B and C6 zoning districts, provided that a permit is obtained from the Village. No live entertainment shall operate prior to the approval of a permit by the Village. The fee for the permit shall be set forth in this Code and the permit shall be posted in a conspicuous location inside the building. Application for the permit shall be made by the property owner or the property owner shall give written permission for application to be made by another party on their behalf. All permits for live entertainment shall be valid for a period of three years unless the permit is revoked in accordance with subsection (B) of this section. 
(A)  All live entertainment must comply with the following provisions: 
1.  The live entertainment activity shall be clearly incidental and accessory to either a permitted or approved special use that is commercial in nature. 
2.  All live entertainment shall be located indoors and no outside audience for live entertainment shall be allowed or encouraged and no means of amplification outside of the building shall be permitted. 
3.  The floor area designated for live entertainment shall not exceed 25 percent of the gross floor area of the primary use. 
4.  Live entertainment shall not be provided after the following hours: 
Sunday through Thursday 11:00 p.m. Friday, Saturday and New Year's Eve 1:00 a.m.  
5.  No toxic, explosive, flammable or other hazardous materials as defined in the most recent version of the Building Code as adopted by the Village of Glen Ellyn shall be used for any live entertainment purposes. 
6.  The premises to be used for live entertainment must be in compliance with all applicable health, fire and Building Codes. 
7.  The form of live entertainment provided shall not be obscene nor appeal to prurient interests. 
8.  All live entertainment activities shall fully comply with all other provisions of this Code, including all regulations related to noise and vibration set forth in subsections 10-5-13(A) and (B) of this chapter. 
9.  All live entertainment activities shall fully comply with the Village Sign Code. 
(B)  A previously issued permit for live entertainment may be revoked by the action of the Village President, which shall be delivered to the permit holder. In the case of a public safety concern, a stay of any live entertainment may be issued by the Police Chief until the matter can be considered by the Village President. The Village President shall have the right to revoke a previously issued permit for live entertainment if: 
1.  The applicant or any person making a representation on behalf of the applicant makes a misrepresentation of any fact in the application or in any testimony before the Village Board; 
2.  Any criteria on which the permit is approved is not complied with; 
3.  After the criteria is initially complied with, compliance with such criteria is not maintained at any time; 
4.  Prior to the issuance of the permit, the applicant transfers interest in the property or business to another party or if the property owner makes an attempt to transfer the nontransferable permit; 
5.  One or more complaints about the live entertainment are received regarding the permitted property; 
6.  Revocation is recommended by the Police Chief for reasons related to public safety; 
7.  Exterior areas of the business providing live entertainment have not been maintained in a clean and orderly manner; and 
8.  The property is not maintained in conformance with all applicable health, fire and Building Codes. 
A written order of the Village President to revoke a permit shall take effect five days after its service. If, within those five days, the permit holder files an appeal to the Village Board, the permit shall continue in effect until the Village Board shall have met and had an opportunity to review the President's decision. The Village Board shall hear from the applicant and it shall review the reasons why the permit was revoked, including the reasons stated by the Village President. The Village Board shall issue a written opinion to either affirm or overrule the decision of the Village President. The Village President may also, stating the reasons for doing so, suspend a permit for a period of up to ten days. A permit may not be suspended for more than two ten-day periods during the term of the permit. 
(Ord. 5886, 9-13-2010) 
10-5-15. - Outdoor seating for restaurants. 
Restaurants shall be permitted to have outdoor seating on private property provided that such seating complies with the following provisions: 
(A)  If outdoor seating is located on or adjacent to a sidewalk, a five-foot wide clear area must be maintained for pedestrian use and handicapped access. 
(B)  All outdoor seating must be located on private property unless the owner has entered into a license agreement with the Village Board to allow outdoor seating on public property. 
(C)  If the restaurant is located in a shopping center, such seating shall only be permitted in front or on the side of the subject establishment unless otherwise approved as part of a special use permit, planned unit development or variation. 
(D)  All outdoor seating must be located on an asphalt, concrete, brick, wood or other similar surface as approved by the zoning officer. 
(E)  Outdoor seating shall not be located in such close proximity to parking or drive aisles as to create a safety hazard. 
(F)  Outdoor seating shall not be located in a required landscape area such as a parking lot landscape island. 
(G)  All outdoor seating must comply with provisions in section 3-1-11 of this Code. 
(H)  Outdoor seating areas shall maintain at least one trash receptacle. Additional trash receptacles may be required as deemed necessary by the Community Development Director. 
(Ord. 5543, 1-22-2007; amd. Ord. 6208, 1-13-2014; Ord. 6601, 5-14-2018; Ord. 6674, 2-25-2019) 
10-5-16. - Outdoor beautification displays. 
Outdoor beautification displays shall be permitted in the C5A and C5B zoning districts provided that the following provisions are met: 
(A)  An annual permit must be obtained from the Village for the outdoor display of statues, sculptures or similar works of art. A permit shall not be required for the outdoor display of live or imitation plant materials and any associated containers or support structures. The fee for the permit shall be as set forth in this Code and the permit shall be posted in a conspicuous location inside the building. 
(B)  No more than a total of two outdoor beautification display areas shall be permitted for each property and the total outdoor beautification display area shall not exceed ten square feet. A greater number of display areas and/or a greater total display area shall be permitted with the approval of a special use permit. 
(C)  If the outdoor beautification display is located on a sidewalk, a continuous five-foot wide area must be maintained free from any obstruction for pedestrian use and handicapped access. 
(D)  All outdoor beautification displays shall be located adjacent to the first floor storefront of the business requesting the annual permit and shall not be permitted in a parking lot. 
(E)  The outdoor beautification display area shall be maintained clean and free from refuse and clutter at all times and the display must be maintained in a good and attractive condition. 
(F)  Outdoor beautification displays shall not be permitted in locations that obstruct the vision of pedestrians or motorists, restrict access or otherwise create a dangerous situation. 
(G)  If any statue, sculpture or other similar work of art is located on the public right-of-way (e.g., sidewalk), the following provisions must also be met: 
1.  A signed indemnification statement provided by the Village must be executed by the business seeking the annual permit. 
2.  The applicant shall submit to the Village a certificate of insurance in the amount of $1,000,000.00 listing the Village as an additional insured and including a statement that the policy shall not be changed or canceled without 30 days' notice to the Village. If any provision of the insurance policy is changed contrary to these requirements, the annual permit may be immediately revoked by the Village. 
(Ord. 5591, 7-23-2007) 
10-5-17. - Landscape and illumination standards for other developments. 
The provisions of subsections 10-5-13(L) and (M) of this chapter shall apply to all planned unit developments, special uses, and multi-family and single-family attached residential developments. 
(Ord. 4673, 12-14-1998, eff. 3-1-1999; amd. Ord. 5365, 6-13-2005) 
10-5-18. - Vacant ground floor storefront windows. 
(A)  Treatment of storefront windows during vacancy: Any ground floor space located within the Village's C5A or C5B central business district zoning districts that is vacant or becomes vacant shall within 30 calendar days of the date of a letter from the Village notifying the property owner of their responsibility, contain a decorative storefront window display. Said display shall be in place until the commercial space is no longer vacant. Property owners are encouraged to partner with a local government or community service organization to create a decorative display. The window display shall be in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
1.  A decorative storefront window display shall be placed in any vacant storefront window visible from the public sidewalk or right-of-way. The purpose of the window display is to make the business areas more attractive, to encourage shopping in other stores even if there are vacancies in the C5A or C5B zoning districts, and to deter vandalism. Among the window displays which would satisfy with the obligation established in this section are the following: paintings, photos, sculptures, art, student projects (i.e., elementary, middle or high school projects for art, social studies, language arts, etc.), merchandise from local businesses (i.e., merchandise from area stores to help advertise those businesses), current religious holiday displays (i.e., displays commemorating Christmas, Chanukah, Easter, etc.), current secular holiday displays (i.e., displays commemorating Independence Day, Labor Day, Memorial Day, Halloween, etc.), live or artificial plants, community organization projects (i.e., projects completed by the Boy Scouts, Girl Scouts, Glen Ellyn Historical Society, Jaycees, etc.), seasonal displays (i.e., displays depicting fall, summer, winter or spring), announcements for local events and other similar items or products. These items may be displayed inside the window or painted or affixed to the glass in storefront windows. An informational sign up to one square foot in total sign area, identifying the name and contact information for each exhibit shall be permitted. 
2.  Visibility into the space shall be maintained in a manner that allows public safety officials the ability to view the interior of the space. 
3.  Window or other signage shall be permitted in accordance with title 4, chapter 5, "Sign Code", of this Code. 
(B)  Prohibited window display content: 
1.  Covering vacant display windows with plain paper, butcher paper, newspaper, soap, tarp, plastic sheets or unpainted plywood is prohibited. The previously mentioned items may be acceptable if they are used as a backdrop or background to a decorative display. 
2.  Lewd or obscene words or images shall not be allowed in any window display. 
3.  No trash, debris, crates, cardboard boxes or other packing materials may be stacked or stored in any vacant storefront windows. 
(C)  Vacant ground floor storefront maintenance: The storefront window of any vacant ground floor space in the Village's C5A or C5B central business district zoning districts shall be maintained in good condition and kept neat, clean and attractive. 
(D)  Responsibility for compliance: Any person owning, leasing, maintaining, in possession of, or control of, any vacant ground floor space located within the C5A or C5B central business district zoning districts shall be responsible for adherence to the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. 5885, 11-22-2010) 
10-5-19. - Medical cannabis dispensaries. 
Medical cannabis dispensaries shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(A)  Sales shall occur only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. 
(B)  All medical cannabis dispensaries shall be at least 1,000 feet away from all other medical cannabis dispensaries, measured from the parcel boundaries. 
(C)  Drive-through and carryout lanes, as well as window sales, are prohibited. 
(Ord. 6228, 4-14-2014) 
10-5-20. - Food trucks. 
(A)  Food trucks shall be permitted to operate on public or private property in the CR zoning district with the exception of school owned property or the public right-of-way and shall operate in accordance with the following provisions: 
1.  The operator must obtain permission from the property owner of record prior to establishing a location for the food truck. 
2.  Food trucks shall only be used for the sale of food and beverages. The sale of other merchandise or goods from a food truck shall not be permitted. 
3.  Food truck operators must be at least 18 years of age and neither the owner nor any of his/her employees shall be a registered sex offender as defined by the sex offender license act. 
4.  Food trucks shall be operated in compliance with all requirements of the DuPage County Health Department. A copy of a valid permit issued by the DuPage County Health Department shall be available on site at all times and furnished to the Village upon request. 
5.  Food trucks must be operated in compliance with all Village codes and ordinances. 
6.  A trash receptacle adequate in size for containing the waste produced by the truck and its patrons must be provided by the operator, and the area immediately surrounding the food truck shall be maintained free of any garbage or debris and any garbage or debris disposed of. The operator shall be responsible for any additional cleanup costs associated with the operation of the truck. 
7.  The use of electronic or sound amplification equipment in association with the operation of a food truck shall be prohibited. 
8.  Food trucks shall not be located in such close proximity to a vehicular access drive or the railroad tracks so as to create a safety hazard as determined by the Village. 
9.  Food trucks shall only be permitted to park in a designated parking space. 
10.  Food trucks must be self-contained. If power is drawn from an external source, the food truck owner or operator must obtain the permission of the property owner in advance. 
11.  Food trucks shall be attended by the licensed operator or his/her employees when on site. 
12.  No flags, balloons or other attention getting devices shall be permitted in association with a food truck and all signage must be affixed to the truck. 
13.  The operator shall obtain a sales tax ID number from the state and furnish a copy of the same to the Village. 
14.  The food truck must be stored off site when not in operation. 
15.  Food truck operators must have a valid peddler's license as required by this Code, which, among other things, requires the submittal of a fingerprint based background check to the Glen Ellyn Police Department. 
(Ord. 6303, 3-9-2015) 
Chapter 6 - FLOOD HAZARD AND LAND USE REGULATIONS 
(Repealed by Ordinance 6146, June 24, 2013) 
Chapter 7 - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS 

10-7-1. - Policy statement. 
(A)  It is the policy of the Village to promote progressive development of land and construction thereon by encouraging more creative and imaginative design for land developments than is possible under the more conventional zoning regulations by allowing planned unit developments as a particular type of special use within each zoning district. The planned unit development provisions are intended to allow more efficient use of land and thus result in more economical land development. Further, the planned unit development provisions allow greater design flexibility than is normally permitted by the district regulations, thereby encouraging more rational utilization of the topographic and natural characteristics of the property as a means of promoting preservation of natural site qualities, better urban amenities, more open space and a higher quality project; 
(B)  The following objectives may be obtained through the use of the planned unit development procedure: 
1.  To permit a maximum choice in the types of environment available to the public by allowing a variety of housing and/or commercial uses in a single development and permitting a flexible application of the individual district regulations for each use; 
2.  To promote a more useful pattern of open space and recreation areas and, if permitted as part of the project, more convenience in the location of commercial uses serving nearby residential areas; 
3.  To encourage a development pattern which preserves and utilizes natural topography and geological features, scenic vistas, trees and other vegetation, and prevents the disruption of natural drainage pattern; 
4.  To facilitate a development pattern more in harmony with the objectives of the Comprehensive Plan for land use, transportation facilities and community facilities; 
(C)  The planned unit development is intended to provide for developments incorporating a single type or a variety of related uses which are planned and developed as a unit. Such development should provide amenities not otherwise required by law and establish facilities and open space greater than the minimums required by law; 
(D)  The planned unit development may also provide for a greater population density in undeveloped areas than that reflected by the present zoning restrictions, provided the developer demonstrates that any increment of public cost attributable to increased densities will be compensated for by the private amenities and public benefits to be achieved by the planned unit development; 
(E)  The planned unit development may provide for a wide range of development techniques and ownership methods, including conventional subdivisions, cluster developments, zero lot line subdivisions with common areas controlled by an owners' association, condominium ownership of land and buildings, or other ownership techniques. The entire development shall be controlled by means of a planned unit development ordinance including graphics which establish densities, approximate height and location of buildings and improvements, and records the location of natural features of property in keeping with the land use development policies of the Village. 
(Ord. 3617, 5-8-1989, eff. 6-1-1989) 
10-7-2. - Provisions governing all Planned Unit Developments. 
(A)  Planned unit developments may be authorized as a special use within the R1 through R4 and C2 through C5 and I1 zoning districts. All unimproved land, redevelopments or additions to existing structures in the C5 district which increase that square footage of a structure that is 4,000 square feet or greater, or increase a structure of any size by more than 25 percent, shall be developed only by the planned unit development procedures. Any development within the R5 and C6 zoning districts shall be accomplished only by planned unit development procedures; 
(B)  All planned unit developments shall be consistent with the current Glen Ellyn Comprehensive Plan and all approved supplemental reports; 
(C)  Wherever there is a conflict or difference between the provisions of this chapter and those of other chapters of this title, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. Subjects not covered by this chapter shall be governed by the respective provisions found elsewhere in this title; 
(D)  Construction and improvements within any planned unit development shall comply with all applicable Village ordinances. Any proposed deviation from Village standards or requirements must be clearly listed on the preliminary plan submittal and fully justified as necessary to the proper development of the property consistent with the objectives set forth in this chapter; 
(E)  The standards set forth in this chapter shall apply to all proposed planned unit developments, provided, however, that the Plan Commission, after a noticed public hearing, may recommend and the Village Board may approve, the waiver of any standard contained in this chapter relating to an existing commercial development. Any proposed waiver must be clearly listed as part of the preliminary plan submittal and must be listed in the public notice. 
(Ord. 3617, 5-8-1989, eff. 6-1-1989; amd. Ord. 4259, 5-8-1995; Ord. 6207, 1-13-2014; Ord. 6520, 7-24-2017) 
10-7-3. - Minimum project site. 
The site of the planned unit development shall be under single ownership and/or unified control and shall have an area conforming to the specific requirements set forth in the individual district regulations. The site of a planned unit development shall constitute at least a conforming zoning lot within the district in which the property is located. 
(Ord. 3617, 5-8- 1989, eff. 6-1-1989) 
10-7-4. - Designated open areas or recreational facilities. 
(A)  Except as hereinafter provided, a minimum of 20 percent of the land within any residential planned unit development project shall be reserved and designated for common open areas and/or recreational facilities for use by the residents or users of the area being developed; and at least 15 percent of the land within any commercial planned unit development project (except within the C5 district) shall be reserved and designated for common open areas and/or recreational facilities for enjoyment by the users of the area being developed. The designated common open areas or recreational facilities shall not be of an isolated or of an unusable size and/or character. All such designated common open areas and/or recreational facilities shall be so designated in the planned unit development documents; 
(B)  The designated common open area or recreational facilities reserved under a planned unit development shall either be held by the owners of the project area and restricted for use by each resident, occupant or user thereof as open space or recreational facilities or be dedicated to, and accepted by, the Village, the Glen Ellyn Park District, a school district or other public entity to be retained as common open areas for parks, recreation and/or related public uses; 
(C)  The responsibility for the maintenance of all required common open areas and/or recreational facilities to be designated as part of the planned unit development project shall be specified by the developer as part of the preliminary plan documentation and responsibility, as is approved by the corporate authorities, shall be incorporated in appropriate restrictive covenants, condominium declarations or the like before approval of the final development plan, unless the open area and/or recreational facilities are dedicated to and accepted by the Village, the Glen Ellyn Park District, a school district or other public entity. 
(Ord. 3617, 5-8-1989, eff. 6-1-1989) 
10-7-5. - Utility requirements. 
(A)  All public facilities and improvements shall be constructed in accordance with existing ordinances and regulations of the Village, including the regulations of the Glen Ellyn Subdivision Ordinance; 
(B)  All public utilities, including, but not limited to, telephone and electrical systems, shall be located underground within the limits of all planned unit developments. Appurtenances to the utility systems which can be effectively screened may be excepted from this requirement, if the Plan Commission finds that such exception will not violate the intent or character of the proposed planned unit development. 
(Ord. 3617, 5-8-1989, eff. 6-1- 1989) 
10-7-6. - Future expansion or staging. 
(A)  All areas of a planned unit development shall be developed within 12 months after approval of the final planned unit development plat, unless a staging plan or phased expansion of the planned unit development is approved as part of the final planned unit development plat; 
(B)  In the event a staging plan or future expansion plan is approved as part of a final planned unit development plat, then all areas designated for development after the initial stage or phase shall be landscaped or otherwise maintained in a neat and orderly manner pursuant to a landscape plan and erosion control plan approved as part of the final planned unit development plat. 
(Ord. 3617, 5-8-1989, eff. 6-1-1989) 
10-7-7. - Evaluation factors. 
The planned unit development may be authorized as a special use, provided that it fulfills the intentions of the following factors, which shall be considered by the Plan Commission and the Village Board, among other factors, when evaluating a special use for planned unit development: 
(A)  Factors affecting the community as a whole, including: 
1.  Uses or use; 
2.  Intensity of use; 
3.  Traffic; and 
4.  Noise and odors; 
(B)  Factors affecting the neighborhood: 
1.  Heights; 
2.  Front, side and rear yard definitions and uses where they occur at the development periphery; 
(C)  Factors affecting the development itself: 
1.  Bulk; 
2.  Gross residential, commercial, and/or industrial building areas; 
3.  Area ratios and the designation of the land surfaces to which they apply; 
4.  Spaces between buildings; 
5.  Common open areas and/or recreational facilities; 
6.  Width of streets in the development; 
7.  Setbacks of buildings from streets within the development; 
8.  Off street parking and loading facilities compared to the standards for such facilities contained in this title; 
(D)  Factors affecting the development procedures: 
1.  The order in which development will proceed in complex multiuse developments; 
2.  The time required to complete the development and its various stages or phases, if any; 
3.  Streets, lighting, parking or other improvements being performed by the Village, which in any way affect the development. 
(Ord. 3617, 5-8-1989, eff. 6-1-1989; amd. Ord. 6207, 1-13-2014) 
10-7-8. - Residential Planned Unit Development standards. 
In the residential planned unit development, land may be used only under the following conditions: 
(A)  Allowable uses: Within the R1 through R4 zoning districts, uses within residential planned developments may only include any of the permitted or special uses allowed in the zoning district in which the planned development is located and any permitted or special use allowed in the C2 Community Commercial District, provided no more than five percent of the land area shall be devoted to such commercial uses. Within the R5 zoning district, allowable uses may include single-family dwellings, attached or detached, and two-family dwellings; 
(B)  Design regulations: For the allowable uses, the following standards and provisions shall be required: 
1.  Lot area per family dwelling: The number of dwelling units permitted shall be determined by dividing the net development area by the minimum lot area per family required by the zoning district or districts in which the property is located. Additional dwelling units may be permitted according to the provisions of subsection (B)4. of this section. Net development areas shall be determined by subtracting the areas set aside for nonresidential uses from the gross development area and deducting 20 percent of the remainder for streets, regardless of the amount of land actually required for streets. The area of land set aside for common open space, public use or recreational use shall be included in determining the number of dwelling units permitted; 
2.  Floor area ratio: For residential uses, there shall be a maximum floor area ratio of 0.4 and for commercial uses there shall be a maximum floor area ratio of 0.6. The total floor area for residential purposes may be increased by two square feet of additional floor area for every one square foot of open space in excess of 25 percent of the total lot area. In no case shall building height exceed 45 feet; 
3.  Yard requirements: 
(a)  Yards and open spaces adjoining the boundaries of the development shall not be less than the yard requirements of the adjoining residential districts; 
(b)  A landscaped buffer strip at least ten feet wide shall be provided along all peripheral lot lines; 
(c)  Spacing between principal buildings in the development shall be at least 18 feet and shall be consistent with recognized site planning principles, due consideration being given to the openness normally afforded by intervening streets and alleys; 
(d)  The net building site area for single-family detached dwellings shall not be less than 6,600 square feet except when the housing adjoins permanent open space and then not less than 5,000 square feet will be permitted; 
4.  Factors that may affect density of the development: The number of dwelling units permitted may be increased up to 20 percent by providing one or more of the following described amenities in accordance with the schedule for each. Such percentages may be applied cumulatively up to the 20 percent maximum: 
(a)  Designated open areas or recreational facilities: 
12% Designated open areas or recreational facilities being at least 25% of site area; 1 - 15% Dedication or donation of sites for public purposes such as schools, parks and public buildings (but not including streets, designated open areas and recreational facilities) with the number of percentage points accumulated to be determined as based on the amount of land donated in proportion to the total size of the development as follows:  
Net Percent Of Development Area Donated Percent Points 1 1 5 3 10 6 15 9 20 12 25 or more 15  
  
(b)  Facilities and amenities: 
5% Recreational facilities, which may or may not include a golf course, occupying 1 square foot for every 5 square feet of residential floor area; 5% Swimming pool - 5% for each pool, not to exceed 10%; 3% Tennis courts - 1% for each court, not to exceed 3%; 5% Community center building and/or club; 1% Provisions for pedestrian facilities, such as plaza, trails, bicycle racks, interior sidewalks, benches, etc.;  
(c)  Traffic and parking: 
5% Provision of 50% of all required parking in an enclosed structure or structures; 10% Provision of 25% of required parking in an underground structure.  
(Ord. 3617, 5-8-1989, eff. 6-1-1989) 
10-7-9. - Commercial and Industrial Planned Unit Development standards. 
(A)  Allowable uses: Within the C2 through C6 and I1 zoning districts, uses within commercial, office, and/or industrial planned developments may only include any of the permitted or special uses allowed in the district in which the planned development is located; 
(B)  Arrangement of commercial and industrial uses: 
1.  Commercial and industrial buildings and establishments shall be planned as groups having common parking areas and common ingress and egress points in order to reduce the number of potential accident locations at intersections with thoroughfares. Planting screens or fences shall be provided on the sides of the development abutting areas occupied or likely to be occupied by residences; 
2.  The plan of the project shall provide for the integrated and harmonious design of buildings, and for adequate and properly arranged facilities for internal traffic circulation, landscaping and such other features and facilities as may be necessary to make the project attractive and efficient from the standpoint of the adjoining and surrounding existing or potential development; 
(C)  Designated open areas: Except within the C5 and I1 zoning districts, at least ten percent of the land area of the development designated as common open area shall be developed for open plazas, pedestrian malls, tot lots, passive or active recreational facilities, trails and other quasi-public spaces and uses with adequate arrangement, design and planting; 
(D)  Intensity of use: The coverage of all principal and accessory buildings and structures shall not exceed 50 percent of the lot area, except that the percentage of coverage may be increased two percent for each ten percent of required off street parking which is located either below grade or in a parking structure, up to a maximum lot coverage of 65 percent. 
(Ord. 6207, 1-13-2014) 
Chapter 8 - NONCONFORMITIES 

10-8-1. - Policy statement. 
Within the districts established by this title or amendments that may later be adopted, there exist lots, structures, uses of land and structures, and characteristics of use which were lawful before this title was passed or amended, but which would be prohibited, regulated or restricted under the terms of this title or future amendments. It is the intent of this title to permit these nonconformities to continue only until they are removed or discontinued, except as otherwise permitted, and not to encourage their survival or allow their renewal once they have been discontinued. It is further the intent of this title that nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district, except as otherwise specifically permitted herein. 
(Ord. 3617, 5-8-1989, eff. 6-1-1989) 
10-8-2. - Authority to continue nonconformities. 
Any nonconforming building, structure, or use which existed lawfully at the time of the adoption of this title and which remains nonconforming and any such building, structure, or use which shall become nonconforming upon the adoption of this title or of any subsequent amendment thereto, or upon the annexation of nearby improved property, may be continued subject to the regulations which follow. 
(Ord. 3617, 5-8-1989, eff. 6-1-1989) 
10-8-3. - Lawfully existing buildings, structures and uses. 
For the purposes of this chapter, a building, structure or use shall be deemed to be lawfully established or lawfully existing on the date of adoption of this title if it was established or existed pursuant to a building permit which was lawfully issued prior to such date and on which construction was begun within the period of time required by the applicable Building Code. 
(Ord. 3617, 5-8-1989, eff. 6-1-1989) 
10-8-4. - Avoidance of undue hardship. 
To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this title shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction, or designated use of any building on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of this title and upon which actual building construction has been carried on diligently. 
(Ord. 3617, 5-8-1989, eff. 6-1-1989) 
10-8-5. - Nonconforming use of land. 
In any district where open land is being used as a nonconforming use, and such use is the principal use and not accessory to the main use conducted in a building, such use shall be discontinued not later than two years from the date of passage of this title. During the two-year period, such nonconforming use shall not be extended or enlarged, either on the same or adjoining property. Any building incidental and subordinate to such use of land, such as a shed, tool house, storage building, office or trailer, shall be removed at the end of the two-year period, or, if such building is so constructed as to permit the issuance of a permit for a use not excluded from the district, such building may remain as a conforming use; thereafter, both land and building shall be used only for conforming uses. 
(Ord. 3617, 5-8-1989, eff. 6-1-1989) 
10-8-6. - Nonconforming buildings and structures. 
Any lawfully existing building or structure which does not conform with the regulations of the district in which it is located shall be subject to the provisions of this section: 
(A)  Repairs and alterations : Ordinary repairs and alterations, but not including reconstruction or replacement, may be made to a nonconforming building or structure, provided that no structural alterations shall be made in or to such building or structure, all or substantially all of which is designed or intended for a use not permitted in the district in which it is located, except those required by law, or except to make the building or structure, and use thereof, conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located. For the purpose of this section, ordinary repairs, as determined by the Building and Zoning Official, shall include the replacement of storage tanks where the safety of operation of the installation require such replacement. 
(B)  Additions and enlargements: 
1.  Additions to nonconforming structures: A nonconforming building or structure, all or substantially all of which is designed or intended for a use not permitted in the district in which it is located, shall not be added to or enlarged in any manner unless such nonconforming building or structure, and use thereof, including all additions and enlargements thereto, is made to conform to all the regulations of the district in which it is located; 
2.  Additions to nonconforming structures due to bulk: A nonconforming building or structure other than a single-family dwelling, which is nonconforming only as to bulk, shall not be added to or enlarged in any manner unless such additions or enlargements thereto are made to conform to all regulations of the district in which it is located; 
3.  Nonconforming single-family dwelling: A single-family dwelling which is nonconforming due to zoning bulk control regulations (setback, lot coverage ratio, height, lot width, lot area) may be modified as outlined in the following table, provided all alterations and additions thereto conform to all regulations in the district in which it is located: 
Lots Less Than 50 Feet In Width Or Less Than 6,534 Square Feet In Area Lots With A Width Of At Least 50 Feet And With At Least 6,534 Square Feet In Area Prohibited Permitted Prohibited Permitted Alteration:  Class I X X  Class II X X  Class III X X Addition:  Class I X X  Class II X X  Class III X X Accessory structure X X  
  
4.  Existing nonconforming lot coverage: An addition above or within the perimeter of an existing structure that has an existing nonconforming lot coverage shall be permitted provided: 
(a)  The existing lot coverage ratio does not exceed 25 percent; 
(b)  The existing front perimeter wall projects no more than five feet into the minimum required front yard setback for the zoning district; 
(c)  The existing side perimeter walls project no more than two feet into the minimum required side yard setback for the zoning district; 
(d)  The existing rear perimeter wall projects no more than ten feet into the minimum required rear yard setback for an interior lot or no more than 15 feet for a corner lot; 
(e)  That the sum of the first floor area and the second floor area not exceed the equivalent of a 40 percent lot coverage ratio; and 
(f)  The addition or alteration is permitted in subsection (B)3. of this section; 
(C)  Moving: No building or structure which does not conform to all of the regulations of the district in which it is located, shall be moved in whole or part to any other location unless every portion of such building or structure is moved, and the use thereof is made to conform to all regulations of the district into which it is moved; 
(D)  Restoration of damaged nonconforming building: A building or structure, all or substantially all of which is designed or intended for a use which is not permitted in the district in which it is located, and which is destroyed or damaged by fire or other casualty or act of God to the extent that the cost of restoration to the condition in which it was before the occurrence will exceed 50 percent of the cost of restoration of the entire building or structure new, shall not be restored unless said building or structure, and the use thereof, shall conform to all regulations of the district in which it is located. In the event that such damage or destruction is less than 50 percent of the cost of restoration of the entire building or structure new, no repairs or restoration shall be made unless such restoration is started within 180 days from the date of the partial destruction and is diligently pursued to completion; 
(E)  Restoration of damaged single-family dwelling on substandard sized lot: In the event that a single-family dwelling or structure accessory to a single-family dwelling located on a zoning lot which existed on October 28, 1974, or which was lawfully established thereafter and which has less than the required minimum lot width or area, is destroyed or damaged by fire or other casualty or act of God, the bulk requirements of this title shall not be applicable to the restoration or reconstruction of such single-family residence or accessory structure, provided the restored or reconstructed dwelling or accessory structure is not larger than that which was damaged or destroyed and does not exceed the limits established by the footprint of the original structure; 
(F)  Restoration of damaged single-family dwelling on standard sized lot: In the event that a single-family dwelling located on a zoning lot which meets the requirements of this title is destroyed or damaged by fire or other casualty or act of God, the bulk requirements of this title shall not be applicable to the restoration or reconstruction of such single-family residence provided the restored or reconstructed dwelling is within the limits of the original foundation and original building height; 
(G)  Discontinuance of use of nonconforming building or structure: A building, structure, or portion thereof, all or substantially all of which is designed or intended for a use not permitted in the district, or which use is permitted only by the granting of a special use permit in the district in which it is located, and: 1) which is vacant, unoccupied, or not used on the effective date of this title and remains vacant, unoccupied, or not used for a continuous period of 180 days thereafter or 2) such a building, structure, or portion thereof which becomes vacant, unoccupied, or not used after the effective date and remains unoccupied, or is not used for a continuous period of 180 days, shall not thereafter be occupied or used except by a use which conforms to the use regulations of the district in which the building or structure is located; 
(H)  Change of use in nonconforming building or structure: The nonconforming use of a building or structure may be changed to a use permitted in the district in which it is located. 
(Ord. 3617, 5-8-1989, eff. 6-1-1989; amd. Ord. 3815, 2-25-1991; Ord. 3953, 9-28-1992; Ord. 4425, 10-14-1996; Ord. 4673, 12-14-1998, eff. 3-1-1999; Ord. 5035, 1-14-2002, eff. 3-1-2002; Ord. 5543, 1-22-2007; Ord. 6601, 5-14-2018) 
10-8-7. - Nonconforming use of buildings or structures. 
The lawfully existing, nonconforming use of part or all of a building or structure, all or substantially all of which building or structure is designed or intended for a use permitted in the district in which it is located, may be continued subject to the following provisions: 
(A)  Expansion of nonconforming use prohibited: The nonconforming use of part of a building or structure shall not be expanded or extended into any other portion of such building or structure; 
(B)  Discontinuance: If a nonconforming use of a building or structure is discontinued for a period of 90 days, it shall not be renewed; 
(C)  Change of a nonconforming use: A nonconforming use shall not be changed to another nonconforming use. 
(Ord. 3617, 5-8-1989, eff. 6-1-1989) 
10-8-8. - Special uses not nonconforming. 
Existing uses which are special uses under the provisions of this title shall not be nonconforming uses, but shall require a special use permit for any enlargement or extension or intensification or change of use. 
(Ord. 3617, 5-8-1989, eff. 6-1-1989) 
10-8-9. - Intermittent or partial use. 
The causal, intermittent, temporary or illegal use of land or buildings shall not be sufficient to establish the existence of a nonconforming use. The existence of a nonconforming use on part of a lot, tract or parcel shall not be construed to establish a right to extend the nonconforming use to the entire lot, tract or parcel. 
(Ord. 3617, 5-8-1989, eff. 6-1-1989) 
10-8-10. - Nonconforming uses not validated. 
A use in violation of a provision of ordinance 1904-Z, as amended as of the adoption of this title, shall not be validated by the adoption of this title. 
(Ord. 3617, 5-8-1989, eff. 6-1-1989) 
Chapter 9 - RESERVED 
(Ordinance 3617, May 8, 1989, effective June 1, 1989) 
Chapter 10 - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

10-10-1. - Organization. 
(A)  Administration: The administration of this title is hereby vested in the following: 
1.  Village Department of Community Development; 
2.  Plan Commission; 
3.  Zoning Board of Appeals; and 
4.  Village Board of Trustees; 
(B)  Scope of this chapter: This chapter outlines the authority of each of these offices, then describes the procedures and substantive standards with respect to the following administrative functions: 
1.  Issuance of zoning certificates; 
2.  Issuance of occupancy certificates; 
3.  Issuance of driveway approach permits; 
4.  Appeals; 
5.  Variations; 
6.  Amendments; 
7.  Special uses; 
8.  Special uses for planned unit developments; 
9.  Fees; and 
10.  Penalties. 
(Ord. 3617, 5-8-1989, eff. 6-1-1989; Ord. 6674, 2-25-2019) 
10-10-2. - Village Department of Community Development. 
(A)  The Village Department of Community Development, including the Director of that department and the Building and Zoning Official, shall enforce this title and in addition thereto, and in furtherance of such authority, shall perform the following duties: 
1.  Issue all zoning certificates and make and maintain records thereof, including review of all information submitted regarding compliance with performance standards and approve the same before issuance of any zoning certificate; 
2.  Issue all certificates of occupancy; 
3.  Issue all driveway approach permits; 
4.  Conduct inspections of buildings, structures, and open land uses to determine compliance with the terms of this title; 
5.  Maintain permanent and current records of this title, including nonconforming uses, special uses, amendments, special uses for planned unit developments, variations, appeals and applications therefor, and records of hearings thereon; 
6.  Receive, file and forward for action all appeals and applications for appeals, variations, amendments, special uses, special uses for planned unit developments, all of which may be filed initially with the Director of the Department of Community Development; 
7.  Provide such clerical and technical assistance as may be required by the Plan Commission and Zoning Board of Appeals in the exercise of their duties; 
8.  Initiate, from time to time, a study of the provisions of this title; and 
9.  Make recommendations annually to the Plan Commission and/or corporate authorities as to the effectiveness of this title. 
(Ord. 3617, 5-8-1989, eff. 6-1-1989; Ord. 6674, 2-25-2019) 
10-10-3. - Plan Commission. 
(A)  Establishment: The Plan Commission of the Village has been heretofore duly established by title 2, chapter 4 of this Code; 
(B)  Jurisdiction: The Plan Commission is hereby vested with the following jurisdiction and authority with reference to this title: 
1.  To establish a time for and conduct public hearings on and make written findings of fact and recommendations to the Village Board on the following matters: 
(a)  Applications for amendments to the zoning district map or the text of this title; 
(b)  Special use permits and any variations required to accommodate a use other than a single-family or two-family dwelling; 
(c)  Special use permits for planned unit developments, including any request for change or modification in plans for such developments as required by this title; 
(d)  All zoning requests pertaining to newly annexed property, including review of all plats and plans in connection therewith; 
(e)  Plats of subdivision, including review of such plats for conformance to the Comprehensive Plan, this title and the subdivision regulation ordinance of the Village; 
(f)  All special use permits and variations pertaining to chapter 6, "Flood Hazard And Land Use Regulations", of this title; and 
(g)  Appeals or application for variations to the DuPage County countywide stormwater and floodplain ordinance as adopted by the Village of Glen Ellyn, acting as the stormwater oversight committee therefor. 
2.  To review the recommendations of the Department of Community Development as to the effectiveness of this title and report its conclusions and recommendations to the Village Board, from time to time, but not less frequently than biannually; 
3.  To review the zoning district map for accuracy not less frequently than annually so that the zoning district map may be annually updated and published in the manner required by the Illinois Compiled Statutes; and 
4.  To hear, decide and consider all other matters referred to it by the Village Board or upon which it is required to act pursuant to the provisions of this title, or as prescribed by the applicable provisions of this Code or Illinois Compiled Statutes. 
(Ord. 3617, 5-8- 1989, eff. 6-1-1989; amd. Ord. 4425, 10-14-1996; Ord. 5543, 1-22-2007; Ord. 6674, 2-25-2019) 
10-10-4. - Zoning board of appeals. 
(A)  Establishment: The Zoning Board of Appeals of the Village has been heretofore duly established by title 2, chapter 14 of this Code. 
(B)  Jurisdiction: The Zoning Board of Appeals is hereby vested with the following jurisdiction and authority: 
1.  To establish a time for and conduct public hearings on and make written findings of fact and recommendations to the Village Board concerning applications for all zoning variations for single-family and two-family dwellings, in the manner prescribed by and subject to the standards established in this title; 
2.  To hear and decide appeals from any final order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official charged with the enforcement of this title; and 
3.  To hear and decide all matters referred to it by the Village Board or upon which it is required to act under this title, or as prescribed by the applicable provisions of the Illinois Compiled Statutes. 
(Ord. 3617, 5-8-1989, eff. 6-1-1989; amd. Ord. 5543, 1-22- 2007) 
10-10-5. - Village Board of Trustees. 
The Village Board of Trustees is the elected legislative authority of the Village and has reserved unto itself the final authority on variations, special uses, amendments and special uses for planned unit developments, to be exercised pursuant to its legislative discretion. 
(Ord. 3617, 5-8-1989, eff. 6-1-1989) 
10-10-6. - Zoning certificate. 
(A)  Except as hereinafter provided, no permit pertaining to the use of land or buildings shall be issued by an officer, department or employee unless the application for such permit has been examined by either the Director, Village Department of Community Development or the Building and Zoning Official of that department and has affixed to it the Director's certificate or Building and Zoning Official's certificate indicating that an existing or proposed building, structure or use complies with all the provisions of this title. Any permit or certificate issued in conflict with the provisions of this title shall be null and void; 
(B)  Every application for a zoning certificate shall be accompanied by: 
1.  Two copies of a current plat of the parcel of land, lot, lots, block or blocks, or parts or portions thereof which constitute the proposed zoning lot, drawn to scale showing the actual dimensions and monumenting, as certified by a registered Illinois land surveyor, as a true copy of the piece or parcel, lot, lots, block or blocks, or portions thereof, according to the registered or recorded plat of such land; 
2.  Two copies of additional drawings drawn to a scale in such form as may, from time to time, be prescribed by either the Director, Department of Community Development, or the Building and Zoning Official, showing the proposed zoning lot, the ground area, height and bulk of the building or structure, the building lines in relation to the lot lines, the use to be made of the building, structure or land and such other information as may be required for the proper enforcement of this title; 
3.  The Director, Department of Community Development, may, in those cases where in his judgment the information is not necessary because of existing evidence in Village records, waive all or any portion of the requirements of subsections (B)1. and (B)2. of this section; 
(C)  Every application for a zoning certificate for any property located in the C1 through C6 zoning districts shall also include the following information: 
1.  The location and dimensions of all driveways, parking spaces, waste disposal and recycling areas, screening and landscaped areas on the plot plan of the proposed site; 
2.  All structures, streets, streams and any other significant features within 200 feet of the proposed site on the plot plan of the proposed site; 
3.  A narrative description of the activity to be conducted in sufficient detail to indicate the extent to which the proposed operation will produce waste products, conditions or external effects which are limited or otherwise regulated by this title; 
4.  A narrative or pictorial description of the type and location of any abatement devices or recording instruments used to control or measure conformity with any of the performance standards contained in this title; and 
5.  Such other information as may be reasonably required by the Director of the Department of Community Development to facilitate a determination of whether the proposed commercial use will comply with the provisions of this title; 
(D)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit the filing of amendments to an application or to a plan or other record accompanying same, at any time before the issuance of an occupancy permit. Such amendments, if approved, shall be filed with and be deemed a part of the original application; 
(E)  The Building and Zoning Official or Director, Department of Community Development, shall examine all applications for zoning certificates within a reasonable time after filing. If, after examination, no objection to the same is found and it appears that the proposed use of land or buildings or construction will be in compliance with this title, then such application shall be approved and a building permit or occupancy permit shall be issued, if the circumstances warrant, as soon as practical. If the examination of an application reveals otherwise, the application shall be rejected and the reasons for the rejection stated in a written report to be attached to the application, with a copy thereof delivered to the applicant. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the Building and Zoning Official from issuing a permit for the construction of part of a building or structure providing that adequate plans and detailed statements shall have been presented for the same and have been found to comply with this title. All work or other construction performed under any permit issued by the Department of Community Development and based upon an application for zoning certificate shall conform to the approved application and plans, and approved amendments thereto. The location of all new construction as shown on the approved plot diagram, or on an approved amendment thereto, shall be strictly followed. It shall be unlawful to reduce or diminish the area of a lot, plot or zoning lot of which a plat or other drawing has been filed and has been used as the basis for the issuance of a permit, unless a revised plat showing the proposed change in conditions shall have been filed and approved; except that this shall not apply when the lot is reduced by reason of a street opening or widening or other public taking of private property; 
(F)  Any permit or approval issued under the provisions of this title may be revoked whenever there has been any false statement, misrepresentation or omission of a material fact in the application, plat, plans, drawings or other information on which the permit or approval was based. 
(Ord. 3617, 5-8-1989, eff. 6-1-1989; Ord. 6674, 2-25-2019) 
10-10-7. - Occupancy certificate; zoning. 
(A)  Occupancy certificate requirements: No building, alteration or addition thereto, constructed after the effective date of this title and no addition to a previously existing building shall be occupied, and no land, unused and vacant on the effective date of this title, shall be used for any purpose until an occupancy certificate has been issued by the Community Development Department. No change in a use shall be made until an occupancy certificate has been issued stating that the use or occupancy complies with the provisions of this title. 
(B)  Application required: Every application for a building permit or zoning certificate shall be deemed to be an application for an occupancy certificate. Every application for an occupancy certificate for a new use of land where no building permit is required shall be made directly to the Community Development Department. 
(C)  Compliance with approved plans and applicable standards: No occupancy certificate for a building, or portion thereof, constructed after the effective date of this title shall be issued until construction has been completed and the premises are inspected and certified to be in conformity with the plans and specifications upon which the zoning certificate application was based. No occupancy certificate for a building, alteration, or addition thereto constructed after the effective date of this title shall be issued, and no addition to a previously existing building shall be occupied until the premises have been inspected and certified to be in compliance with all applicable standards. 
(D)  Temporary occupancy certificate: A temporary occupancy certificate may be issued for a period not to exceed 180 days pending the completion of a building or alteration thereof. Such temporary occupancy certificate shall not be construed as in any way waiving the duties and obligations of the owners or occupants to complete the construction or alteration within the time period established in the temporary occupancy certificate. 
(E)  Amendments to original application: Nothing in this section shall prohibit the filing of amendments to an application or to a plan or other record accompanying same at any time before the issuance of an occupancy permit. Such amendments, if approved, shall be filed with and be deemed a part of the original application. 
(F)  Compliance with approved plot diagram: All work or other construction performed under any permit issued by the Community Development Department and based upon an application for zoning certificate shall conform to the approved application and plans and approved amendments thereto. The location of all new construction as shown on the approved plot diagram, or on an approved amendment thereto, shall be strictly followed. It shall be unlawful to reduce or diminish the area of the lot, plot, or zoning lot of which a plat or other drawing has been filed and has been used as the basis for the issuance of a permit, unless a revised plat showing the proposed change in conditions shall have been filed and approved, except that this shall not apply when the lot is reduced by reason of a street opening or widening or other public taking of private property. 
(G)  Revocation of permit or approval: Any permit or approval issued under the provisions of this title may be revoked whenever there has been any false statement, misrepresentation, or omission of a material fact in the application, plat, plans, drawings, or other information on which the permit or approval was based. 
(H)  Occupancy certificate issuance or written notice of denial: An occupancy certificate shall be issued or a written notice shall be given to the applicant stating the reasons why a certificate cannot be issued not later than five working days after the Community Development Department is notified in writing that the building or premises is ready for inspection for occupancy. 
(Ord. 4673, 12-14-1998, eff. 3-1-1999; amd. Ord. 5035, 1-14- 2002, eff. 3-1-2002; Ord. 6674, 2-25-2019) 
10-10-8. - Driveway approach permits. 
(A)  A driveway approach permit shall be required when: 
1.  Property is developed or redeveloped; 
2.  Any existing driveway approach is reconstructed (resurfacing is not considered reconstruction) or widened; 
3.  An additional driveway approach is proposed to be constructed; 
4.  The intensity of use of any building, structure or land is increased through the addition of dwelling units, gross floor area, seating capacity or other manner that may change parking or access requirements; or 
5.  The use of land or a building is changed to a different use, unless a driveway approach is not required, proposed nor existing; 
(B)  A permit for a temporary driveway approach may be granted if it is conditioned upon being replaced by a specified future date with one of the following: 
1.  An adjacent public street or access (frontage) road; or 
2.  A shared driveway, as shown on an approved development plan for the site; 
(C)  Every application for a driveway approach permit shall be accompanied by: 
1.  Two copies of a drawing showing the driveway design and geometrics including curb return radius, width of driveway at the property line, curbed or uncurbed, dimension of any channelizing islands or medians and slope between property line and street, measured parallel to the driveway between the edge of the street and the property line; 
2.  Two copies of a sketch (not necessarily to scale) showing the distances between proposed driveway(s) and existing driveway(s) on both sides of the street, within 200 feet each direction from the subject property lines, with distances to be measured parallel to the street. The sketch shall also identify the type of land use currently served by these existing driveway(s); 
3.  Narrative or pictorial identification of proposed driveway signage/markings/striping for intersection control, inbound/outbound movements, turn prohibitions (if any) and similar information required to show compliance with this title; 
4.  Based on a review of site topography, street alignment, existing driveways and other factors, the Director of Community Development may require a survey to establish the site distance along the intersecting street measured from the driveway and/or potential vehicular conflicts; 
5.  The Director, Department of Community Development, may, in those cases where in his judgment the information is not necessary because of existing evidence in Village records, waive all or any portion of the requirements of subsections (C)1. through (C)4. of this section; 
(D)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit the filing of amendments to an application or to a drawing or other record accompanying same, at any time before the issuance of a driveway approach permit. Such amendments, if approved, shall be filed with and be deemed a part of the original application; 
(E)  The Building and Zoning Official or Director, Department of Community Development, shall examine all applications for driveway approach permit within a reasonable time after filing. If, after examination, no objection to the same is found and it appears that the proposal will be in compliance with this title, then such application shall be approved and a permit shall be issued, if the circumstances warrant, as soon as practical. If the examination of an application reveals otherwise, the application shall be rejected and the reasons for the rejection stated in a written report to be attached to the application, with a copy thereof delivered to the applicant. All work or other construction performed under any permit issued by the Department of Community Development shall conform to the approved application and plans, and approved amendments thereto. The location of all new construction as shown on the approved plot diagram, or on an approved amendment thereto, shall be strictly followed. It shall be unlawful to reduce or diminish the area of a lot, plot or zoning lot of which a plat or other drawing has been filed and has been used as the basis for the issuance of a permit, unless a revised plat showing the proposed change in conditions shall have been filed and approved; except that this shall not apply when the lot is reduced by reason of a street opening or widening or other public taking of private property; 
(F)  Any permit or approval issued under the provisions of this title may be revoked whenever there has been any false statement, misrepresentation or omission of a material fact in the application, plat, plans, drawings or other information on which the permit or approval was based. 
(Ord. 3617, 5-8-1989, eff. 6-1-1989; Ord. 6674, 2-25-2019) 
10-10-9. - Appeals. 
(A)  Scope of appeals: An appeal from a final order, requirement, decision or determination to issue, not to issue, revoke, rescind or extend a permit or certificate requiring compliance with the provisions of this title may be taken to the Zoning Board of Appeals by any person aggrieved or by any officer or department of the Village. Such an appeal shall be taken within 45 days after the decision complained of, by filing with the Director, Department of Community Development, and with the Zoning Board of Appeals, a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The Director, Department of Community Development, shall forthwith transmit to the Zoning Board of Appeals all the papers constituting the record upon which the decision appealed from was taken; 
(B)  Notice of appeal: The notice of appeal shall contain at least the following information: 
1.  The name, address and phone number of the person filing the appeal; 
2.  The location of the property involved in the decision complained of; 
3.  Identification of the section or provision of this title in dispute; 
4.  The written decision of the enforcing officer or department or the reason given by the enforcing officer or department in support of the decision from which the appeal is taken; 
5.  A description of the proposed use of the property, including a plat or plot diagram; and 
6.  A brief narrative argument and a summary of the factual evidence upon which the appeal is based; 
(C)  Appeal proceedings: An appeal shall stay all proceeding in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the Director, Department of Community Development, certifies to the Zoning Board of Appeals, after notice of the appeal has been filed with the Director, that by reason of facts stated in the Director's statement to deny a stay, would, in the Director's opinion, cause eminent peril to life and/or property, in which case the proceedings shall not be stayed unless determined otherwise by the Zoning Board of Appeals or as ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction, for due cause shown; 
(D)  Appeal hearing: The Zoning Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of an appeal and give at least ten days' notice to all parties interested in the appeal. The notice shall be by publication in a newspaper in general circulation within the Village and also by mailing the notice thereof to the parties in interest. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall reach its decision within a reasonable period of time after the conclusion of the hearing of the appeal. The board may affirm or may reverse, wholly or in part, or modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination that, in its opinion, ought to be done and to that end, shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken. The Director, Department of Community Development, shall maintain records of all actions of the Zoning Board of Appeals relative to appeals. The decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be a final administrative decision, based upon the evidence presented at the hearing of the appeal. Judicial review of the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals on appeals shall be in accordance with the Illinois Compiled Statutes. 
(Ord. 3617, 5-8-1989, eff. 6-1-1989; Ord. 6674, 2-25-2019) 
10-10-10. - Petition (application) procedures. 
(A)  Procedures applicable to all petitions for variations, amendments, special use permits and special use permits for planned unit developments: Requests for variation, amendment, special use, and special use for planned unit development may be filed as follows: 
1.  Requests for variation, special use and special use for planned unit development may be initiated by resolution or motion of the Village Board or by petition or application which seeks to vary the provisions of this title or to obtain a special use or special use for planned unit development as specified within this title; 
2.  Map amendments may be initiated by resolution or motion of the Village Board, by the Zoning Board of Appeals, by the Plan Commission or by petition or application by the fee owner, other person having a proprietary interest in the property, and/or any person having the right to represent the fee owner of the particular parcel or parcels of property affected by the map amendment, or their agent or attorney; 
3.  Text amendments may be initiated by resolution or motion of the Village Board, the Zoning Board of Appeals or the Plan Commission, or by petition (application) by any resident or property owner in the Village and shall state in particular the section, subsection and/or paragraph of this title to be amended; 
(B)  Petitioner; applicant requirements: If any of the following requirements relating to the petitioner or applicant change at any time during the processing of the petition, the Village must be notified in writing within ten working days as to the nature of these changes. The petitioner or applicant shall comply with the following requirements: 
1.  Each petition or application shall be filed by the fee owner, other person having a proprietary interest in the property, and/or any person having the right to represent the owner, or their agent or attorney, unless otherwise specified herein; 
2.  Where the petitioner or applicant is a nominee, agent, attorney, or one other than the fee owner, then the petition or application must disclose the name and address of the fee owner and of any person or entity for whom the petitioner or applicant is acting; and all of said persons or entities shall be deemed to be a petitioner or applicant for the purpose of disclosing interests as required in this subsection (B); 
3.  In the case where the fee owner has entered into a contract for the sale of the property sought to be affected, the contract purchaser shall be a copetitioner to the petition or application or shall provide a letter of authorization to represent the fee owner; 
4.  In case of property that is the subject of a land trust agreement, the trustee of such trust, as such trustee, shall be the petitioner or copetitioner to the petition or application or the applicant shall provide a letter of authorization from the trustee authorizing the applicant to represent the beneficial interest of the trust; 
5.  Where the petitioner or applicant is a corporation, the petition or application shall include the correct names and addresses of all officers and Directors and of all stockholders or shareholders owning any interest in excess of five percent of all outstanding stock of such corporation. If any owner of five percent or more of the stock is also a corporation, the same disclosures shall be made concerning that corporation; 
6.  Where the petitioner or applicant or his principal, if other than the applicant, is a business or entity doing business under an assumed name, the petition or application shall include the name and residence of all true and actual owners of such business or entity; 
7.  Where the petitioner or applicant is a partnership, limited partnership, joint venture, syndicate, trust or an unincorporated voluntary association, the petition or application shall include the names and addresses of all partners, limited partners, joint venturers, syndicate members, trust beneficiaries or members of the unincorporated voluntary association; 
8.  Where property is the subject of a land trust agreement, the petitioner or applicant shall provide a trust disclosure in compliance with "an act to required disclosure of all beneficial interest", 765 Illinois Compiled Statutes 405/1, signed by the trustee of the trust; 
9.  Where any person disclosed pursuant to the requirements of this subsection (B) is not a natural person, then the partners, limited partners, joint venturers, syndicate members, trust beneficiaries, members of the unincorporated voluntary association, officers, Directors and stockholders (owning any interest in excess of five percent) shall be disclosed so that all interested natural persons are disclosed; 
10.  The Village Engineer, the Director of Community Development, or their designee shall require a plat of assessment, consolidation, resubdivision or subdivision if the development site is comprised of a portion (or portions) of previously platted land, more than one lot of record, or contains more than one property identification number (PIN) per zoning lot. 
(Ord. 3617, 5-8-1989, eff. 6-1-1989; amd. Ord. 3815, 2-25-1991; Ord. 5035, 1-14-2002, eff. 3-1-2002; Ord. 6674, 2-25-2019) 
10-10-11. - Notice requirements for variations, amendments, special uses and special use permits for planned unit developments. 
(A)  No public hearing before either the Zoning Board of Appeals or the Plan Commission on any request or petition for variation, amendment, special use or special use for planned unit development shall be held unless notice of the time and place of the hearing is published at least once, not more than 30 nor less than 15 days before the beginning of the hearing, in one or more newspapers published within the Village, or if no newspaper is published therein, then in one or more newspapers with a general circulation within the Village which is published in the county where the Village is located; 
(B)  Each petition or application for variation, amendment, special use or special use for planned unit development shall include a list of all property owners, as disclosed either by the records of the DuPage County Recorder of Deeds or the tax records maintained by the DuPage County Clerk, for all property within 250 feet of the parcel, exclusive of road rights-of-way. The Department of Community Development shall cause notice of the public hearing to be mailed to property owners contained within such list at the addresses identified therein at least ten days prior to the public hearing; 
(C)  Each petitioner or applicant shall be responsible for the placement of one or more placards on the parcel or parcels subject to a hearing for variation, amendment, special use or special use for planned unit development not less than 15 days prior to the date of any public hearing. The placard shall remain until completion of the public hearing, at which time it shall be removed. Such placards shall be provided by the Village and shall contain such information as directed by the Director, Department of Community Development. Jurisdiction of the Zoning Board of Appeals or the Plan Commission to hold hearings shall not be affected by the absence of a placard, if such absence is not the result of the applicant's or petitioner's act or omission. 
(Ord. 3617, 5-8-1989, eff. 6-1- 1989; Ord. 6674, 2-25-2019) 
10-10-12. - Variations. 
(A)  Variations shall be classified into the following: 
1.  Administrative variations, which are minor variations to the Village's bulk regulations for existing single family, detatched structures including: 
(a)  Lot coverage ratio variances less than or equal to ten percent of the lot coverage ratio requirement on structures greater than one-story; and 
(b)  Yard setback variances less than 20 percent of the setback requirement; and 
2.  Variations, which are all other requests for relief that do not meet the criteria for administrative variation; 
(B)  A petition or application for either type of variation shall be filed with the Director of Community Development, and shall contain at least the following information: 
1.  The name, address and phone number of the applicant, pursuant to section 10-10-10 of this chapter; 
2.  The legal description, common address and permanent index number of the property to be benefited by the variation; 
3.  Identification of the provisions of this title from which the variation is sought; 
4.  A description of the proposed use and/or variation, including a dimensioned site plan or plat. The dimensioned site plan or plat need not be prepared by an architect or engineer; 
5.  A brief summary of the factual evidence upon which the applicant will rely to show that the standards for variation will be met; 
(C)  The Community Development Director shall review all applications for administrative variation and determine if the request meets the requirements for administrative approval. If the Director determines that the request meets the standards described herein, a copy of the variation application shall be sent by the Village by certified mail at the property owner's expense, to property owners within a one property radius, excluding the right-of-way, of the subject property. If there are no written objections filed with the Director of Community Development within 15 days of sending such notice, the administrative variation will be granted. If an administrative variation is not granted, the applicant may apply for a variation to be heard by the Zoning Board of Appeals. The Community Development Director shall send a letter to the petitioner indicating if the administrative variation was approved or denied. 
(D)  Upon application for a variation, the Zoning Board of Appeals, after giving notice as provided herein and by the Illinois Compiled Statutes, shall conduct a public hearing. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall also conduct public hearings and make recommendations to the Village Board regarding requested variations from bulk regulations applicable to single-family lots in planned unit developments, in accordance with the procedures established for other variations in this title, provided the conditions set forth in subsection 10-10-15(F) of this chapter have been met. Any property owners' association related to the planned unit development shall be notified of any proposed variations from bulk regulations in the same manner as that required for surrounding property owners in subsection 10-10-11(B) of this chapter; 
(E)  The Community Development Director shall not vary the provisions of this title, nor shall the Zoning Board of Appeals recommend, and the Village Board vary, the provisions of this title, except in cases where there are practical difficulties or particular hardship in the way of carrying out the strict letter of any regulation of this title relating to the use, construction or alteration of buildings or structures or the use of land, and unless it shall have made findings based upon the evidence presented to it in the following cases: 
1.  That the property in question cannot yield a reasonable return if permitted to be used only under the conditions allowed by the regulations governing the district in which it is located; and that the variation, if granted, will not alter the essential character of the locality; or 
2.  That the plight of the owner is due to unique circumstances; and that the variation, if granted, will not alter the essential character of the locality; 
(F)  For the purpose of supplementing the above standards, in consideration of granting an administrative variation or recommending approval of a variation, the Community Development Director or the Zoning Board of Appeals shall also take into consideration the extent to which the evidence establishes or fails to establish the following facts favorably to the applicant: 
1.  That the particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical condition of the specific property involved would bring particular hardship upon the owner as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the strict letter of the regulation were to be carried out; 
2.  That the conditions upon which the petition for variation is based would not be applicable generally to other property within the same zoning district; 
3.  That the purpose of the variation is not based exclusively upon a desire to make more money out of the property; 
4.  That the alleged difficulty or particular hardship has not been created by any person presently having an interest in the property or by the applicant; 
5.  That the granting of the variation will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property or improvements in the neighborhood in which the property is located; 
6.  That the proposed variation will not: 
(a)  Impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property; 
(b)  Substantially increase the hazard from fire or other dangers to said property or adjacent property; 
(c)  Otherwise impair the public health, safety, comfort, morals or general welfare of the inhabitants of the Village; 
(d)  Diminish or impair property values within the neighborhood; 
(e)  Unduly increase traffic congestion in the public streets and highways; 
(f)  Create a nuisance; or 
(g)  Result in an increase in public expenditures; 
7.  That the variation is the minimum variation that will make possible the reasonable use of the land, building or structure; 
8.  In the case of a planned unit development, that the granting of the variation will not significantly compromise the character and concept of the planned unit development; 
(G)  No variation from the provisions of chapter 6, "Flood Hazard And Land Use Regulations", of this title shall be recommended or granted unless the evidence presented at the public hearing establishes the following facts in addition to those facts required for any other variation: 
1.  For a variation from the requirements of this title that would result in a structure not being protected to the elevation of the base flood that: 
(a)  The structure is to be located on a lot contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level; 
(b)  The applicant has acknowledged that such construction below the base flood level will increase the risks to life and property and that the applicant proceeds with knowledge of these risks; and 
(c)  Any variation is contingent upon the applicant obtaining approval from other agencies having jurisdiction, when the variance violates the requirements of such agencies; 
2.  For a variation from the requirements of this title that would significantly impede or increase the flow and passage of floodwaters that: 
(a)  The use will not result in an increased flood height greater than 0.1 feet within the designated regulatory floodway; 
(b)  The resulting increase in the base flood elevation will not affect any existing structures or utilities; 
(c)  The owners of the properties affected by the increased base flood elevation are compensated for the resulting effect on property values, and they give their written agreement to granting the variation; and 
(d)  The resulting increased flood elevations will not affect any flood protection structures; 
(H)  The Community Development Director is not required to approve the full variation requested, nor is the Zoning Board of Appeals required to recommend approval of the full variation requested, when a variation of less extent than that contained in the request is more appropriate; 
(I)  The Zoning Board of Appeals may recommend and the Community Development Director or Village Board may require such conditions and restrictions upon the premises benefited by a variation as may be necessary in their opinion to comply with the standards set forth in this section, to reduce or minimize the injurious effect of such variations upon other property in the neighborhood, and to better promote and implement the general intent of this title; 
(J)  No variation shall be granted except by ordinance duly passed and approved by the President and Village Board after public hearing and written findings of fact and recommendation from the Zoning Board of Appeals. Without further public hearing, the Village Board may grant, deny or amend the recommendation for variation. Every variation which is granted by ordinance of the Village Board shall be accompanied by findings of fact and shall refer to any exhibit containing plats and specifications for the proposed variation, which exhibit shall remain a part of the permanent records of the Zoning Board of Appeals. The terms of relief granted shall be specifically set forth separate from the findings of the ordinance. 
(Ord. 3617, 5-8-1989, eff. 6-1-1989; amd. Ord. 3953, 9-28-1992; Ord. 6520, 7-24-2017; Ord. 6674, 2-25-2019) 
10-10-13. - Amendments. 
(A)  For the purpose of promoting the public health, safety, morals, comfort, general welfare; to conserve the value of property throughout the Village; and to lessen or avoid congestion in the public streets and highways, the Village Board may, from time to time, in the manner hereinafter set forth, amend the regulations imposed in this title, pursuant to the procedures established herein; 
(B)  Amendments shall be classified into the following: 
1.  Text amendments, which are amendments to the text of this title; and 
2.  Map amendments, which are amendments to zoning district map adopted pursuant to this title; 
(C)  A petition or application for amendment shall be filed with the Director, Department of Community Development, and shall contain at least the following information: 
1.  For text amendments: 
(a)  The name, address and phone number of the petitioner or applicant, pursuant to section 10-10-10 of this chapter; 
(b)  The proposed text amendment; and 
(c)  A statement of how the proposed text amendment relates to the Comprehensive Plan then in effect or otherwise promotes the public health, safety and general welfare; 
2.  For map amendments: 
(a)  The name, address and phone number of the petitioner or applicant, pursuant to section 10-10-10 of this chapter; 
(b)  The proposed map amendment, including the legal description of the property to be affected, common address and permanent index number, and the precise district into which the property is proposed to be placed; 
(c)  The present use of the affected property; 
(d)  The present zoning district in which the affected property is contained; 
(e)  The proposed use of the affected property; 
(f)  A vicinity map at a scale approved by the Director, Department of Community Development, showing property lines, streets, existing and proposed zoning and such other items as the Director may require; and 
(g)  A statement of how the proposed map amendment relates to the Comprehensive Plan, promotes the public health, safety and general welfare, and how the proposed map amendment fulfills the conditions of subsection (E) of this section; 
(D)  The Director, Department of Community Development, shall transmit the application to the Plan Commission, which shall hold a public hearing on each application for an amendment at such time and place as shall be established by the commission, after due notice as required herein. The hearing shall be conducted and a record of such proceedings shall be preserved in such manner as the commission shall prescribe from time to time; 
(E)  Within 90 days after the close of the hearing on a proposed amendment, the Plan Commission shall make written findings of fact and shall submit the same together with recommendations to the Village Board. For map amendments, the commission shall make written findings of fact based upon the evidence presented to it in each case with respect to the following matters: 
1.  Identification of the existing uses of property within the general area of the affected property; 
2.  Identification of the zoning classification of property within the general area of the affected property; 
3.  Determination as to the suitability of the property in question to the uses permitted under the existing classification or district and under the proposed classification or district; 
4.  The trend or development, if any, in the general area of the affected property, including changes, if any, which have taken place since the date the affected property was placed in its present zoning classification or district; 
5.  The trend or development, if any, as to the proposed uses of property within the general area of the affected property, as represented on the Comprehensive Plan; 
6.  The length of time the property has been vacant as zoned, considered in the context of the land development and the area surrounding the subject property; and 
7.  The extent to which property values are diminished, if at all, by the particular zoning restrictions; 
(F)  A property affected by a proposed map amendment shall have at least 200 feet of frontage or 25,000 square feet of area, or shall adjoin a parcel of land which bears the same zoning district classification as that proposed for the affected property by the map amendment; 
(G)  In case of a written protest against any proposed text amendment or map amendment, signed and acknowledged by the owners of 20 percent of the frontage proposed to be altered, or by the owners of 20 percent of the frontage immediately adjoining or across an alley therefrom, or by the owners of 20 percent of the frontage directly opposite the frontage proposed to be altered, is filed with the Village Clerk, the amendment shall not be passed except by a favorable vote of two-thirds of the Village Trustees then holding office. In such case, a copy of the written protest shall be served by the protester or protesters on the applicant for the proposed amendment and a copy upon the applicant's attorney, if any, by certified mail at the address of such applicant and attorney shown in the application or petition for the proposed amendment; 
(H)  The Village Board shall not act upon a proposed amendment until it shall have received a written report and recommendation from the Plan Commission. If an application is not acted upon by the Village Board within six months of the date upon which such application is filed, it shall be deemed to have been denied. 
(Ord. 3617, 5-8-1989, eff. 6-1-1989; Ord. 6674, 2-25-2019) 
10-10-14. - Special uses. 
(A)  The development and execution of this title is based upon the division of the Village into zoning districts, within any one of which the use of land and use of buildings are essentially uniform. However, certain uses, because of their unique character, cannot be properly classified in any particular district or districts without consideration in each case of the impact of those uses upon the neighboring lands and upon the public need for the particular use at the particular location. Such uses fall into two categories: 
1.  Uses operated by a public agency or publicly regulated utilities, which are uses traditionally associated with a public interest, such as parks, recreation areas, public administrative buildings, or the private use of existing public buildings. It is stressed that public uses are associated with the public interest. In the case of a request for a special use by a unit of local government, for a public use within its statutory mandate, the review shall not be based on determining the necessity for the public, mandated use on the specific site but, rather, is for assessing the impact of the proposed public use upon neighboring lands, and upon the Village's streets and utilities; or 
2.  Uses entirely private in character, but of such a nature that the operation may give rise to unique problems or benefits with respect to their impact upon neighboring property, public facilities, the Village as a whole or the natural environment or resources; 
(B)  A petition or application for a special use shall be filed with the Director, Department of Community Development, and shall contain at least the following information: 
1.  The name, address and phone number of the applicant, pursuant to section 10-10-10 of this chapter; 
2.  Legal description of the property for which the special use is requested; 
3.  Description of the existing use of the affected property; 
4.  The present zoning district of the affected property; 
5.  Description of the proposed special use; 
6.  A dimensioned site plan or plat showing at least the location of all buildings, parking areas, traffic access and traffic circulation, open spaces, landscaping, refuse and service areas, utilities, signs, yards and such other information as the Plan Commission may require to determine if the proposed special use meets the intent and requirements of this title; and 
7.  A narrative statement evaluating the economic effects on adjoining property, the effect of such elements as noise, glare, odor, fumes and vibration on adjoining property, a discussion of the general compatibility with the adjacent and other properties in the district, the effect of traffic, and the relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan, and how it fulfills the requirements of subsection (E) of this section; 
(C)  Upon application to the Department of Community Development, the Plan Commission, after giving notice as provided herein and by the Illinois Compiled Statutes, shall conduct a public hearing. 
Due to the public benefit provided by governmental services, it is in the public interest to review the category of special uses to be operated by a unit of local government on a priority basis. The public hearing procedure will be expedited in such cases to the extent permitted by statute; 
(D)  Within 90 days after the close of the public hearing on a special use permit application, the Plan Commission shall render written findings of fact and shall submit the same together with recommendations to the Village Board. The written findings and recommendations shall refer to any exhibits containing plans and specifications for the proposed special use, which shall remain a part of the permanent records of the Plan Commission; 
(E)  The Plan Commission shall not recommend that a special use be granted nor shall the Village Board grant a special use, unless it shall find, based upon the evidence presented to the Plan Commission in each specific case, that the special use: 
1.  Will be harmonious with and in accordance with the general objectives, or within a specific objective of the Comprehensive Plan and/or this title; 
2.  Will be designed, constructed, operated, and maintained so as to be harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the existing or intended character of the general vicinity and that such use will not change the essential character of the same area; 
3.  Will not be hazardous or disturbing to existing or future neighborhood uses; 
4.  Will be served adequately by essential public facilities and services such as highways, streets, police and fire protection, drainage structures, refuse disposal, water, sewers and schools, or that the persons or agencies responsible for the establishment of the proposed use shall be able to provide adequately any such services; 
5.  Will not create excessive additional requirements at public cost for public facilities and services, and will not be detrimental to the economic welfare of the Village; 
6.  Will not involve uses, activities, processes, materials, equipment and/or conditions of operation that will be detrimental to any persons, property or the general welfare by reason of excessive production of traffic, noise, smoke, fumes, glare or odors; 
7.  Will have vehicular approaches to the property, which shall be so designed as not to create an undue interference with traffic on surrounding public streets or roads; 
8.  Will not increase the potential for flood damage to adjacent property or require additional public expense for flood protection, rescue or relief; and 
9.  Will not result in destruction, loss or damage of natural, scenic or historic features of major importance to the community; 
(F)  The Plan Commission may recommend and the Village Board may require such conditions and restrictions upon the premises benefited by a special use as may be necessary in their opinion to comply with the standards set forth in this section, to reduce or minimize injurious effect of such special use upon other property in the neighborhood, and/or to implement the general purpose and intent of this title; 
(G)  No special use shall be granted except by ordinance duly passed and adopted by the Village Board after public hearing and written recommendation from the Plan Commission. Without further public hearing the Village Board may grant, deny or amend the recommendation for special use. Every special use which is granted by ordinance of the Village Board shall be accompanied by findings and shall refer to any exhibits containing plans and specifications of the proposed special use, which shall remain a part of the permanent records of the Plan Commission. The findings shall specify the reason or reasons for granting the special use. The terms of relief granted shall be specifically set forth separate from the findings of the ordinance. 
(Ord. 3617, 5-8-1989, eff. 6-1-1989; Ord. 6674, 2-25-2019) 
10-10-15. - Special use for planned unit development. 
(A)  Preapplication conference: 
1.  Prior to filing a formal application for a planned unit development, the developer shall request a preapplication conference with the Plan Commission and submit the proposed planned unit development. The purpose of this conference is to afford the applicant an opportunity to avail himself of the advice and assistance of the Plan Commission before preparing the preliminary plan and formal application for its approval; 
2.  The preapplication conference is mandatory, but may be waived at the discretion of the Community Development Director. A formal application for a planned development need not be filed at the time of preapplication conference. The Department of Community Development shall consult with, advise and assist the applicant in meeting the goals and objectives established in this title; 
3.  The Director of the Department of Community Development, may waive the requirement for the preliminary and final planned unit development plans to be reviewed sequentially and separately and may permit the simultaneous review of the preliminary and final planned unit development plans provided, however, that the Plan Commission may overrule such decision of the Director and require full compliance with the review procedures in this section, if it deems, in its opinion, to be necessary for a full understanding of the proposed development and its impact upon surrounding areas and the Village; 
4.  At the preapplication conference, the applicant may request relief from specific requirements of subsection (B) of this section. In response to that request, the Plan Commission may determine that: 
(a)  All the requirements of subsection (B) of this section must be fulfilled; or 
(b)  Relief should be granted from specific requirements of subsection (B) of this section. The Plan Commission shall indicate in writing the reasons for each waiver and such writing shall be delivered by the Plan Commission to the Director of the Department of Community Development, for attachment to the preliminary plan when it is filed with the Director by the applicant. 
(B)  Preliminary plan: Following the preapplication conference, and pursuant to any relief from the specific requirements of this section being granted, the applicant may file a preliminary plan with an application or petition for a special use for planned unit development. The items of general information listed in subsection (B)1. of this section and the maps, plats and graphics listed in subsection (B)2. of this section constitute the minimum requirements for the contents of a preliminary plan. The applicant should feel free to supplement the list with whatever materials the applicant may deem appropriate to illustrate compliance with the regulations of this title and in particular with the evaluation factors set forth in section 10-7-7 of this title: 
1.  General information: 
(a)  The name, address and phone number of the owner and applicant, pursuant to section 10-10-10 of this chapter; 
(b)  Accurate legal description of the property to be subject to the planned unit development, its common address and permanent index number; 
(c)  Present zoning classification for the property to be subject to the planned unit development; 
(d)  The type of planned unit development being requested, residential or commercial; 
(e)  A listing of each separate use to be contained within the proposed planned unit development; 
(f)  A listing of any proposed deviations from all Village regulations or standards, including, by way of illustration and not limitation, this title, the Subdivision Regulations Ordinance, Building Codes, other development codes or business regulations, together with an explanation of the reasons deemed by the applicant to justify the requested deviation; 
(g)  A quantitative summary including, but not limited to, the following required items: 
(1)  Acreage or square footage of the property proposed to be subject to the planned unit development (subject parcel); 
(2)  Acreage or square footage for each proposed use area of land, including identified usable open space; 
(3)  Floor area ratios for each use; 
(4)  Residential density including tabulation by use, area and dwelling type of the number of dwelling units and bedrooms per unit, the units per acre or area per unit in estimated population; 
(5)  Number and locations by use area of parking spaces; 
(6)  Areas of designated or commonly owned and maintained open space as required by section 10-7-4 of this title; 
2.  Maps, plats and graphics: 
(a)  Survey: An accurate survey drawn to scale, prepared by an Illinois registered land surveyor and showing the boundary dimensions of the property to be subject to the planned unit development (subject property) including locations and dimensions of all existing public ways contiguous thereto; 
(b)  Existing site conditions: A map or plat drawn to scale and illustrating existing land conditions including existing topography, with contour intervals of not less than two feet, obtained from a field survey and referenced to an approved bench mark, existing tree cover over ten inches in diameter, location of any soil borings or seepage tests, existing water related features, prominent vegetation, unique soil conditions and other environmental data; 
(c)  Surrounding conditions: A map or plat illustrating the use, type, elevation and location of all properties and improvements thereon within 250 feet of the perimeter of the subject property; 
(d)  Preliminary planned unit development plat: An accurate dimensioned plat of the subject property showing at least the following information: 
(1)  Each proposed use area and arrangement of all buildings and structures therein, including location, height, size and relative distances; 
(2)  The proposed location, size, height, elevations and orientation of all signs; 
(3)  The proposed number and arrangement of all off street parking and loading spaces, location and width of driveways, entrances and exits and their relationship to existing streets; 
(4)  All areas to be maintained as permanent designated open areas or recreational facilities as required by section 10-7-4 of this title; 
(5)  The proposed location for public parks, public playgrounds, public schools, commonly owned community buildings and open areas other than those required by section 10-7-4 of this title; 
(6)  The proposed location and dimensions of all pedestrian walkways; and 
(7)  The proposed location and dimensions of all streets, vehicular accesses or driveways; 
(e)  Grading and landscape plan: A site plan drawn to scale and illustrating all excavation and/or filling of the property together with a preliminary plan for the revegetation and formal landscaping of the site, including location and type of plant materials to be used and indicating which existing plant materials are to remain or be moved on the site; 
(f)  Utility and drainage plan: A proposed site plan illustrating existing and proposed underground utilities, including gas mains, electric transmission lines, telephone lines, water distribution lines, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, cable communication lines and the like, with pipe size and direction of flow being shown, the location and topography of all drainage retention facilities and a drainage plan with sufficient control grades to indicate the intent of the drainage plan, and the location and size of any public rights-of-way for the widening, extension or connection of major streets, the installation and maintenance of private or public utilities or emergency access areas; 
(g)  Building plans: Preliminary building plans for all buildings, other than detached single-family dwellings, including proposed floor plans, exterior elevations, cross sections, perspective drawings, and outline specifications of the type of building materials, type of wall and roof construction and type of pavement and surfacing materials proposed to be used (in lieu of preliminary building plans for single-family dwellings, proposed architectural guidelines for the construction of single-family dwellings shall be provided); 
3.  Supporting documentation: 
(a)  A statement signed by the owners of the property describing the arrangements by which the owners propose to regulate use of the property and otherwise ensure development in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan; 
(b)  A cost revenue study showing both the immediate and long term effects of the development on schools and municipal services, including a letter signed by the superintendents of affected school districts, or other appropriate official of the districts, and any affected park districts, public library, fire department or other public body, indicating the developer has notified the district or public body of the proposed development and its proposed effect on school enrollment or the services provided by the district or public body; 
(c)  A traffic analysis prepared by a registered professional engineer who is skilled in the science of traffic engineering, indicating the estimated traffic to be generated by the complete development of the project, with said estimate shown for the average week, 24-hour period, and for the peak morning and evening traffic hours. The impact of this new traffic on existing traffic in the vicinity of the project shall be appraised and a list submitted of new street construction and new traffic control measures required to accommodate the estimated traffic increases; 
(d)  An environmental impact study including air quality and water quality data; 
(e)  For land which was outside the Village limits on September 26, 1972, a natural resource analysis report from the Kane-DuPage soil and water conservation district shall be provided, prior to any scheduled public hearing date; 
(f)  Any soil boring or seepage tests, or other tests or information concerning existing land or environmental conditions; 
(g)  A statement of economic justification or a market analysis of proposed uses in the planned unit development; 
(h)  A proposed draft of covenants, conditions and regulations to assure proper maintenance and repair of, and to provide for maintaining adequate personnel to assure security of, all areas and facilities under common ownership, including, but not limited to, common area utilities, designated open areas, recreational facilities and drainage facilities, with provisions for the payment for such maintenance, repairs and security and enforceability thereof, by or on behalf of the Village. The proposed draft shall include, where appropriate, any proposed charter and/or bylaws of an association for owners or tenants within the planned unit development and/or a copy of any proposed condominium, townhouse, recreation or easement or other operating documents; 
(i)  A statement indicating the preliminary time schedule for development and construction of the entire project; 
(j)  A statement indicating the stages, if any, which will be followed in carrying out construction of the proposed planned unit development, and interim use and maintenance of areas not under construction at any given time; 
(k)  Evidence of the capability of the proposed developers to implement the general type of development proposed in the planned unit development documents; 
(l)  A written statement providing that the owners and developers agree to be bound by the covenants, conditions and regulations proposed by the applicant and further agree to register such agreements with the DuPage County Recorder of Deeds, which statement shall be signed by all owners of record and the applicants and filed with the Director, Department of Community Development, before any public hearing on the preliminary plan will be conducted by the Plan Commission; 
(C)  Approval of preliminary plan: 
1.  Upon receipt of the preliminary plan documents, as defined herein, the Director, Department of Community Development, shall make record thereof, and within three days thereafter, shall transmit said preliminary plan to a development committee consisting of the Director, Department of Community Development, who shall act as the Chairman of the Development Committee, the Building and Zoning Official, Director, Department of Public Works, the Chairman of the Plan Commission or his designee, and any other technical person or persons as may be invited by the Chairman of the Development Committee; 
2.  Within five days after receipt of a preliminary planned unit development, the Chairman of the Development Committee shall notify the members thereof and the applicant of the date, place and time of a meeting to review said preliminary plan for the purpose of determining compliance with the requirements of subsection (B) of this section. The meeting of the Development Committee shall be held no less than 15 days after mailing of the notice thereof; 
3.  Within 30 days after the meeting with the applicant, the Development Committee shall complete its review of the preliminary plan and shall prepare a written report noting any deficiencies of the application, which report shall be filed with the Village Clerk; 
4.  Upon completion of the report of the Development Committee, the Director, Department of Community Development, shall transmit the report and preliminary plan documents to the Chairman of the Plan Commission. The Plan Commission, at its next scheduled meeting, shall review the preliminary plan documents and written report of the Development Committee to determine whether all necessary information has been filed, as required by this Zoning Code. 
The Plan Commission shall give written notice to the applicant of any deficiencies in the preliminary plan documents and shall allow him such time as he may request within which to correct such deficiencies. A copy of such notice shall be filed with the Director, Department of Community Development. 
5.  The Plan Commission shall establish the time for and conduct a public hearing concerning the preliminary plan, after giving due notice as provided in section 10-10-11 of this chapter. Within 90 days following the conclusion of the public hearing, the Plan Commission shall make written findings concerning the evaluation factors set forth in section 10-7-7 of this title and make its recommendations to the Village Board for final action with reference to the preliminary plan. Further, since planned developments are special uses, no planned development shall be recommended by the Plan Commission unless the Plan Commission shall also make the findings in accordance with subsection 10-10-14(E) of this chapter; 
6.  The Village Board, after receipt of the preliminary plan of the planned unit development and the findings and written recommendations of the Plan Commission, may approve, with or without modification or conditions, disapprove, or disapprove with recommendations to the applicant, such planned unit development by ordinance. The Village Board may require such special conditions in the approval of the planned unit development as it may deem necessary to ensure conformity with the intent of all elements of the Comprehensive Plan and the stated purposes for planned developments. Planned unit developments shall be approved only by ordinance containing findings and setting forth the specific terms of relief, with reference to exhibits presented during the public hearing before the Plan Commission and made a part of the permanent records of the Plan Commission; 
7.  Approval of a preliminary plan of a planned unit development by ordinance of the Village Board shall not constitute approval of any final development plan, rather it shall be deemed an expression of approval of the layout submitted as a preliminary guide to the preparation of the final development plan. The planned unit development shall thereafter be developed essentially in accordance with any condition and exhibits presented as part of the preliminary plan documents and in accordance with the procedures established in this title. No building permit shall be issued for any building or structure in the planned unit development unless a final development plan has been approved and filed with the Recorder of Deeds. Neither a preliminary plan nor a final development plan shall be a substitute for a preliminary or final plat of subdivision as may be required by the Glen Ellyn Subdivision Regulations Ordinance; 
(D)  Final plan: 
1.  The final development plan or plans shall be filed with the Director, Department of Community Development, within six months after the passage and approval of an ordinance approving a preliminary plan, or within such extension thereof as may be granted by the Village Board. Failure to file the final plan within the prescribed time shall void approval of the preliminary plan. The final plan shall conform with the preliminary plan, including any conditions imposed by the Village Board; 
2.  The final development plan documents (final plan) shall include: 
(a)  Final architectural and engineering plans and specifications for all development, except plans for detached single-family homes; 
(b)  Plans and specifications for all utilities, roadway improvements and drainage, including by way of example and not limitation, all sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, water distribution lines, underground telephone, gas and electric lines, lot and block or site drainage, roads, roadways and walkways; 
(c)  If the development constitutes the subdivision of lands, as defined in the Subdivision Regulations Ordinance, then the final development plan shall include the final plat of subdivision meeting all Village subdivision regulations; 
(d)  An accurate legal description of each unsubdivided area, including any common open space or area to be dedicated as open space; 
(e)  A dimensioned plat drawn to scale and accurately locating all buildings to be constructed and designating the special uses to which each building or land area shall be put; 
(f)  Final version of the covenants by which the owner or developer proposes to regulate land and buildings, assure adequate maintenance and security and otherwise protect the proposed development, accompanied by the written representation and warranty of the owner, in form and substance satisfactory to the attorney for the Village, to the effect that said owner of the real property which is the subject of the proposed development will not sell or otherwise dispose of any interest in said property prior to the filing of record of said covenants in the office of the Recorder of Deeds in DuPage County, Illinois; 
(g)  Such deeds or easement agreements, if any, as are required or approved by the Village Board to convey a suitable ownership interest in any parcels within the proposed development which are to be subject to public ownership by the Village or other public body; 
(h)  Final construction schedule, stating the date scheduled for final completion of construction work on all buildings, structures, facilities and features within the proposed development; 
(E)  Approval of final plan: 
1.  A request for approval of a final plan shall be filed with the Director, Department of Community Development, at the same time as the filing of the final plan documents, with the request being in such form and containing such information as shall be established from time to time by the Plan Commission; 
2.  Upon receipt of a request for approval of a final plan, the Director, Department of Community Development, shall transmit the same to the Plan Commission prior to its next regularly scheduled meeting; 
3.  The Plan Commission shall review the final plan to determine whether all necessary information has been filed as required by this title and shall, within 60 days of receipt of a complete set of the final plan documents, make its findings and recommendations to the Village Board. If the Plan Commission finds that the final plan documents contain substantial deviations from the approved preliminary plan, then the Plan Commission may recommend to the Village Board that the applicant resubmit a revised preliminary plan in accordance with subsection (B) of this section; 
4.  The Village Board, after receipt of the findings and recommendations of the Plan Commission concerning a final plan shall approve, with or without modifications or conditions, disapprove or disapprove with recommendations to the applicant, the final plan, pursuant to the standards set forth in subsection (D) of this section; 
5.  The final plan, as approved by the Village Board, shall constitute the final land use and zoning plat and shall be filed with the DuPage County Recorder of Deeds. No permit allowing construction of a building or any other improvements shall be issued until the final plan is recorded. All recording costs shall be paid by the applicant. No building permit, zoning certificate or occupancy certificates shall be issued for any building or use that is not in accordance with an approved final plan for any property affected by an approved final plan; 
6.  The Village may require as a condition of the issuance of a building permit that the applicant file a surety bond or letter of credit or escrow a cash deposit to insure the completion of the project as approved within the period specified. Such bond, letter of credit or escrow agreement shall be deposited in the manner provided by section 11- 5-2 of this Code; 
7.  Any application for a planned unit development which has been denied wholly or in part by the Village Board shall not be resubmitted for a period of one year from the date of said order of denial, except on the grounds of new evidence or proof of change of conditions found to be valid by the Plan Commission or unless the final plan was disapproved with recommendations to the applicant and the newly submitted final plan conforms to said recommendations; 
(F)  Changes after approval of final plan: 
1.  After approval of the final plan, any requested change in or deviation from the final plan shall be reviewed in the same manner as a new planned unit development, with the exception of the requirement for a preapplication meeting. The Community Development Director may at his or her discretion allow the proposed amendments to the preliminary and final planned unit developments plans to be reviewed simultaneously. The applicant shall be required to advise the Director of Community Development of the existence and address of any property owners' association related to the subject property, and shall provide proof that such property owners' association was given notice in advance of any proposed changes or deviations to the approved final plan and of the procedure to be followed with respect to such proposed changes or deviations; 
2.  In the case of a residential planned unit development where five years after the date of the Village Board ordinance approving the final plan have elapsed and where in excess of 80 percent of the single-family home lots have been developed in the entire planned unit development or in an identified phase thereof, all requested variations to bulk regulations applicable to single-family residential lots shall be addressed by the Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with the procedures established for variations in this title. 
(Ord. 3617, 5-8-1989, eff. 6-1-1989; amd. Ord. 3953, 9-28-1992; Ord. 5543, 1-22-2007; Ord. 6015, 3-26-2012; Ord. 6520, 7-24-2017; Ord. 6601, 5-14-2018; Ord. 6674, 2-25-2019) 
10-10-16. - Termination of special uses, variations, map amendments and planned unit developments. 
(A)  An approval pursuant to the provisions of this title of a variation, special use or special use for planned unit development shall become null and void should a building permit to begin construction not be applied for within 24 months of the approval by ordinance, unless this time limit is expressly extended by the Village Board by ordinance in accordance with subsection (D) of this section. 
(B)  A project pursuant to an approved map amendment, variation, special use or special use for planned unit development, called the proposal, shall be subject to the following construction requirements: 
1.  Construction must begin within 24 months of the approval by ordinance or in accordance with an approved construction schedule; 
2.  Construction must be continuous and may not be discontinued for a period of 180 days or more; 
3.  The approved use must occupy the site within 180 days of the date of approval or 120 days post completion of construction, whichever is later. 
These time limitations may be extended in accordance with subsection (D) of this section. 
(C)  In any case in which any of the conditions listed in subsection (B) of this section have occurred, the body (Plan Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals) which made the original recommendation regarding the proposal may initiate a public hearing after due notice in accordance with section 10-10-11 of this chapter has been given and written notice sent to the applicant at the address contained in the application to consider the following actions: 
1.  Granting a further extension of the proposal; 
2.  Modifying the proposal; 
3.  Terminating the proposal and requiring the developer to remove associated structures; or 
4.  In the case of a map amendment, rezoning the property. 
The findings and recommendations of the reviewing body shall be forwarded to the Village Board for their consideration and final action. 
(D)  Upon the request of the applicant, the Community Development Director shall have the authority to grant one 12-month extension of a previously approved Zoning Code variation, special use permit or special use permit for a planned unit development based upon the review and approval of appropriate justification submitted by the applicant. The Community Development Director shall have no obligation to grant any such extension and may at his or her discretion forward the request to the Village Board for consideration and action. Any subsequent requests for extensions shall be acted on by the Village Board by ordinance. 
(Ord. 5887, 9-13-2010; Ord. 6674, 2-25-2019) 
10-10-17. - Fees. 
(A)  Fees: The fee schedule for all administrative procedures and applications for benefits or relief under this title shall be as established by the Village Board. 
Note: In those situations when single-family residential petitions require both a zoning variation and a special use, the petitioners will be charged only the higher of the two fees. 
(B)  Deposits: Each application for a planned unit development, commercial special use, commercial variation, subdivision, and any development project larger than five acres made by the owner of the property or his authorized representative to the Director of the Community Development Department shall include an agreement to reimburse the Village for out of pocket costs associated with this development. These out of pocket costs will cover services provided by the Village's consulting engineer, consulting attorney, consulting planner, appraiser and transcriber, as well as reproduction costs, recording costs, etc. 
The agreement shall be accompanied by an initial deposit in an amount to be determined by the Community Development Director but no less than $1,000.00. The Village will provide an itemized list of Village expenses related to this development, and the applicant will deposit funds to reimburse the Village for those expenses on a monthly basis. If the expenses are not reimbursed, then reviews associated with out of pocket costs will cease, and the application will not be moved forward through the review process. At the completion of the review process, and following development of the project, if appropriate, any remaining balance from the deposit will be returned to the petitioner, without interest, after all expenses have been paid. 
(Ord. 3617, 5-8-1989, eff. 6-1-1989; amd. Ord. 4094, 2-28-1994; Ord. 4342, 1-22-1996; Ord. 4425, 10-14-1996; Ord. 6674, 2-25-2019) 
10-10-18. - Enforcement and penalties; general. 
(A)  Any person, persons, firm or corporation or anyone acting in behalf of said person, persons, firm or corporation, who violates the terms of this title shall be guilty of a petty offense punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00 for each week the violation remains uncorrected with each week or part thereof constituting a separate offense. The imposition of any sentence shall not exempt the offender from compliance with the requirements of this title; 
(B)  In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any building, structure or land is used in violation of this title, the proper authorities of the Village or any person whose property value or use is or may be affected by such violation may, in addition to other remedies, institute an appropriate action or proceeding in equity to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use, to restrain, correct or abate such violation, to prevent the occupancy of said building, structure or land or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about the premises, and such violation shall subject the owners or party in interest to the penalties set forth within the ordinances of the Village including, but not limited to, those set forth in this subsection and subsection (A) of this section and such other enforcement powers as the Village shall possess by law or by ordinance. 
(Ord. 3617, 5-8-1989, eff. 6-1-1989; amd. Ord. 4425, 10-14-1996) 
10-10-19. - Adoption clause; effective date. 
The zoning ordinances of the Village are hereby revised and amended in their entirety, effective June 1, 1989, by the substitution in lieu thereof of this title to be known as the Glen Ellyn Zoning Code, passed and approved by the corporate authorities of the Village on May 8, 1989, as Ordinance 3617. 
(Ord. 3617, 5-8-1989, eff. 6-1-1989) 
Chapter 11 - ILLUSTRATIONS 

10-11-1. - Overview. 
The illustrations contained in this chapter are provided solely to clarify the intent of textual provisions and are not to be considered a part of this title for purpose of construction, interpretation or otherwise. 
(Ord. 3617, 5-8-1989, eff. 6-1-1989) 
10-11-2. - Figures. 
FIGURE 1 
EXAMPLE OF LOT TYPES 

FIGURE 2 
LOT WIDTH AND DEPTH EXPLAINED 

X = Minimum allowed front yard setback in zoning district. 
Y = Lot width - Distance between side lot lines measured at the minimum front yard setback line 
FIGURE 3 
REQUIRED YARDS 

FIGURE 4 
BUILDING (PRINCIPAL AND ACCESSORY) 

FIGURE 5 
BUILDING HEIGHT 

FIGURE 6 
FLOOR AREA RATIO (ILLUSTRATED) 

FIGURE 7 
STANDARD TREE AND SHRUB 

FIGURE 8 
SCREENING 

FIGURE 9 
SCREENING (Continued) 

FIGURE 10 
AREA OF COMPARISON (SAMPLE) 

FIGURE 11 
CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT C5A OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICT 

FIGURE 12 
SETBACK 

FIGURE 13 
DORMERS 

Dormers with eaves located above the maximum permitted eave height may be constructed provided the following criteria are met: 
1.  No dormer is greater than eight feet in width from outside of wall to outside of wall. 
2.  The space between dormer walls located on the same roof side must be a minimum of five feet. 
3.  The total width of all dormers located on any roof shall not exceed 25 percent of the length of the building on that same side. 
Example: 
If side B in the diagram above were 60 feet wide, a total of 15 feet of dormers (60 feet x 25% = 15 feet) could be located anywhere within the side B roof areas, provided they meet the criteria 1-3 above. 


FIGURE 15 
REQUIRED REAR YARD 

(Ord. 3617, 5-8-1989, eff. 6-1-1989; amd. Ord. 6208, 1-13-2014; Ord. 6601, 5-14-2018) 
Chapter 12 - REAL ESTATE INTERESTS, DISCLOSURE 

10-12-1. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
AGENT: A person authorized to act for another person or corporation. 
APPLICANT: One who applies for any benefits on behalf of himself or some other entity. 
BENEFICIAL INTEREST: Any interest in a land trust. 
BENEFICIARY: Any person, corporation or other entity having a beneficial interest in a land trust. 
CORPORATION: A body of persons authorized by law to act together as a single person, and, for the purpose of this chapter, includes any association, joint stock company, syndicate or partnership. 
LAND TRUST: An express agreement whereby the legal and equitable title to real estate is held by a trustee for the benefit of beneficiaries who have the exclusive right to manage and control said real estate. 
LESSEE: One designated to act for another, with limited authority. 
OPTION HOLDER: One having the right to purchase real estate upon compliance with conditions named in a contract. 
STOCKHOLDER: One owning certificates of stock in a corporation or membership in an association, joint stock company, syndicate or partnership. 
(Ord. 1831, 10-17-1973; amd. Ord. 6086, 11-13-2012) 
10-12-2. - Applications. 
Any application to the Village Board of Trustees or Village Boards and Commissions for authorization, benefit, license, permit, variation, zoning amendment or planned unit development relating to real estate shall be signed by the owner, lessee, option holder, agent or nominee of either. 
(A)  If the application is made by a person other than the fee owner, it shall be accompanied by an affidavit of the owner that the person signing the application has authority to make the application; and the application shall disclose the full names, addresses and telephone numbers of the applicant and owner. 
(B)  If the applicant or the owner is a corporation, the application shall disclose the names and addresses of the officers, directors, registered agent, and those shareholders or members owning in excess of five percent of the outstanding stock or interest in the corporation. 
(C)  If the applicant is a trustee, the full name, address, telephone number, and the extent of the interest of each beneficiary must be disclosed. 
(D)  If the applicant is a beneficiary, nominee, or option holder, the application must disclose the name, address and telephone number of those persons or entities for whom he is acting, and if it is a corporation, the provisions of subsection (B) of this section shall be complied with. 
(Ord. 1831, 10-17-1973; amd. Ord. 6086, 11-13-2012) 
10-12-3. - Penalty. 
Any person making a false or incomplete statement in the application shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine of $500.00. 
After a statement is determined to be falsified, missing or incorrect, a written notice of the omission or falsification shall be sent to the applicant; each day that elapses until the date the required information is furnished or corrected shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. 1831, 10-17-1973; amd. Ord. 6086, 11-13-2012) 
Chapter 13 - ANNEXATION 

10-13-1. - Extended term of annexation agreements. 
Where the Village has entered into an annexation agreement, it may provide in such agreement that, at its option or by mutual agreement, it may extend the term thereof for a period up to an additional 20 years. The term of the annexation agreement may be extended whether or not the land has been annexed to the Village during the prior term. 
The Village Board may, but is not required to, hold a public hearing before the corporate authorities prior to exercising this option. During the term of any extended annexation agreement, it may be amended in the same manner as amendments may be made to an annexation agreement within its initial term. In order for the Village, by its option, to initiate the extension of the term of an annexation agreement, the agreement must have provided for such extension. 
The method of notice by which the owner of the property shall be informed of the exercise by the Village of its option shall be in accordance with the terms of the annexation agreement; or if the agreement is silent as to a method, the Village may exercise its option by notifying the owner in writing not more than two years nor less than three months before the termination of the agreement. The Village may elect to exercise its option with regard to all of the property previously covered under the annexation agreement or only a portion thereof. If the extension requires the approval of all parties, that approval shall be procured before the extended term may commence. 
To the extent that an annexation agreement shall contain certain covenants of the owners which, by the terms of the annexation agreement survived its term, they shall continue in effect during the period of the extended annexation agreement and thereafter. The Village may only exercise its option for a single extension of an annexation agreement; but the Village and the then owner of property which was not annexed during the term of an annexation agreement may, in the manner provided for by law for the entering into an annexation agreement, agree that the property shall be bound by a newly negotiated and executed annexation agreement. All extended annexation agreements may also be referred to as development agreements. 
(Ord. 5091, 9-9-2002; amd. Ord. 6086, 11-13-2012) 
TITLE 11 - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS CODE 
Chapter 1 - JURISDICTION AND PURPOSES 

11-1-1. - Short title. 
This title shall be known and cited as the Glen Ellyn Subdivision Regulations Code. 
(Ord. 6086, 11-13-2012) 
11-1-2. - Jurisdiction and applicability of this title. 
Each subdivision accepted by the Village is or may become a permanent part of the physical structure of the Village of Glen Ellyn. In order to ensure the maintenance of existing and future standards respecting the subdivision of land, all subdivisions hereafter planned, including any maps, plats, or subdivisions of any block, lot, sublot, or part thereof, shall be submitted to the Village for its approval. The Village shall have jurisdiction over all property within its corporate limits and unincorporated territory within one and one-half miles of the Village boundaries. 
No person shall subdivide any tract of land or plat any street or otherwise improve any tract of land or right-of-way even if such improvement does not entail the subdivision or platting of land within the Village or in any unincorporated area which is located entirely or in part within one and one-half miles of the nearest limits of the Village, except in conformity with the provisions of this title. The plans and plats for all such proposed improvements to be installed, and all procedures relating thereto, shall, in all respects, be in full compliance with any regulations herein. Acceptance by the Village of any improvements made on public property shall be based on the conformity of such improvements with the provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 5334, 2-28-2005) 
11-1-3. - Policy. 
(A)  In order to provide for the orderly, planned, efficient, and economical development of the Village, it is declared to be the policy of the Village to regulate the subdivision of land and its subsequent development pursuant to the Village's official plan. 
(B)  Land to be subdivided shall be of such character that it can be used safely for building purposes, and shall conform to reasonable standards from time to time adopted by the Village relating to standards for the design of subdivisions including reasonable requirements governing the location, width, course and surfacing of public streets and highways, alleys, ways for public service facilities, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, streetlights, parks, playgrounds, school grounds, size of lots to be used for residential purposes, stormwater drainage, water supply and distribution, sanitary sewers and sewage collection and treatment. 
(C)  Existing and proposed public improvements shall conform and be properly related to the standards reflected in the official map and the official plan. 
(D)  Land subdivided prior to the effective date hereof should, whenever possible, be in compliance with the standards for subdivisions established by the Village. 
(Ord. 5334, 2-28-2005) 
11-1-4. - Purposes. 
The standards established by this title are designed: 
(A)  To ensure that the Village exercises proper authority and oversight in conjunction with the subdivision of land; 
(B)  To ensure that sufficient arrangements are made for adequate public facilities and services and that the Village will not be required to bear more than its fair share of the expense of providing public facilities and services by requiring developers to provide sufficient resources through fees, dedication of land, or similar measures to ensure the provision of capital facilities required to serve the properties created by the development; 
(C)  To guide future growth and development of the Village in accordance with the official plan; 
(D)  To supplement and facilitate enforcement of the building and zoning ordinances of the Village; 
(E)  To protect the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the Village and of developments approved in unincorporated territories within the Village's planning area; 
(F)  To protect the character and the social and economic stability of all parts of the Village and to encourage the orderly and beneficial development of all parts of the Village; 
(G)  To protect and conserve the value of land throughout the Village and the value of the buildings and improvements upon the land, and to minimize conflicts among the uses of land and buildings; 
(H)  To guide public and private policy and action in order to provide adequate and efficient transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, playgrounds, recreation and other public requirements and facilities; 
(I)  To provide a beneficial relationship between the uses of land and buildings and the circulation of traffic throughout the Village, specifically to avoid congestion on streets and highways, and provide for pedestrian traffic movement appropriate to the various uses of land and buildings, and provide for the proper location and width of streets and building lines; 
(J)  To establish reasonable standards of design and procedures for subdivisions and resubdivisions, in order to further the orderly layout and use of land; 
(K)  To ensure proper legal descriptions and monumenting of subdivided land; 
(L)  To prevent pollution of air, streams and ponds, assure the adequacy of drainage facilities, safeguard the water table and encourage wise use and management of natural resources in order to preserve the integrity, stability and beauty of the community; 
(M)  To preserve the natural beauty and topography of the Village and to ensure appropriate development in regard to these natural features; 
(N)  To provide for open spaces through the most efficient design layout of the land; and 
(O)  To remedy the problems associated with inappropriately or illegally subdivided lands. 
(Ord. 5334, 2-28-2005) 
Chapter 2 - RULES AND DEFINITIONS 

11-2-1. - Rules. 
The language set forth in the text of this title shall be interpreted in accordance with the following rules on construction: 
(A)  The singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular; 
(B)  The word "shall" is mandatory while the word "may" is permissive; 
(C)  The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter; 
(D)  The present tense includes the past and future tenses and the future the present; and 
(E)  Whenever a word or term defined hereinafter appears in the text of this title, its meaning shall be construed as set forth in the definition thereof, and any word appearing in parenthesis directly after a word herein defined shall be construed in the same sense as that word. 
(Ord. 5334, 2-28-2005) 
11-2-2. - Definitions. 
The following words and terms, whenever they occur in this title, shall be construed as herein defined: 
ADEQUATE PUBLIC FACILITIES: Facilities determined, by the Village, to be capable of supporting and servicing the physical area and density of the proposed subdivision. 
APPLICANT: A person or entity, either the owner or owners of the subject property or having the express consent of the owner, who files an application with the Village seeking the approval of a subdivision. 
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. The base flood is also known as the 100-year flood. 
BLOCK: Any tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, shorelines of waterways or boundary lines of municipalities. 
BUILDING: Any structure designed or intended for the support, enclosure, shelter or protection of persons, animals, or property. 
BUILDING AND ZONING OFFICIAL: An individual appointed to the office of Building and Zoning Official by the Village or his or her duly authorized representative. 
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT: A public facility with a life expectancy of three or more years owned and operated by or on behalf of the Village. 
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PLAN: A plan adopted by the Village providing for the design, construction and maintenance of capital improvements. 
CONSTRUCTION PLAN: A plan, or set of plans, consisting of maps, drawings and specifications calling for the location and design of improvements to be constructed in a subdivision. 
DENSITY: A unit of measurement reflecting the number of dwelling units per acre, or other designated area of land. 
DEVELOPER: The owner, or person authorized by the owner, presenting an application for the approval of a subdivision. 
DIRECTOR OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT: An individual appointed to the office of Community Development Director by the Village or his or her duly authorized representative. 
EASEMENT: A grant of right for the use of a designated portion of a parcel of property, for a specific purpose to one or more designated parties, such as public utilities or to the public, in general. 
ESCROW: An arrangement to provide for the deposit of property to be held as security to insure satisfaction of a condition or set of conditions for the Village's approval of a project. 
FINAL PLAT: A map or plan of a subdivision and any accompanying material as described in section 11-3-5 of this title which has been approved by the Village and complies with the laws of the state of Illinois so as to qualify for recording with the County Recorder of Deeds. 
FLOODPLAIN: The area typically adjacent to and including a body of water where ground surface elevations are at or below a specified flood elevation. 
FLOODWAY: The channel of a watercourse and that portion of the floodplain adjacent to a stream or watercourse that is needed to convey the base (100-year) flood with no increase to exceed one-tenth foot in the base flood elevation. 
GRADE: The slope of a road, street, or other public way, specified in percent gradient. 
IMPROVEMENTS: See definition of Lot Improvement or Public Improvement. 
LAND TRANSFER: The transfer of land between adjacent lots or parcels where no new lot or parcel is created. 
LICENSED ILLINOIS LAND SURVEYOR: A person holding a current license to provide survey services in the state of Illinois. 
LICENSED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER: A person holding a current license to provide engineering services in the state of Illinois. 
LOT: An individual portion of land separated from other parcels on a preliminary, final or recorded plat intended as a unit for transfer of ownership or for building development. 
LOT CONSOLIDATION: The consolidation of multiple lots or parcels into one lot of record. 
LOT, CORNER: A lot situated at the intersection of two or more streets. A lot abutting on a curved street shall be considered a corner lot if straight lines projected tangent to the curve from the points of intersection between the curve and the lot lines meet at an interior angle of less than 135 degrees. 
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE: A lot, also referred to as a "through lot", having a pair of opposite lot lines along two substantially, parallel improved public rights-of-way. 
LOT, FLAG: An irregularly shaped lot, also referred to as a "rear lot" or "panhandle lot" characterized as a lot with minimal frontage on the public right-of-way, a nonconforming lot width measured at the minimum required front yard setback, and where a majority of the area of the lot is situated behind one or more lots fronting the public right-of-way. 
LOT IMPROVEMENT: Any building, structure, work of art, or other object, or improvement on the land which it is situated constituting a physical betterment of real property, or any part of such betterment. 
LOT, OUT LOT: A platted lot that is unbuildable and held in common ownership by a property owners' association or which is transferred to a public agency or utility. 
MAJOR SUBDIVISION: See definition of Subdivision. 
MINOR SUBDIVISION: See definition of Subdivision. 
MULTIUSE PATH: An off street trail or pathway designed for use by more than one mode of transportation, such as: walking, jogging, horseback riding, bicycling, and rollerblading. 
NONRESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISION: See definition of Subdivision. 
OFFICIAL MAP: The map established by the Village pursuant to law showing the streets, highways and parks and adopted and established by law, and any amendments or additions thereto adopted by the Village Board. 
OFFICIAL PLAN: The composite of the functional and geographic elements of the comprehensive Village plan, or any segment thereof, in the form of plans, maps, charts and textual material, as adopted by the Village. 
100-YEAR FLOOD: A flood magnitude with a one percent statistical chance of being equaled or exceeded during any year. The occurrence of such an event does not diminish the chance of its recurring again at any time. 
OWNER: Any person, legal entity having merchantable title to a parcel of property. 
PARKWAY: An unpaved strip of land situated within the street right-of-way. 
PEDESTRIANWAY: A right-of-way across or within a block for use by pedestrian traffic. 
PERFORMANCE SECURITY: Any form of security including an escrow account of instrument or credit in an amount and form satisfactory to the Village. 
PERSON: Any individual or group of individuals, or any corporation general or limited partnership, joint venture, unincorporated association, governmental or quasi-governmental entity. 
PLAN COMMISSION: A Zoning Commission established by the Village pursuant to the authority of section 11-13-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code, as from time to time amended, and designated as "the Glen Ellyn Plan Commission". 
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: One or more uses accommodated in a planned environment under more flexible standards than those allowed in the zoning district in which the development is located. 
POLICE POWER: Inherent, delegated, or authorized legislative power for purposes of regulation to secure health, safety and general welfare. 
PRELIMINARY PLAT: The preliminary drawing(s) or plan described in this title indicating the manner or layout of the proposed subdivision. 
PUBLIC FACILITY: Facilities such as schools, libraries, parks, and other similar facilities, which serve the public and are owned, operated and maintained by a unit of government. 
PUBLIC HEARING: An adjudicatory proceeding held by the Plan Commission preceded by published notice to the public as required herein and where the applicant and public may attend, call witnesses and introduce evidence for the purpose of demonstrating that plat approval should or should not be granted or raise general questions or concerns about the proposed subdivision. 
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT: Any sanitary sewer, storm sewer, drainage ditch, water main, roadway, parkway, sidewalk, pedestrianway, streetlights, planting strip or other facility for which the Village may ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and operation or which may affect an improvement for which the Village is responsible. 
RESUBDIVISION: A change of an approved or recorded subdivision plat if such change affects any street layout or area reserved thereon for public use, or any lot line, or if it affects any plat legally recorded prior to the adoption of any regulations controlling subdivisions. A resubdivision includes lot consolidations and will result in the recording of a new plat of subdivision. 
RIGHT-OF-WAY: A strip of land dedicated for use as a public way, and which may be occupied by a street, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, parkway trees, light poles, sidewalks, drainage facilities or other similar uses. The right-of-way is separate and distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining such right-of-way and not included within the dimension or areas of such lots or parcels. 
ROAD AND/OR ROADWAY: The portion of the right-of-way intended for vehicular traffic. 
SIDEWALK: That portion of a street or pedestrianway, generally located in the right-of-way, paved or otherwise surfaced, and intended for pedestrian use only. 
SKETCH PLAN: A preliminary and dimensioned plan showing a proposed subdivision of land and public improvements intended for review at a preapplication meeting with Plan Commission. 
STORMWATER ORDINANCE: The DuPage County Countywide Stormwater and Floodplain Ordinance as adopted and, from time to time, amended by the Village. 
STREET: A right-of-way as specified in the official plan of the Village of Glen Ellyn, which affords primary means of access by pedestrians and vehicles to abutting properties, whether designated as a street, avenue, highway, road, boulevard, lane, court, or however otherwise designated. 
(A)  Alley: A public or private right-of-way primarily designed to serve as secondary access to the side or rear of those properties whose principal frontage is on some other street. 
(B)  Arterial: A street with a high degree of continuity and serving as a trafficway between the various districts within the Village and connecting with major state and interstate roadways and other arterials. 
Local Arterial Street: A street that provides for the handling of local traffic over extended distances as specified in the Village's official plan. 
Regional Arterial Street: A street that provides a link in the regional transportation system for both through and local traffic as specified in the Village's official plan. 
Village Arterial Street: A primarily residential street intended to connect different parts of the community as specified in the Village's official plan. 
(C)  Collector Street: A street, which carries traffic from local streets to an arterial street. 
Community Collector Street: A street intended to connect different activity areas in the Village as specified in the Village's official plan. 
Neighborhood Collector Street: A street intended to service vehicle trips generated to and from the neighborhood it serves and which distributes traffic to other streets as specified in the Village's official plan. 
(D)  Cul-De-Sac: A local street with only one outlet that terminates in a vehicular turnaround having an appropriate terminal for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement. 
(E)  Dead End Street: A road or portion of a road having only one vehicular outlet. 
(F)  Expressway: A divided high volume street for through traffic and having limited access with a grade separated intersection as specified in the Village's official plan. 
(G)  Half Street: A street bordering one or more property lines of a tract of land in which the applicant has allocated less than the full required right-of-way width. 
(H)  Local Street: A street of limited continuity used primarily for access to abutting properties and local needs of a neighborhood. 
(I)  Marginal Access Street: A local street which is parallel to and adjacent to an arterial street, and which provides access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. 
STREET, PRIVATE: A street that is owned and maintained by one or more property owners, or an association, or other entity other than the Village. 
STREET, PUBLIC: A public dedicated way for vehicular traffic. 
STREET WIDTH: The shortest distance between the property lines delineating a street. 
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. Among other things, structures include buildings, walls, fences and signs. 
SUBDIVIDER: Any person who, having an interest in land, causes it, directly or indirectly, to be subdivided into a subdivision. 
SUBDIVISION: A described tract of land, which is to be or has been divided into two or more lots or parcels. 
Major Subdivision: All subdivisions not classified as minor subdivisions, two-lot subdivisions, land transfers or lot consolidations including, but not limited to, subdivisions resulting in the creation of five or more lots. 
Minor Subdivision: Any subdivision resulting in the creation of three or four lots, or a subdivision resulting in the creation of two lots in which one or both of the proposed lots or associated public improvements will not conform to standards established by the Village's zoning ordinance and/or subdivision regulations. 
Nonresidential Subdivision: A subdivision whose intended use is other than residential. 
Resubdivision: The term subdivision includes the resubdivision of land previously subdivided. 
Two-Lot Subdivision: The division of a lot or lots of record into two lots, which conform to all requirements of the Village's zoning ordinance and this title. 
(A)  Exception: For the purpose of this title, a subdivision shall not include the division of a parcel of land into two or more lots or parcels, all of which resultant parcels exceed five acres and that no new street is sought thereby to be dedicated or is contemplated or projected through said lands. 
SUBDIVISION PLAT: The map or drawing described in these regulations on which the subdivider's plan of subdivision is presented and which conforms to the standards established by the Illinois plat act, as amended from time to time. 
TRACT: Used interchangeably with the term "lot", particularly in the context of a subdivision, where a "tract" is subdivided into several lots, parcels, sites, units, plots, condominiums, tracts, or interest. 
VILLAGE: The Village of Glen Ellyn, Illinois. 
VILLAGE BOARD: The President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Glen Ellyn, Illinois. 
VILLAGE CLERK: An individual appointed to the office of Village Clerk by the Village or his or her duly authorized representative. 
VILLAGE CODE: The Village code of the Village of Glen Ellyn, also known as the Glen Ellyn municipal code. 
VILLAGE ENGINEER: An individual appointed to the office of Village Engineer by the Village or his or her duly authorized representative. 
WETLANDS: Areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated conditions. 
ZONING ORDINANCE: The zoning ordinance adopted and from time to time amended by the Village. 
In addition to the above definitions, further explanations may be found in other applicable titles of this Code. 
(Ord. 5334, 2-28-2005; Ord. 6674, 2-25-2019) 
Chapter 3 - SUBDIVISION PROCEDURE 

11-3-1. - Initial plat investigation. 
Before subdividing any tract or parcel of land within the corporate limits of the Village or the unincorporated territory within one and one-half miles of the Village limits, an owner, or subdivider shall submit the appropriate application as set forth in this chapter and the ordinances of the Village. 
(Ord. 5334, 2-28-2005; Ord. 6674, 2-25-2019) 
11-3-2. - Preapplication meeting encouraged. 
It is recommended that the subdivider of a major or minor subdivision meet with the Plan Commission for advice and assistance before submitting for official filing of a preliminary plat in the case of a major subdivision or a final plat in the case of a minor subdivision. This step does not require formal application, or filing of a plat with the Village but shall include submission and review by the Plan Commission of: 
(A)  Ownership information for the subject property; 
(B)  A narrative statement including information about the proposed use of the lots, the type and number of dwelling units and/or type of business and industry, how the lots would be served by public utilities and the stormwater management plan; 
(C)  An accurate plat of survey showing existing buildings, streets and natural features; 
(D)  A dimensioned preliminary sketch plan; and 
(E)  A preapplication fee as set forth in section 4-1-4 of this Code. 
Before appearing before the Plan Commission for a preapplication meeting, the subdivider shall schedule an appointment and meet with the Director of Community Development to discuss the procedure for review of a subdivision plat and the requirements as to general layout of streets and for reservation or land, street improvements, drainage, sewerage, fire protection, and similar matters, as well as the availability of existing services, including schools. 
(Ord. 5334, 2-28-2005; Ord. 6674, 2-25-2019) 
11-3-3. - Fees. 
(A)  Fee schedule: The fee schedule for all applications sought under this title is as set forth in section 4-1-4 of this Code. 
(B)  Escrow deposit: The subdivider shall deposit cash for an escrow account in an amount to be determined by the Director of Community Development to cover Village out of pocket expenses including all costs directly attributable to recording testimony of all witnesses at public hearings, reproduction costs, public notice mailing costs, newspaper publication charges and all expenses for professional consultants including, but not limited to, attorneys, engineers, traffic engineers, planners, wetland consultants or other professionals outside the employee staff. 
(C)  Recapture agreement collection fee: In the event the subdivision is required to install public improvements as a condition precedent to approval of that subdivision and when those improvements, in the opinion of the Village Board, can be used for the benefit of property not contained in that subdivision, then the Village may agree to enter into a contract with the subdivider pursuant to the provision of the Illinois Compiled Statutes to be reimbursed for a portion of those costs. The recapture agreement, which must be approved by the Village Board, shall specify those properties receiving benefit from the public improvements and the proportionate fees. The recapture agreement shall be recorded. The Village shall only be required to turn over to the subdivider such funds as are actually received. In the event that there is a contest of the recapture agreement, it shall be the obligation of the subdivider to defend the agreement, including the Village and its officers and employees. The Village and its officers and employees may cause the use of the subdivision improvement by others with no fee or a reduced fee if the parties seeking to be the beneficiary of the recapture agreement do not adequately protect the interests of the Village and other named parties. The Village may require a cash deposit from the subdivider to secure the payment of any fees or charges incurred by the Village if it should choose to support the recapture agreement. 
(D)  Inspection fees: Inspection fees for required public improvements shall be paid prior to initiation of construction on the improvements. 
(E)  Building permits: No building permits shall be issued until all such fees are paid. All improvements made under this title shall be maintained at the subdivider's expense until dedicated and accepted by the Village. 
(Ord. 5334, 2-28-2005; Ord. 6674, 2-25-2019) 
11-3-4. - Preliminary plat. 
A subdivider requesting approval of a major subdivision shall submit an application for preliminary plat approval as set forth below. 
(A)  Submission requirements: A total of six collated copies of the following materials shall be submitted to the Community Development Director with an application for approval of a preliminary plat of subdivision: 
1.  Application: Application for preliminary subdivision approval; 
2.  Topography and elevation: There shall be submitted simultaneously with the preliminary subdivision plat a study or studies which shall show topography and the elevations as a part of any phase of subdividing; 
3.  Narrative statement: A narrative statement including, but not limited to, information concerning the proposed use of the lots, the type and number of dwelling units and/or type of business or industry and the manner in which subdivision is to be served by public utilities; 
4.  Prints: Prints of a preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision. The preliminary plat, shall show the following: 
(a)  Identification and description: 
(1)  Proposed name of the subdivision; 
(2)  Location by township, section, town and range, or by other legal description; 
(3)  Names and addresses of the owners, the developer, and the surveyor who made the plat, and the title under which the proposed subdivision is to be recorded; 
(4)  Scale of plat, not smaller than one inch equals 100 feet; 
(5)  Date; and 
(6)  North point. 
(b)  Delineation of existing conditions: 
(1)  Boundary line of proposed subdivision indicated by a solid heavy line and a notation of the approximate total acreage encompassed thereby; 
(2)  Location, widths, and names of all existing streets or other public ways, railroad and utility rights-of-way, easements, parks and other public lands, permanent buildings and structures, and section lines and municipal boundaries within and adjacent to the tract for a distance of not less than 100 feet; 
(3)  Locations of existing sewers, water mains, culverts, and other underground facilities within the tract and to a distance of 100 feet beyond the tract, and invert grade elevations of catch basins, manholes and culverts; 
(4)  Boundary lines of adjacent properties for a distance of not less than 100 feet from the proposed subdivision. Ownership of these properties shall be shown; 
(5)  Existing zoning districts of the proposed subdivision and adjacent tracts; 
(6)  Topographic data, including existing contours at vertical intervals of not more than two feet, except in unusual topographical conditions; such vertical intervals may be required to be altered as determined by the Village Engineer. Topographic data shall refer to the national geodetic vertical datum. The location of watercourses, marshes, and other significant features shall be depicted. Soil boring data and seepage tests may be required at locations and depths as determined by the Village Engineer; 
(7)  Locations of or reference to locations of existing monuments or survey markers used in preparation of survey and grade elevation of each monument marker; 
(8)  Ownership of contiguous properties; 
(9)  The location of wells, septic fields and field tiles; 
(10)  A tree preservation plan identifying all trees with a ten-inch or greater diameter breast height and any significant trees including hickory, oak or walnut species with a five-inch or greater diameter breast height within and adjacent to the tract for a distance of not less than 50 feet; 
(11)  The location of any brush lines, wetlands, watercourses, historic sites and any other similar site features and irreplaceable assets; and 
(12)  The location of all structures adjacent to the proposed subdivision for a distance of not less than 100 feet. 
(c)  Delineation of proposed conditions: 
(1)  Street system, including location and width of proposed streets or public ways, right-of-way widths and street names with proposed through streets shown extended to the boundaries of subdivision; 
(2)  Location and width of alleys, pedestrianways, and utility easements; 
(3)  Layout of blocks and lots, and numbering of all such blocks and lots by progressive numbers and dimensions of such blocks and lots, scaled to the nearest foot; 
(4)  Building and setback lines indicating dimensions; 
(5)  The proposed zoning district for the subdivision upon annexation to the Village; 
(6)  Areas intended to be dedicated or reserved for community facilities, open space, common open area, parks, playgrounds, or other private or public reservation, indicating in each the square footage and dimensions. Such areas shall be designated by letter or number; 
(7)  Source of domestic water supply, type of sanitary sewerage disposal, and proposed location of sanitary sewers; and 
(8)  Stormwater management plan and stormwater permit application in accordance with the DuPage County Countywide Stormwater and Floodplain Ordinance as adopted and amended by the Village including storm drains, overland flow routes, and mitigation plans for impacts to special management areas, such as floodplains, wetlands and riparian areas; 
5.  Key map: A print of the appropriate tax map or its equivalent at a scale not smaller than one inch equals 1,200 feet with the boundaries of the proposed subdivision indicated thereon shall accompany the preliminary plat. Where the proposed subdivision is outside the corporate limits of the Village of Glen Ellyn, the map shall include the area within one-half mile of the site; 
6.  Development report: A development report which is a narrative statement describing the existing features of the site and the engineering impact of the proposed development of the site. Development reports shall include a resource information report from the Kane-DuPage Soil Conservation District when required by law; 
7.  Traffic studies: If required by the Community Development Director, a traffic analysis shall be prepared evaluating the impact of the project on the existing or proposed surrounding roadway system and/or the internal traffic movements on the site of the proposed subdivision; 
8.  Environmental assessment: A phase I environmental assessment may be required in accordance with state law; 
9.  Archaeological report: An archaeological report may be required in accordance with state law; 
10.  Historic resources survey: A historic resources survey may be required in accordance with state and federal law or upon the request of the Director of Community Development; 
11.  Zoning variations: Whenever a zoning variation is requested in association with a subdivision, a zoning variation application shall be submitted and reviewed by the Plan Commission concurrent with the review of the preliminary plat; and 
12.  Additional materials: The Community Development Director may, at his or her discretion, require the submission of such other additional materials or data related to the possible impact of the proposed uses of the subdivision on public facilities and services. 
(B)  Consideration of preliminary plat by Plan Commission: 
1.  Referral to the Plan Commission: 
(a)  Application to Plan Commission: Upon receipt of all required documents necessary for a preliminary plat and following review(s) for completeness and conformance to this title by Village staff, the Director of Community Development shall instruct the subdivider to submit the requisite number of complete and collated application packets for review by the Plan Commission and Village Board and shall refer such application to the Plan Commission. The date of the Plan Commission meeting at which the Plan Commission indicates its acknowledgment of the plat submission shall be the date from which the statutorily imposed time period for action shall commence. 
(b)  Public hearing: As part of the review process, the Plan Commission shall hold a public hearing at such time and place as shall be established by the commission. The hearing shall be conducted and a record of such proceedings shall be preserved in such manner, as the commission shall prescribe from time to time. 
(c)  Public hearing notice procedures: 
(1)  Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the Village, not more than 30 days or less than 15 days before the hearing; and 
(2)  For those properties located within the Village boundaries, notice of the hearing shall also be mailed to property owners within 250 feet of the land proposed to be subdivided, exclusive of road rights-of-way, at least ten days prior to the hearing and one or more placards shall be placed on the site not less than 15 days prior to the date of the hearing. The placard shall remain until completion of the public hearing, at which time, it shall be removed. Such placards shall be provided by the Village and contain such information as directed by the Community Development Director. Jurisdiction of the Plan Commission to hold hearings shall not be affected by the absence of a placard, if such absence is not the result of the subdivider's act or omission. 
2.  Review by Plan Commission: 
(a)  The Plan Commission may recommend that changes or revisions be made to the preliminary plat that are deemed necessary in the interests and needs of the community in keeping with the provisions of this title. 
(b)  The Village Engineer, after conferring with affected staff members, shall make written recommendations for revisions to the proposed plans and specifications prior to review by the Plan Commission. 
(c)  The Plan Commission shall recommend approval, conditional approval with qualifications, or disapproval of the application for preliminary plat approval and shall provide written comments to the Village Board which set forth the reasons for its recommendation within 90 days from the date of application or the filing by the subdivider of the last item of required supporting data, whichever date is later, unless such time is extended by mutual consent. In reviewing and making a recommendation on the preliminary plat, the Plan Commission shall consider the provisions set forth in this title, particularly the criteria set forth in section 11-3-10 of this chapter. 
(C)  Consideration of preliminary plat by the Village Board: 
1.  Upon receipt of a preliminary plat from the Plan Commission, the Village Clerk shall place the matter upon the Village Board agenda not later than the second next regular meeting of the Board of Trustees or a later meeting set by mutual consent, and shall notify the subdivider of the meeting date. 
2.  The Board of Trustees shall accept, reject or modify the preliminary plat, or require it to be returned to the Plan Commission for further hearings within 30 days of its first meeting date at which the application is reviewed by the Village Board unless action on the application has been extended by mutual consent. 
3.  The Board of Trustees shall approve, reject or modify the preliminary plat on the basis of how the proposed subdivision complies with the provisions in this title. The Board of Trustees shall also consider the recommendations of the Plan Commission with respect thereto and may return the matter to the Plan Commission to undertake specifically stated additional matters. 
4.  Approval of the preliminary plat shall be effective for not more than 12 months following the date of approval by the board unless, upon written application by the subdivider, a written extension of time is granted by the Village Board. Where less than the entire land area shown in the preliminary plat is contained in the initial final plat to be filed for record, such recordation shall automatically extend the approval of the unrecorded balance of the preliminary plat for the successive 12-month period. 
5.  If the preliminary plat, plans and specifications are disapproved by the Village Board, one print of the proposed preliminary plat and one copy of the proposed plans and specifications for land improvement shall be retained by the Director of Community Development and a written statement identifying the reasons for such disapproval and specifying particular aspects in which the proposed plat fails to conform to this title shall be forwarded to the subdivider within 30 days of disapproval of the preliminary plat by the Village Board. 
(D)  Conformance to Zoning Regulations: Every plat shall conform to the existing zoning regulations and this title applicable at the time of proposed final approval, except as varied by the approval of the Village Board. Any plat that has received preliminary approval shall be exempt from any subsequent amendments to the zoning ordinance rendering the plat nonconforming as to bulk or use, provided that final approval is obtained within the one year period. 
(Ord. 5334, 2-28-2005; Ord. 6674, 2-25-2019) 
11-3-5. - Final plat. 
(A)  Major subdivision: In the case of a major subdivision, within 12 months after receiving the last required approval of the preliminary plat and supporting documents by the Village Board, or a period of time beyond 12 months that may be granted by the Village Board, there shall be submitted to the Plan Commission a final plat of all or a part of the area included in the approved preliminary plat. 
(B)  Submission requirements: A total of six collated copies of the following materials shall be submitted to the Community Development Director with an application for approval of a final plat: 
1.  An application for final subdivision approval; 
2.  Prints of the final plat of the subdivision not larger than 30 inches wide by 36 inches long. The final plat shall retain the design characteristics of the approved preliminary plat; 
3.  The final plat shall show the following: 
(a)  Proposed name of the subdivision; 
(b)  Location by township, section, town and range, or by other legal description; 
(c)  Names and addresses of the owner, the developer and the surveyor who made the plat, and the title under which the proposed subdivision is to be recorded; 
(d)  Scale of plat, not smaller than one inch equals 100 feet; 
(e)  Date; 
(f)  North point; 
(g)  Boundary of the plat based on an accurate traverse, with angular and linear dimensions. Error of closure of such boundary line survey shall not exceed one in 10,000; 
(h)  Exact locations, widths, and names of all streets within and adjoining the plat, and the exact location and widths of all alleys and crosswalk ways; 
(i)  True angles and distances to the nearest established street lines or official monuments (not less than three, which shall be accurately described on the plat). Monuments shall be placed at all block corners, angle points, and at intermediate points as shall be required by the Village Engineer. The monuments shall be of permanent character, in accordance with Village of Glen Ellyn standards. All NGVD state, county, Village or other official bench marks, monuments, or triangulation stations in or adjacent to the property shall be preserved in precise position; 
(j)  Municipal, township, or section lines accurately tied to the lines of the subdivision by distances and angles; 
(k)  Radii, internal angles, points of curvature, tangents, bearings and lengths of all curves, including chord lengths and bearings; 
(l)  All easements for public services and utilities, including any restrictions for use of the property; 
(m)  Conservation easements for special management areas including maintenance responsibilities; 
(n)  All lot and block numbers with their lines accurately dimensioned in feet and hundredths. When an angle occurs in any lot line between lot corners, measurement of the angle shall be shown in degrees, minutes, and seconds. The final plat shall accurately show the locations of all permanent lot markers as actually installed, or to be installed (lot markers shall be installed in accordance with Village of Glen Ellyn standards); 
(o)  Accurate outlines and legal descriptions of any areas to be dedicated or reserved for public use, with the purposes indicated thereon, and of any area to be reserved by deed covenant for the common use of all property owners; 
(p)  A soil condition survey to determine the corrosiveness of soils; 
(q)  Information regarding the ownership and maintenance responsibilities of public and nonpublic improvements, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Common areas not owned by the Village, such as stormwater management facilities; and 
(2)  Public areas in the public right-of-way such as islands and entrance areas; and 
(r)  Other information as required by state statutes. 
(C)  Endorsement/certificates: At a minimum, the final plat of subdivision shall include the endorsement/certificates set forth in the Exhibits of this title. 
(D)  Supporting documents: The following shall be submitted along with the final plat: 
1.  Plan Commission: 
(a)  All construction plans, specifications and drawings including profiles, cross sections and details where applicable of all proposed public improvements. Elevations shall be referred to the standard national geodetic vertical datum; 
(b)  A tree preservation plan identifying which trees, if any, are to be preserved and protected during construction of the subdivision; 
(c)  A hydraulic report prepared by a licensed engineer to verify the adequacy of the proposed water distribution system; 
(d)  A site grading plan; 
(e)  A utility plan; 
(f)  A plan showing the location of any sidewalks, multiuse paths, parkway trees and streetlights; 
(g)  Protective covenants of a homeowners' or other property owners' association including provisions for maintenance of any common amenities; 
(h)  If the owner places restrictions on any of the land contained in the subdivision greater than those required by the zoning ordinance or this title, such restrictions or reference thereto shall be required to be indicated on the subdivision plat, and the Village Board shall require that restrictive covenants be recorded with the county recorder of deeds in a form to be approved by the attorney for the Village; 
(i)  The original mylar of the final plat signed by the owner, surveyor, appropriate utility companies, DuPage County Clerk and other individuals as required, with the exception of any Village officials or representatives and the DuPage County Recorder, along with a letter from the surveyor authorizing the Village to record the final plat. This item may be submitted after the Village Engineer has indicated that the final plat is in a form suitable for recording; 
(j)  Written evidence from the proper governmental agencies of their willingness to accept and maintain dedicated areas; 
Note: Such documents shall not be required for subdivisions located in the unincorporated areas one and one-half miles beyond the Glen Ellyn Village limits when there is evidence that these documents have been submitted to and approved by DuPage County officials, except when the Village of Glen Ellyn standards of public improvements are of higher quality than DuPage County standards, such applicable documents shall be required by the Village of Glen Ellyn; 
(k)  Neither the Village Board nor the Plan Commission shall approve such plat, unless, in addition to any other requirements of such Village Board or Plan Commission, the topographical and profile studies submitted with the subdivision plat have on their face a certification of a licensed professional engineer, and the owner of the land or his duly authorized attorney, to the effect that to the best of their knowledge and belief the drainage of surface waters will not be changed by the construction of such subdivision or any part thereof, or, that if such surface water drainage will be changed, adequate provision has been made for collection and diversion of such surface waters into public areas, or drains which the subdivider has a right to use, and that such surface waters will not be deposited on the property of adjoining landowners in such concentrations as may cause damage to the adjoining property because of the construction of the subdivision. The topographical and profile studies required herein shall not be recorded, but shall be retained and filed by the Village as permanent public documents; and 
(l)  Neither the Village Board nor the Plan Commission shall approve a final plat unless in addition to any other requirements of such Village Board or Plan Commission, when said plat has any lands bordering on or including any public waters of the state in which the state of Illinois has any property rights or property interests, unless such subdivision plat is approved by the department of transportation, nor shall any person offer or present for recording or record any map, plat or subdivision of lands, any part of which as shown on the map, plat or subdivision is situated within 500 feet of any surface drain or watercourse serving a tributary area of 640 acres or more, until such map, plat or subdivision of lands has been reviewed by the department of transportation either independently or in cooperation with federal, state or local agencies, for the purpose of determining, for the protection of persons and property, the flood hazards involved and a report thereon filed by that department with the recorder. 
2.  Village Board: In addition to those items listed in subsection (D)1. of this section, the following additional materials must also be submitted to the Community Development Director prior to review of the final plat by the Village Board: 
(a)  Complete estimates of cost of all proposed public improvements, including costs of engineering inspection; 
(b)  A statement signed by the Village Engineer approving the specifications, drawings and estimates of costs; 
(c)  The performance security required in chapter 5 of this title; and 
(d)  Signed copies of any proposed development agreements, easement agreements, annexation agreements, vacation agreements or any other agreements related to the proposed subdivision in a form acceptable to the Village Attorney. 
(E)  Consideration of final plat: 
1.  Plan Commission: 
(a)  Upon receipt of all required documents necessary for a final plat, and following review(s) by staff of the application for completeness and conformance to this title, the Director of Community Development shall instruct the subdivider to submit the requisite number of complete and collated application packets for review by the Plan Commission and Village Board and shall refer the application to the Plan Commission. 
(b)  The Plan Commission shall review the proposed plan and specifications pertaining to water supply and water distribution systems; sanitary sewerage systems, including mains and sewage disposal or treatment facilities; stormwater drainage systems; street lighting; street name signs; fire hydrants; grading, gradients and widths of roadways and sidewalks; the paving of roadways and sidewalks; proposed detailed grading plans of blocks and lots, the tree preservation plan, any areas designated as common open area and/or open space and other aspects of the subdivision as deemed necessary by the Plan Commission to determine if the subdivision provides adequate public facilities and services and conforms to the rules and regulations in section 11-4-1 of this title. 
(c)  The Plan Commission shall recommend approval, denial or modification of the final plat, including any requested variations to this title, based on whether or not the final plat complies with the provisions in this title, including the applicable rules and regulations set forth in section 11-4-1 of this title and any conditions placed on approval of the preliminary plat. The Plan Commission shall make its recommendations in writing to the Village Board on the final plat. 
2.  Village Board: 
(a)  Decision: 
(1)  Upon receipt of a final plat from the Plan Commission, the Village Clerk shall place the matter upon the Village Board agenda not later than the second next regular meeting of the Board of Trustees or a later meeting set by mutual consent, and shall notify the subdivider of the meeting date. 
(2)  The Village Board shall approve, deny or approve with modifications the final plat, including any requested variances to this title based on whether or not the final plat complies with the regulations in this title, including the applicable rules and regulations set forth in section 11-4-1 of this title and any conditions placed on approval of the preliminary plat and shall also consider the recommendation of Plan Commission with respect thereto. 
(3)  The Village Board shall act on the application for final plat approval within 60 days from the date of filing the last required document or other paper or within 60 days from the date of filing application for final plat approval, whichever date is later, unless the applicant and corporate authorities mutually agree to extend this 60-day time period. 
(4)  If the Village Board is satisfied with the final plat and the supporting documents submitted therewith, it shall, by ordinance, approve said plat and authorize the Village President to execute the final plat. Such approval shall be attested by the Village Clerk and sealed with the corporate seal of the Village of Glen Ellyn. 
(5)  If the final plat, plans and specifications are disapproved by the Village Board, one print of the proposed final plat and one copy of the proposed plans and specifications for land improvement shall be retained by the Director of Community Development and a written statement identifying the reasons for such disapproval and specifying particular aspects in which the proposed plat fails to conform to this title shall be forwarded to the subdivider within a reasonable period of time thereafter. 
(Ord. 5334, 2-28-2005; Ord. 6674, 2-25-2019) 
11-3-6. - Combined review of preliminary and final plats. 
The Director of the Department of Community Development, may waive the requirement for the preliminary and final plats of subdivision to be reviewed sequentially and separately and may permit the simultaneous review of the preliminary and final plats provided, however the Plan Commission may overrule such decision of the Director and require full compliance with the review procedures in this section, if it deems, in its opinion, to be necessary for a full understanding of the proposed development and its impact upon surrounding areas and the Village. 
(Ord. 5334, 2-28-2005; Ord. 6520, 7-24-2017; Ord. 6674, 2-25-2019) 
11-3-7. - Procedures for minor subdivisions. 
(A)  When a person desires to divide or subdivide a minor subdivision the Plan Commission need require only that a final plat and supporting documents as required by section 11-3-5 of this chapter be presented to it for recommendation for approval or disapproval, except that the Community Development Director, at his or her discretion, may require the submission of additional documentation typically required for a preliminary plat that demonstrates the expected impact of the minor subdivision on public facilities and services by possible uses of the subdivision and that when a zoning variation is requested in association with a minor subdivision, a zoning variation application shall also be submitted and reviewed by the Plan Commission at the same time as the minor subdivision. 
(B)  The procedures and requirements specified elsewhere in this title for consideration of final plats shall be followed with the addition of a requirement to hold a public hearing upon said final plat. Notice of time and place of such hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the Village not more than 30 days or less than 15 days before such hearing. 
(C)  When there is presented to the Village Board of Trustees for approval a plat for a minor subdivision, within the corporate limits, if the Board of Trustees after consideration thereof and recommendation thereon by the Plan Commission, is of the opinion that the provisions of this title, including the intent and purpose of this title as set forth in section 11-1-4 of this title are not violated, the Board of Trustees may approve such plat without requiring further procedure. 
(Ord. 5334, 2-28-2005; Ord. 6674, 2-25-2019) 
11-3-8. - Recording. 
(A)  After approval of a minor or major subdivision by the Village Board, the Director of Community Development shall obtain the signatures of the Village officials on the original mylar of the final plat submitted in accordance with section 11-3-5 of this chapter and shall record the final plat with the DuPage County Recorder. 
(B)  The Director of Community Development shall not record the final plat until: 
1.  The Village Engineer has verified that the plat is in a form suitable for recording; and 
2.  The Village has received the required security for any public improvements; 
Upon the fulfillment of subsections (B)1. and (B)2. of this section, the Director of Community Development shall record the final plat within 60 days, barring any signature rejections. 
(C)  The Director of Community Development shall distribute copies of the recorded plat as follows: 
1.  The original tracing containing the approval signatures shall be returned to the Village Clerk and kept as part of the official Village records; and 
2.  One print shall be kept by the Community Development Department. 
(Ord. 5334, 2-28-2005; Ord. 6674, 2-25-2019) 
11-3-9. - Land transfers, lot consolidations and two-lot subdivisions. 
Land transfers, lot consolidations and two-lot subdivisions shall be permitted upon review and approval of the Community Development Director subject to the following: 
(A)  The applicant shall be required to submit to the Director of Community Development a map in the form required by the Village, which shall demonstrate that the request fully complies with all zoning ordinance requirements, with the following exceptions: 
1.  Any preexisting nonconformities; 
2.  For land transfers, only the lot transferring the land shall be required to comply with the provisions of the zoning ordinance following the transfer of land; and 
3.  For lot consolidations, the consolidated lot shall not be required to comply with the provisions of the zoning ordinance; 
all provided that any new building, structure or impervious surface area that may be proposed on any lots subject to the requirements of this section complies with all zoning ordinance requirements or a zoning variation for such has been granted. 
(B)  If the Director of Community Development finds that the requirement of conformity to the Village's zoning ordinance has been satisfied as set forth above and that the request in no way violates the policy and purpose of this Subdivision Ordinance as set forth in sections 11-1-3 and 11-1-4 herein, an approval letter shall, upon request and payment of the required fee, be issued to the applicant and, if applicable, to the owner of the lot or parcel. 
(C)  If the standards set forth above have not been satisfied, then the Director of Community Development shall deny the request of the applicant and shall require the application to be reviewed by the Plan Commission and Village Board in accordance with the procedures for review of a minor subdivision set forth in section 11-3-7 of this chapter. 
(D)  Once a land transfer, lot consolidation or two-lot subdivision is approved, the applicant, within 90 days of the date of the approval letter, shall prepare and submit to the Community Development Department a reproducible plat showing the land transfer, lot consolidation, or two-lot subdivision. The Community Development Director shall sign the submitted plat and have the plat recorded with the DuPage County Recorder of Deeds. If no plat is submitted to the Community Development Department within 90 days of the date of the approval letter, the approval shall be considered null and void. 
(E)  No public hearing or action by the Plan Commission shall be required in the case of an application for an adjacent land transfer, lot consolidation or two-lot subdivision, which complies with the provision of this section. 
(F)  The above provisions shall not apply to two-lot subdivisions if the subject lot was part of a major, minor or two-lot subdivision approved within five years of the current subdivision proposal. In such a case, the proposed subdivision shall be considered and reviewed as a Minor Subdivision. 
(Ord. 5334, 2-28-2005; amd. Ord. 5362, 6-13-2005; Ord. 6607, 6-4-2018; Ord. 6674, 2-25-2019) 
11-3-10. - Criteria for subdivision approval. 
A subdivision shall not be approved unless: 
(A)  The proposed subdivision conforms to the provisions set forth in this title, including the rules and regulations referenced in section 11-4-1 of this title. 
(B)  Definite provision has been made for a water supply system that is sufficient in terms of quantity, dependability, and quality to provide an appropriate supply of water for the type of subdivision proposed. 
(C)  A public sewage system is proposed and adequate provision has been made for such system or, if other methods of sewage disposal are proposed that such systems will comply with federal, state and local laws and regulations. 
(D)  All areas of the proposed subdivision which may involve soil or topographical conditions presenting hazards or requiring special precaution have been identified by the subdivider and that the proposed uses of these areas are compatible with such conditions. 
(E)  The proposed subdivision will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(F)  No development shall be approved if such development, at full occupancy, will result in or increase traffic on an arterial or collector street to such an extent that the street does not function at a level of service deemed acceptable by the Village. The applicant may propose and construct approved traffic mitigation measures to provide adequate roadway capacity for the proposed development. 
(Ord. 5334, 2-28-2005) 
11-3-11. - Variances. 
(A)  Where extraordinary hardships or practical difficulties may result from strict compliance with these regulations and/or the purposes of these regulations may be served to a greater extent by an alternate proposal, the Village may approve variances to this title so that substantial justice may be done and public interest secured, provided that the variance shall not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of this title. 
(B)  All requests for variances to this title shall be forwarded to the Plan Commission for review and recommendation to the Village Board. The Village Board shall then approve, deny or conditionally approve the requested variance. 
(C)  The Plan Commission shall not recommend approval of a variance nor shall the Village Board grant approval of a variance unless it determines that: 
1.  The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public safety, health, or welfare or injurious to other property or improvements; 
2.  The conditions upon which the request is based are unique to the property for which the relief is sought, create substantial difficulty in developing the property and are not generally applicable to other property; and 
3.  Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical conditions of the specific property involved, a particular hardship to the owner would result, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the strict letter of these regulations is carried out. 
(D)  For the purpose of supplementing the above standards, the Plan Commission and Village Board shall also take into consideration the extent to which the evidence establishes or fails to establish the following facts favorable to the applicant: 
1.  That the variation, if granted, will not alter the essential character of the locality; 
2.  That the purpose of the variation is not based exclusively upon a desire to make more money out of the property; 
3.  That the proposed variation will not: 
(a)  Diminish or impair property values within the neighborhood; 
(b)  Unduly increase traffic congestion in the public streets and highway; or 
(c)  Result in an increase in public expenditures; and 
4.  That the variation is the minimum variation that will make possible the reasonable use of the land; 
5.  Whether or not the alleged difficulty or particular hardship has been created by any person presently having an interest in the property or by the applicant. 
(E)  The Plan Commission shall forward a written recommendation on the request for a variance to the Village Board that shall set forth the reasons on which the Plan Commission's recommendation is based. 
(F)  In approving variances, the Plan Commission may recommend and the Village Board may require such conditions as will in its judgment, secure substantially the purposes described in section 11-1-4 of this title. 
(G)  A petition for any variance shall be submitted in writing by the subdivider at the time when the plat is filed for the consideration by the Plan Commission. The petition shall state fully the grounds for the application and all of the facts relied upon by the petitioner. 
(H)  Whenever a variance is requested under this title, the Plan Commission shall hold a public hearing thereon. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published according to the procedures set forth in subsection 11-3-4(B) of this chapter. 
(Ord. 5334, 2-28-2005) 
11-3-12. - Changes and amendments. 
The Plan Commission shall from time to time propose and recommend in writing to the Village Board of Trustees such changes or additions to the provisions and regulations herein contained as the Plan Commission may deem necessary or advisable. Such changes or additions shall become effective after the Board of Trustees passes an amendment to this title. 
(Ord. 5334, 2-28-2005) 
Chapter 4 - DESIGN STANDARDS 

11-4-1. - Conformance to applicable rules and regulations. 
In addition to the requirements established herein, all subdivision plats shall comply with the following rules and regulations: 
(A)  All applicable statutory provisions; 
(B)  The Village of Glen Ellyn zoning ordinance; 
(C)  The applicable Village of Glen Ellyn building codes and all other applicable laws of the appropriate jurisdictions; 
(D)  The official plan, official map and capital improvement plan of the Village including all streets, drainage systems, and parks shown on the official map or official plan as adopted; 
(E)  The special requirements of these regulations and any rules of the county health department and/or appropriate state agencies; 
(F)  The rules of the Illinois department of transportation, if applicable; 
(G)  The DuPage County Countywide Stormwater and Floodplain Ordinance as adopted, amended or varied by the Village; and 
(H)  The Village of Glen Ellyn standards for construction of public improvements. 
(Ord. 5334, 2-28-2005) 
11-4-2. - Lots. 
(A)  Minimum design standards: All lots within the subdivision shall meet or exceed the minimum design standards for the appropriate zoning as specified in the Glen Ellyn zoning ordinance or the DuPage County Zoning Ordinance for subdivisions in unincorporated areas within one and one-half miles of the Village corporate limits. References to lot dimensions in this section shall refer to the appropriate Village or county zoning ordinance. 
(B)  Lot arrangement: The lot arrangement shall be such that there will be no foreseeable difficulties, for reasons of topography or other conditions, in securing building permits to build on all lots in compliance with the zoning ordinance, any applicable health regulations and providing driveway access to buildings on the lots from an approved street. 
(C)  Shape: In general, lots should be as nearly rectangular in shape as practical. 
(D)  Corner lots: Corner lots shall comply with the minimum corner lot width set forth in the zoning ordinance for the district in which the lot is located. If a corner lot width is not specified in the district in which the lot is located, the Village Engineer shall review the proposed subdivision to ensure the proper development of an intersection design that promotes traffic safety and may require that the lot width be increased by 20 percent over the width of a typical interior lot. 
(E)  Front on public street: All lots shall front upon a public street. 
(F)  Side lines of lots: Side lines of lots shall be at right angles or radial to the street line, or substantially so, unless a variation from this rule will provide a better street or lot plan. 
(G)  Double frontage lots: Double frontage lots are not permitted in residential districts, except where one of the frontages is located adjacent to an improved alley. 
(H)  Screening and/or additional lot depth: The Village may require screening and/or additional lot depth when a subdivision is located adjacent to a marginal access street, alley, arterial street, expressway, railroad, utility or other similar feature to protect residential properties from any adverse impacts associated with such and to provide separation of the subdivision from through and local traffic. 
(I)  Lots abutting on a watercourse, drainageway, etc.: Lots abutting upon or located on a watercourse, drainageway, channel, stream, special management area as defined in the stormwater ordinance, or a stormwater storage facility shall have an additional depth or width as required by the Village Board in order to provide acceptable building sites and shall comply with the regulations set forth in the floodplain hazard and land use regulations set forth in the zoning ordinance. 
(J)  Regard for natural features: In the subdividing of any land, due regard shall be shown for all natural features such as tree growth, watercourses, historic spots, or similar conditions. 
(K)  Streets, blocks, depths: Streets, blocks, depths of lots, parks and other public grounds shall be located and laid out in such a manner as to preserve and utilize natural streams, channels and detention basins. Wherever possible, the larger streams and floodplains shall be included within parks or other public grounds. 
(L)  Limit traffic hazards on the street: Where driveway access from a regional arterial street may be necessary for several adjoining lots, the Plan Commission may recommend and the Village Board may require that such lots be serviced by a combined access drive in order to limit possible traffic hazards on the street. Where possible, such driveways must be designed and arranged so as to avoid requiring vehicles to back into traffic on regional arterial streets. 
(M)  Easements: 
1.  Easements shall be provided for any utility service, including stormwater drainage, where necessary. Easements for entities, including utilities which have been granted franchise by the Village or the county shall be, unless otherwise specified within the franchise agreement, ten feet wide and be established at the rear of each lot and adequate easements shall be provided along such other lot lines as may be necessary to provide continuity of alignment from block to block at deflection points in these easements. 
2.  Where a subdivision is traversed by a natural watercourse, drainageway, channel, or stream, there shall be provided a drainage easement conforming substantially with the lines of such watercourse. It shall include an additional area of at least 15 feet wide adjoining both edges of the established area that would be affected by 100-year storm floods, as certified by the subdivider or his engineer. 
3.  An easement shall be provided for any stormwater storage facility to include an area of at least 15 feet wide adjoining the design 100-year high water level as certified by the subdivider's engineer. 
4.  A wider easement than specified in subsections (M)1., (M)2. and (M)3. of this section may be required at the discretion of the Village Engineer. 
5.  All easement descriptions shall include information about any restrictions in regard to permitted landscaping on the area of the easement. 
(N)  Flag lots: Flag lots shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. 5334, 2-28-2005; Ord. 6303, 3-9-2015) 
11-4-3. - Blocks. 
(A)  In residential subdivisions, the maximum lengths of blocks where all lots are 90 feet or more in width shall be 1,800 linear feet, and the maximum length of blocks where lots are less than 90 feet in width shall be 1,200 linear feet. No blocks shall be less than 600 linear feet in length unless approved by the Plan Commission. Pedestrianways leading to schools, parks, or other common destinations may be required by the Plan Commission. 
(B)  In nonresidential subdivisions, block lengths shall be as approved by the Plan Commission in accordance with the proposed function and location of each subdivision. 
(C)  The shape of blocks shall be dictated by topographical features, the basic street system and traffic pattern, lot depths, and areas designated for public and other nonresidential land uses. 
(D)  Where a subdivision borders upon or is traversed by a railroad right-of-way, regional or local arterial street or expressway, the Plan Commission may require a marginal access street (on one or both sides of such right-of-way or street) approximately parallel to and at a suitable distance from such right-of-way or street appropriate for the use of the proposed subdivision. 
(Ord. 5334, 2-28-2005) 
11-4-4. - Roads and streets. 
In order to provide for streets of suitable location, width, and improvement to accommodate prospective traffic and afford satisfactory access for police, firefighting, snow removal, sanitation, and road maintenance equipment, and to coordinate streets so as to compose a convenient roadway system, the following design standards for streets are hereby required: 
(A)  Street plan: The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets shall conform to the official plan, and shall be considered in relation to existing and planned streets; reasonable circulation of traffic within the subdivision and adjoining lands; topographical conditions; runoff of stormwater; public convenience and safety; and in their appropriate relation the proposed uses of the area to be served. 
(B)  Street access: No subdivision shall be approved unless it has access to an existing street or a new street proposed as part of the subdivision. 
(C)  Private streets: Private streets are prohibited. 
(D)  Streets in close proximity to floodplain: All streets in close proximity to the floodplain shall be elevated to one foot above the base flood elevation. Where local streets intersect a drainageway it may be necessary to lower the street elevation below the base flood elevation. Such lowering shall not exceed six inches. 
(E)  Right-of-way widths: All right-of-way widths shall conform to the following minimum dimensions: 
Type of Street Residential Subdivision Nonresidential Subdivision Collector streets and Village arterial streets 80 feet 80 feet Local streets 66 feet 70 feet Cul-de-sac streets and local streets less than 600 feet in length 60 feet 70 feet Marginal access streets 40 feet 50 feet Expressways and regional and local arterial streets In accordance with federal, state, and county requirements or the Village of Glen Ellyn standards for construction of public improvements  
(F)  Pavement widths: All pavement widths shall conform to the following minimum dimensions: 
PAVEMENT WIDTH 
(Back of Curb to Back of Curb) 
Type Of Street Residential Subdivision Nonresidential Subdivision Collector streets and Village arterial streets 25 feet 25 feet Local streets 21 feet 36 feet Cul-de-sac streets 21 feet 36 feet Marginal access streets 21 feet 28 feet Expressways and regional and local arterial streets In accordance with federal, state, and county requirements or the Village of Glen Ellyn standards for construction of public improvements  
(G)  Pavement design: All street pavements shall be designed in accordance with the pavement design specified in the Village of Glen Ellyn standards for construction of public improvements. 
(H)  Prerequisite to street construction: Before the base course of the roadway pavement is laid, all of the underground work such as sewer, water and gas mains, house service connections therewith, and any underground conduits or wires for electric or telephone, shall be completely installed in place and the installation approved by the Village Engineer. The roadway pavement shall not be laid until the backfilling of all trenches dug for the installation of the aforementioned utility services have been completely settled or compacted to the satisfaction of the Village Engineer. 
For asphalt streets, the final surface course shall not be installed until the binder course has been in place for one winter season. Prior to installation of the final surface course, the Village Engineer shall determine whether the existing binder course is in good condition or in need of repair. In a residential subdivision, the final street surface course shall not be installed before house construction is completed on 75 percent of the lots but shall be installed not later than three years from the date of final plat approval. 
(I)  Pavement edging: All new streets shall have concrete curb and gutter constructed in accordance with the Village of Glen Ellyn standards for construction of public improvements. 
When a subdivision is proposed on an existing street, the Village may, at its discretion, and upon the advice and recommendation of the Public Works Director, require the installation of curb and gutter and/or the reconstruction of streets in conformance with the Village of Glen Ellyn standards for the construction of public improvements on streets adjacent to the subdivision. 
(J)  Details of design: 
1.  Cul-de-sac streets: Cul-de-sac streets in single-family residential districts shall not be more than 500 feet in length, measured along their centerline from the centerline of the street of origin to the end of the cul-de-sac right-of-way, or may be longer than 500 linear feet provided not more than 20 lots abut upon the cul-de-sac right-of-way lines. In multiple-family residential districts, such cul-de-sacs shall not exceed 300 feet in length. Each cul-de-sac street shall have a right-of-way terminus of nearly circular shape with a minimum diameter of 116 feet. The terminus shall be connected with each right-of-way line of the approach segment of the street by a reverse curvature having a radius of not less than 30 feet. A cul-de-sac terminus may have concentric to its radius point a landscape island regularly maintained by parties other than the Village. If provided, the island shall not obstruct sight lines around and through the island. The minimum pavement width in the terminus is 31 feet back of curb to back of curb. The outside curb of the cul-de-sac shall have a minimum diameter of 82 feet. 
2.  Horizontal alignment: 
(a)  Where there is a deflection in horizontal centerlines within a given block at any given point in excess of ten degrees, a curve shall be inserted with a radius of not less than: 
Arterials 1,000 feet Collector streets 300 feet All other streets 100 feet  
(b)  Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall not be permitted if they can be reasonably avoided. 
(c)  Local streets shall be so aligned that their use by through traffic will be discouraged. 
(d)  Street intersections and confluences shall be planned in a manner that will provide safe and efficient traffic flow: 
(1)  Streets shall intersect at or near right angles; 
(2)  An intersection of more than two streets shall be avoided unless specific conditions of design indicate otherwise; 
(3)  Curved streets intersecting with arterial and collector streets shall do so with a tangent section of centerline 50 feet in length, measured from the right-of-way line of the arterial or collector street; and 
(4)  At an intersection with an arterial street, the intersecting street gradient shall not exceed two percent for the 50 feet, as measured from the right-of-way line from the arterial street. 
3.  Vertical alignment: 
(a)  Gradients of streets shall be a minimum of four-tenths percent and not exceed on: 
Arterial and collector streets 5 percent All other streets 7 percent  
(b)  All changes in street gradients in excess of one percent shall be connected with vertical curves. Minimum length in feet of these curves shall provide a sight distance of not less than 300 feet, measured from an eye level four feet high, with a clear view of an obstacle not over two feet high. The minimum length of a vertical curve shall be as required by the Village Engineer but not less than 100 feet. 
4.  Half streets: Half streets shall be prohibited. 
5.  Residential property abutting regional arterial streets and expressways: Provisions shall be made for vehicular and pedestrian access to residential property abutting regional arterial streets and expressways either by providing: a) marginal access streets; or b) by backing lots to the regional arterial street or expressway and providing access by a collector, local or cul-de-sac street and with a visual barrier established in a nonaccess reservation strip along the rear property line (abutting the regional arterial street or expressway). 
6.  Dead end streets: Dead end streets are prohibited, except when it is part of a continuing street plan and only if a temporary turnaround satisfactory to the Village Engineer in design is provided. A dead end street shall not exceed 500 feet in length. 
7.  Gradient: Any private drive or drive approach constructed as part of a subdivision shall have a minimum of a one percent gradient and a maximum eight percent gradient. 
8.  Reserve strips: The creation of reserve strips shall not be permitted adjacent to a proposed street in such a manner as to deny access from adjacent property to the street. 
(K)  Street names: Proposed streets, which are obviously in alignment of continuation of existing streets already named, shall bear the name of such existing streets. In no case shall the name for proposed streets duplicate existing street names, irrespective of the use of the suffix street, avenue, road, boulevard, drive, place or court, or any abbreviation thereof. The Village retains the right to require the names of streets to be changed at its absolute discretion, either at the time of platting or thereafter. 
(L)  Street signs: Appropriate street signs for public and private streets shall be erected at each street intersection within the subdivision. The type of street sign shall conform to those used throughout the Village of Glen Ellyn and the number and location of such signs shall be as directed by the Public Works Director of the Village of Glen Ellyn. The cost of said street signs shall be borne by the subdivider. 
(M)  Street lighting: Streetlights shall be provided throughout the subdivision as approved by the Public Works Director and in accordance with the standards for street lighting set forth in the Village of Glen Ellyn standards for the construction of public improvements. Upon acceptance of the public improvements by the Village, the streetlights shall be owned and maintained by the Village. 
(Ord. 5334, 2-28-2005; Ord. 6148, 6-24-2013; Ord. 6607, 6-4-2018) 
11-4-5. - Storm drainage and sanitary sewers. 
(A)  Separation of systems: The storm and sanitary sewer systems of any subdivision shall be separately constructed in accordance with this Code, including, but not limited to, title 7, chapter 9 of this Code and shall be constructed and located in accordance with the Village of Glen Ellyn standards for the construction of public improvements. 
(B)  Storm drainage: 
1.  Storm drains: An adequate system of stormwater drainage shall be constructed and installed, consisting of pipes, tiles, manholes, inlets and other necessary facilities that will adequately drain the subdivision and protect roadway pavements. The storm sewer design shall incorporate the rational formula. The intensity used shall be a return frequency of not less than ten years. Such drainage system shall be subject to approval by the Village Engineer for the Village of Glen Ellyn. Storm sewers shall be constructed in accordance with the Village of Glen Ellyn standards for the construction of public improvements. 
2.  Stormwater management: Stormwater runoff shall be controlled as prescribed by the DuPage County Countywide Stormwater and Floodplain Ordinance as adopted, amended or varied by the Village of Glen Ellyn. 
3.  Site grading: The overall site grading shall be designed so that the street grades and lot and block grading provide positive overland drainage to the stormwater control facility in the event that the underground storm drainage system is blocked. Such positive drainage shall be capable of handling the 100-year storm. An easement shall be established to the 100-year high water line for all drainageways where the overland flow exceeds one cubic foot per second. The top of foundation of all structures adjacent to such drainageways shall be a minimum elevation of one foot over the 100-year high water level. The top of foundation of all structures within at least 250 feet of a stormwater storage facility or a floodplain shall be at a minimum elevation of two feet over the 100-year high water level. 
4.  Erosion control: The grading plan and construction plan shall provide for erosion and sedimentation control: 
(a)  Erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be in conformance with the DuPage County Countywide Stormwater and Floodplain Ordinance as adopted and amended by the Village of Glen Ellyn; and 
(b)  Lot grading, except on areas for stormwater detention facilities, shall not exceed five feet in fill or cut, unless greater depth will not adversely affect abutting properties in the opinion of the Village Engineer. 
(C)  Wastewater collection: 
1.  Sanitary sewers: Sanitary sewer mains shall be constructed throughout the entire subdivision in such a manner as to adequately serve all lots and tracts with connection to the Glen Ellyn sewer system. Each lot shall be provided with an individual service to the sanitary sewer. 
2.  Standards for construction of public improvements: Sanitary sewer mains shall be constructed in compliance with the Village of Glen Ellyn standards for construction of public improvements. 
(Ord. 5334, 2-28-2005) 
11-4-6. - Water supply. 
(A)  Water mains: Water mains shall be constructed in the public right-of-way throughout the entire subdivision in accordance with the Village of Glen Ellyn standards for construction of public improvements. 
(B)  House services: Each lot shall be provided with an individual service to the water main. 
(Ord. 5334, 2-28-2005) 
11-4-7. - Sidewalks and multiuse paths. 
(A)  Sidewalks shall be located on both sides of the rights-of-way adjacent to all new and existing streets, except as varied by the Village Board. 
(B)  Sidewalks, where required, shall be five feet in width, unless the Village requires a greater width. 
(C)  The open areas bordering the sidewalk shall be landscaped in accordance with plans approved by the Village Board. Any parkway in which a sidewalk is located shall be at least 12 feet wide. 
(D)  Multiuse paths shall be provided as recommended in the official plan of the Village of Glen Ellyn and the most recent DuPage County bicycle plan. Multiuse paths shall be ten feet in width. The Village Board may waive the requirement for a multiuse path if it finds that the multiuse path would not serve a useful purpose. 
(E)  Sidewalks and multiuse paths shall be constructed in accordance with the standards set forth in the Village of Glen Ellyn standards for construction of public improvements. 
(F)  Sidewalks and multiuse paths shall not exceed a maximum gradient of five percent except for curb ramps no longer than six feet. 
(Ord. 5334, 2-28-2005; Ord. 6148, 6-24-2013) 
11-4-8. - Communication, electric, gas and other utilities. 
(A)  In all new subdivisions and in subdivisions platted and recorded prior to the effective date hereof, all proposed and existing communication lines, electric lines, and other similar utilities or entities which have received a franchise from the Village or the County in the subdivision and in the rights-of-way adjacent to the subdivision shall be placed underground at the subdivider's expense. Such utilities shall be located within easements, preferably in the rear yards, or in dedicated public ways, and shall be placed in locations deemed appropriate by the Public Works Director and in a manner, which will not conflict with other underground services. All transformer boxes shall be located so as not be unsightly or hazardous to the public. 
Exceptions to this requirement: All land transfers, lot consolidations, and two-lot subdivisions, that are administratively approved by the Community Development Department and do not require the review of the Plan Commission, on property zoned residential and used for single-family residential purposes shall be exempt from the requirement to place existing overhead utilities located in the adjacent rights-of-way underground. This exception does not exempt a land transfer, lot consolidation, or two-lot subdivision from the requirement to place all proposed and existing utilities located within the subdivision underground nor from the requirement to place all proposed utilities in the adjacent rights-of-way underground. 
(B)  Underground utility installations, which traverse private property, shall also be protected by easements. 
(C)  Gas service lines shall always be placed underground within easements or dedicated public ways, in a manner, which will not conflict with other underground services. 
(Ord. 5334, 2-28-2005; Ord. 6607, 6-4-2018; Ord. 6674, 2-25-2019) 
11-4-9. - Trees. 
(A)  Preservation: Existing trees shall be preserved whenever possible. To this end, the Director of Community Development shall review the proposed tree preservation plan and provide a recommendation to the Plan Commission and Village Board regarding the preservation of existing trees. Existing trees identified as being preserved on the tree preservation plan shall be preserved on a given lot until construction of the structure on that lot is complete and a certificate of occupancy is issued for the building. In unique and unusual circumstances, the Director of Community Development may approve minor revisions to the tree preservation plan approved as part of the subdivision where such revision is submitted on a revised tree preservation plan along with a statement describing the proposed change. 
(B)  Subdivision trees: Once a subdivision application, or preapplication, has been submitted to the Director of Community Development, no trees shall be removed from the subdivision and no change shall be made to the grade of the land affected until approval of the final plat has been granted by the Village Board. 
(C)  Parkway trees: 
1.  Parkway or street trees shall be planted 40 feet on center, or a greater spacing as recommended by the Village to accommodate for underground utilities, curb cuts, streetlights and similar obstructions. The subdivider shall be solely responsible for the purchase and planting of all new parkway trees. 
2.  All new parkway trees must have a minimum caliper of two and one-half inches. When five or more parkway trees are required, no more than 20 percent of the trees may be of the same species. When fewer than five trees are required, no more than 50 percent of the trees may be of the same species. The trees must be purchased from a nursery that is a member of the Suburban Tree Consortium or otherwise approved by the Public Works department. 
3.  All new or relocated parkway trees shall be planted in accordance with the Village of Glen Ellyn standards for the construction of public improvements. 
4.  The subdivider shall guarantee all parkway trees for two years following the date of planting. The Public Works department shall be notified of the date of plantings. At the discretion of public works, the newly planted parkway trees may be subject to an inspection. If any parkway trees die or are determined by the Village to be distressed within the two-year period then the subdivider shall replace said trees. 
5.  In no event shall parkway trees be planted later than five years from the date of final plat approval. 
(Ord. 6148, 6-24-2013; Ord. 6674, 2-25-2019) 
11-4-10. - Dedication of public use areas. 
(A)  Where a proposed public use area (in addition to streets, alleys, pedestrianways and utility easements) as identified in the official plan of the Village is located in whole or in part within a subdivision, such area shall be reserved for future public use development and so designated on the preliminary plat and final plat. In the event such area is not acquired or arrangements made for acquisition by the Village of Glen Ellyn, park board, school board, or other taxing body within a period of one year after the approval by the Village Board of the final plat, such land may thereafter be used by the owner for any use permitted at its location by zoning ordinance regulations. 
(B)  When a public use area is proposed by the subdivider on the preliminary plat at the time of submittal to the Village and its location thereafter approved by the Plan Commission, the subdivider shall either in accordance with the conditions of a zoning ordinance, an annexation agreement, or a written request from the Village promptly dedicate the land either to the Village of Glen Ellyn, park board, school board or other government body as appropriate. 
(C)  When public use areas are designated by the subdivider for the benefit and use of the residents of the subdivision, the subdivider shall dedicate such land to the owners of property in the subdivision. Such land shall be perpetuated for such use by recorded protective covenants, which shall also require maintenance of such areas by the owners. The protective covenants shall be approved by the Village Board. 
(Ord. 5334, 2-28-2005) 
11-4-11. - Dedication of park lands and school sites or for payments or fees in lieu of. 
As a condition of approval of a final plat of subdivision, or of a final plat of a planned unit development, each subdivider or developer will be required to dedicate land proportional to the need for additional school, park, public library and fire department services specifically and uniquely attributable to the new subdivision or cash contribution in lieu of actual land dedication, or a combination of both. In the event that the subdivider is able to reach agreement with the governmental body benefited by the donation, the Village will accept that dedication or contribution in satisfaction of this requirement. In the event that the subdivider and the governmental body benefited by the donation are not able to reach an agreement, the Village will calculate the amount of land or cash contribution in lieu thereof based upon the actual value of undeveloped land and formulas for the amount of land required for the provision of various public services as established by nationally recognized standards. 
Where the Village itself requires and establishes the amount of contributions, the contributions shall be paid to the Village, which shall use them for the purposes for which the payments were to be made either on its own or by transmitting them to the appropriate governmental bodies. 
(Ord. 5334, 2-28-2005) 
Chapter 5 - ASSURANCE OF COMPLETION, MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS AND ACCEPTANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS 

11-5-1. - Improvements and performance security. 
(A)  All public improvements, including street, sanitary and other improvements including lot improvements on the individual lots of the subdivision as required by this title specified in the final subdivision plat as approved by the Village Board, shall be completed and dedicated to the Village free and clear of all liens and encumbrances on the property and public improvements thus dedicated. In order to ensure completion of these improvements, the subdivider shall post a letter of credit in a form acceptable to the Village in the amount of 125 percent of the estimate of the total cost of the construction, installation and maintenance of such improvements until accepted by the Village. The Village may rely upon an estimate of the Village Engineer or the Village Engineer's review and evaluation of estimates provided either by the subdivider's engineer or based upon executed contracts for the performance of the work entered into in arms lengths transactions. Such letter of credit shall be made a supporting document to the final plat as per section 11-3-5 of this title. 
(B)  If the subdivider wishes to post a cash escrow deposit or a cash deposit in lieu of an irrevocable letter of credit, the Village may accept this amount, at its discretion, if the amount deposited is equal to 125 percent of the estimate of the costs of construction, installation and maintenance of such improvements until accepted by the Village as determined by the Village Engineer. The Village Engineer or his designated representative shall be made a signatory to any cash escrow on behalf of the Village. Money from this account shall be released from time to time upon receipt of lien waivers indicating that work has been successfully performed and paid for. The aggregate sum of the releases shall not reduce said deposit to less than ten percent of the cost of improvements except upon final acceptance. 
(C)  In the event that a subdivider has posted either an irrevocable letter of credit, a cash deposit or a cash escrow deposit, and the amount of such security should be found by the Village to not be adequate to complete the construction, installation and maintenance of the improvements, the subdivider shall be required to increase the amount of the letter of credit or the amount of the cash so as to cover the then estimated cost of completion. 
(D)  When improvements, or a portion of the improvements, are not completed, then the Village may, under whatever procedures are set forth within the irrevocable letter of credit, drawn down adequate funds to complete the remaining uncompleted improvements. When the cash escrow procedure is used, and the improvements are not completed within the time limits contained within the ordinances of the Village, the escrow agreement, or such other document establishing the responsibilities of the owner or subdivider, the Village may use or withdraw some or all of the cash or cash escrow funds and complete or cause the improvements to be completed. Such withdrawal shall be without the concurrence of the subdivider, who as a condition of the escrow shall waive any objection to such withdrawal. Any funds remaining after the work has been completed and maintained shall be returned to the entity, which provided the security. 
(E)  Unless otherwise mutually agreed upon between the subdivider and the Village Board, the improvements other than the surface course of streets shall be completed within one year of the approval of the final plat. 
(Ord. 5334, 2-28-2005) 
11-5-2. - Maintenance of improvements until acceptance. 
(A)  The subdivider shall be required to maintain all improvements until acceptance by the Village Board. 
(B)  In addition, the improvements shall not be accepted until the subdivider provides a cash deposit, letter of credit or escrow deposit equal to ten percent of the actual cost of improvements as a guarantee of satisfactory performance of the improvements constructed within the subdivision. This performance security shall be held by the Village for a period of one year after acceptance of such facilities by the Village. After one year, the performance security shall be refunded if no defects have developed, or if any defects have developed, then the balance of such performance security shall be refunded after reimbursement for amounts expended by the Village in correcting such defective improvements. 
(C)  The subdivider shall be responsible for the maintenance of streets within a subdivision, which have been improved but not yet accepted by the Village as set forth below: 
1.  The subdivider shall be responsible for keeping any street, sidewalk or multiuse path clear of ice and snow. The subdivider shall commence snow removal upon a two-inch snow accumulation. 
2.  The subdivider shall be responsible for street sweeping, removal of storm debris, removal of dead animals and other forms of routine maintenance typically undertaken by the Village. 
3.  If the subdivider fails to abide by the above maintenance requirements such failure shall be considered a violation of the provisions of this section. Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, be fined not more than $750.00 for each offense. Each day that a violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. The Village may elect to perform said services upon default by the developer, and may reimburse itself from the performance security. 
(D)  The subdivider may fulfill the obligations imposed by the above paragraph of this section by entering into an agreement with the Village whereby the Village shall clear such streets, sidewalks or multiuse paths free of ice and snow in consideration of the subdivider's agreement to hold the Village harmless for any damages to subdivision street improvements resulting from ice and snow removal and to hold the Village harmless for liability to third parties for personal injury and/or property damage and to repair any such damages prior to acceptance of such street improvements by the Village. 
(Ord. 5334, 2-28-2005) 
11-5-3. - Acceptance of improvements. 
If any plat of subdivision within the corporate limits of the Village of Glen Ellyn contains public streets or other public improvements, which are therein dedicated as such, the approval of the plat thereof by the Board of Trustees shall not constitute an acceptance by the Village of such streets or public improvements irrespective of any acts by any officer, agent or employee of the Village with respect to such streets or improvements. 
The acceptance of such streets and other public improvements and release of the performance security shall be made only by the adoption of a resolution by the Board of Trustees after there has been filed with the Village Clerk a certificate by the Village Engineer certifying the following: 
(A)  All improvements required to be constructed in connection with the approval of the plat of subdivision by the Board of Trustees, have been fully completed and the construction or installation thereof approved by him or her. 
(B)  That an "as built" plan of the subdivision has been received indicating location, dimensions, materials and other information required by the Village Engineer, that the layout of the line and grade of all public improvements is in accordance with construction plans for the subdivision, indicating that the improvements shall have been completed, are ready for dedication to the local government and are free and clear of any and all liens and encumbrances. Further, all applicable fees and monies shall have been paid as described elsewhere in this title and further the Village shall not be liable for any damages that may have occurred on any dedicated road within a new subdivision that has not been accepted as completed by the resolution of the Village Board of Glen Ellyn. The subdivider, his agents or employees shall save the Village free and harmless from any and all claims that may be submitted. Upon receipt of this information and recommendation, the Village shall thereafter accept the improvements for dedication in accordance with the established procedure. The developer shall convey the improvements with a warranty bill of sale. 
(Ord. 5334, 2-28-2005) 
Chapter 6 - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 

11-6-1. - Suitability of land for subdividing. 
Those lands subject to flooding, and land deemed to be topographically unsuitable, should not be subdivided for residential purposes, nor for such other uses as may increase danger to health, life or property, or aggravate erosion or flood hazard. Further description of floodplain land use regulations can be found in the DuPage County stormwater ordinance as adopted and amended by the Village and the Village zoning ordinance. Upon adequate investigation, the Plan Commission shall not approve the subdivision of land if it has been determined that in the best interest of the public, the site is not suitable for subdivision and development as proposed by the subdivider. 
(Ord. 5334, 2-28-2005) 
11-6-2. - Nonresidential subdivisions. 
(A)  Conformance to standards: A nonresidential subdivision shall be subject to all the requirements of these regulations, as well as such additional standards required by the Plan Commission and/or Village Board, and shall conform to the proposed land use and standards established in the official plan, official map, and zoning ordinance. 
(B)  Standards: In addition to the principles and standards in this title, which are appropriate to the planning of all subdivisions, the applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Plan Commission and/or Village Board that the street, parcel, and block pattern proposed is specifically adapted to the uses anticipated and takes into account other uses in the vicinity. The following principles and standards shall be observed: 
1.  Proposed nonresidential parcels shall be suitable in area and dimensions to the types of nonresidential development anticipated; 
2.  Street and alley rights-of-way and pavement shall be adequate to accommodate the type and volume of traffic anticipated to be generated thereupon; 
3.  Special requirements may be imposed by the Village over and beyond minimum requirements with respect to street, curb, gutter, and sidewalk design and construction; 
4.  Special requirements may be imposed by the Village over and above the minimum requirements with respect to the installation of public utilities, including water, sewer and stormwater drainage; and 
5.  Every effort shall be made to protect adjacent residential areas from potential nuisance from a proposed commercial or industrial subdivision, including the provision of extra depth for parcels backing up on existing or potential residential development and provisions for permanently landscaped buffer strips and/or fencing or other screening when necessary. 
(Ord. 5334, 2-28-2005) 
11-6-3. - Vacation/repeal of plats. 
(A)  Vacation of plat: Any plat or part of any plat may be vacated by the owner of the premises, at any time before the sale of any lot therein, by a written instrument, to which a copy of such plat shall be attached, declaring the same to be vacated. 
(B)  Approval: Such an instrument shall be approved by the Village Board upon recommendation from the Plan Commission in like manner as minor subdivisions, including the requirement for a public hearing. The Village Board may reject any such instrument, which abridges or destroys any public rights in any of its public uses, improvements, streets or alleys. 
(C)  Recorded; filed: Such an instrument shall be executed, acknowledged or approved, and recorded or filed, in like manner as plats of subdivisions, and being duly recorded or filed shall operate to destroy the force and effect of the recording of the plat so vacated, and to divest all public rights in the streets, alleys, and public grounds, and all dedications laid out or described in such plat. 
(D)  Sold lots: When lots have been sold, the plat may be vacated in the manner herein provided by all the owners of lots in such plat joining the execution of such in writing. 
(E)  Village initiated repeal of plat of subdivision: The Village Board may repeal the ordinance approving a subdivision plat when: 
1.  No lots within the approved subdivision have been sold within five years from the date the final plat was recorded; 
2.  The plat has been of record for more than five years and the Village Board determines that the further sale of lots within the subdivision presents a threat to public health, safety and welfare, except that the vacation shall apply only to lots owned by the developer or its successor; or 
3.  A subdivision plat has been recorded in violation of this title. 
(Ord. 5334, 2-28-2005) 
11-6-4. - Building permit. 
(A)  No building permit shall be issued until a certified copy of a plat is filed with the Village. 
(B)  No permanent connection shall be made or maintained with the sanitary or storm sewer or water supply systems of the Village to serve the property within the subdivision until the Village Engineer has approved in writing the appropriate tests required on these improvements, and not until the monies due the Village of Glen Ellyn for permit fees for the connections with said system has been paid. 
Upon completion of the construction of all house service connections with utility mains, an accurate map or maps showing the exact location of all such house services, all sewer and water mains, together with manholes, shutoff valves and other similar facilities, by distances in feet from street lines and side lot lines, shall be reviewed by the Village Engineer and filed with the Director of Public Works for the Village of Glen Ellyn. 
(C)  No building permit shall be issued for the final two or ten percent of the lots in a residential subdivision, whichever is greater, until all public improvements required by the Village have been fully completed, except for the final street surface course on the roadway. 
(D)  No building permits shall be issued until all the required fees set forth in section 11-3-3 of this title have been paid. 
(Ord. 5334, 2-28-2005) 
11-6-5. - Occupancy permit. 
(A)  No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any structure within the subdivision prior to completion of the required public improvements, with exception of the final surface course of a street. 
(B)  No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until final grading has been completed in accordance with the approved subdivision plans. 
(C)  No cut trees, timber, debris, earth, rocks, stones, soil, junk, rubbish, or other waste materials of any kind shall be buried in any land, or deposited on any lot or street at the time of issuance of a certificate of occupancy and removal of those items and materials shall be required prior to issuance of any certificate of occupancy for any structure in a subdivision. 
(D)  Whenever, by reason of the season of the year, any lot improvements required by this title cannot be performed, the Building and Zoning Official may issue a temporary certificate of occupancy, provided there is no danger to health, safety, or general welfare, that the improvements are completed no later than July 1 of the following year and that adequate security to guarantee the completion of the improvements remains in force. 
(Ord. 5334, 2-28-2005) 
11-6-6. - Enforcement of this title. 
The Director of Community Development of the Village of Glen Ellyn shall be the enforcing official of this title and may call upon any department or official of the Village for such information and assistance as he may deem necessary for the observance or enforcement of this title. 
Where an application is made or pursued by an entity which is not the owner, the Village may, because the owner has consented to the application, pursue either or both the developer or the owner for a violation or breach of this title. 
(Ord. 5334, 2-28-2005; Ord. 6674, 2-25-2019) 
11-6-7. - Penalty. 
Any person or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this title shall be subject to punishment by a fine of not more than $750.00 for each violation, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. In addition to such a penalty, the Village may seek either a mandatory injunction or other judicial relief to prevent violations of this title. 
(Ord. 5334, 2-28-2005) 
11-6-8. - Police power. 
Regulation of the subdivision of land and the attachment of reasonable conditions to land subdivision is an exercise of valid police power delegated by the state to the Village. The subdivider has the duty of compliance with reasonable conditions laid down by the Village Board for design, dedication, improvement, and restrictive use of the land to conform to the physical and economic development of the municipality and to the health, safety and general welfare of the future lot owners in the subdivision and the community at large. 
(Ord. 5334, 2-28-2005) 
11-6-9. - Saving provision. 
These regulations shall not be construed as abating any action now pending under, or by virtue of, prior existing subdivision regulations, or as discontinuing, abating, modifying, or altering any penalty accruing or about to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm, or corporation, or as waiving any right of the municipality under any section or provisions existing at the time of adoption of these regulations, or as vacating or annulling any rights obtained by any person, firm, or corporation, by lawful action of the municipality except as shall be expressly provided for in these regulations. 
(Ord. 5334, 2-28-2005) 
11-6-10. - Separability. 
If any part or parts of this title are for any reason held to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this title. 
(Ord. 5334, 2-28-2005) 
Chapter 7 - EXHIBITS - FINAL PLAT CERTIFICATIONS 
Final Plat Certifications: 
EXHIBITS 
FINAL PLAT CERTIFICATIONS 
The final subdivision plat shall contain the following certificates. Certificates by the Plan Commission and the Village Board shall be certified last in the order listed: 
a.  OWNER'S CERTIFICATE 
STATE OF ILLINOIS   ) 
                   ) SS 
COUNTY OF DU PAGE ) 
This is to certify that the undersigned is the owner of the land described in the annexed plat, and that he has caused the same to be surveyed and subdivided, as indicated thereon, for the uses and purposes therein set forth, and does hereby acknowledge and adopt the same under the style and title thereon indicated. 
I hereby dedicate for public use the lands shown on this plat for thoroughfares, streets, alleys, and facilities; and I hereby also reserve for that company or companies which have been granted by the Village or other entities with the power to do so, franchises within the Village for utility services, including natural gas, electricity, telephone, water, sewer, cable and other similar entities the easement provisions, which are stated on their standard form, which is attached hereto. 
This is to certify, as Owner of the property described herein and legally described on the plat, that I have determined to the best of my knowledge and belief that each of the subject lots lie wholly within (Name School Districts(s)). 
___________ 
___________ 
(address) 
Dated this _______ day of ___________, A.D. 20___. 
b.  NOTARY CERTIFICATE 
STATE OF ILLINOIS   ) 
                   ) SS 
COUNTY OF DU PAGE ) 
I, ___________, a Notary Public in and for said County, in the state aforesaid, do hereby certify that ___________, personally known to me to be the same persons whose names are subscribed to the foregoing instrument as such owners, appeared before me this day in person and acknowledge that they signed the annexed plat as their own free and voluntary act for the uses and purposes therein set forth. 
Given under my hand and Notarial Seal this _______ day of _______ , A.D. 20___. 
___________ 
Notary Public 
c.  SURVEYOR'S CERTIFICATE 
STATE OF ILLINOIS   ) 
                   ) SS 
COUNTY OF DU PAGE ) 
This is to certify that I, ___________ Licensed Illinois Land Surveyor No. _______, have surveyed and subdivided the following described property: as shown by the annexed plat, which is a correct representation of said survey and subdivision. All distances are shown in feet and decimals thereof. I further certify that all regulations enacted by the Village Board relative to plats and subdivisions have been complied with in the preparation of this plat. 
(Insert legal description) 
I further certify that the property shown on the Plat hereon drawn is situated within the Corporate Limits of the Village of Glen Ellyn which has adopted a Comprehensive Plan and which is exercising the special powers authorized by Division 12 of Article II of Illinois Municipal Code as heretofore and hereafter amended and that based upon a review of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Flood Insurance Rate Map Community Panel _______ with an effective date of _______, it is my opinion that the property platted hereon (is or is not) located within a Special Flood Hazard Area. 
I hereby authorize a representative from the Village of Glen Ellyn to record this Plat. 
Given under my hand and seal at ___________, Illinois, this _______ day of _______, A.D. 20___. 
___________ 
Name 
d.  COUNTY CLERK CERTIFICATE 
STATE OF ILLINOIS   ) 
                   ) SS 
COUNTY OF DU PAGE ) 
I, ___________, County Clerk of DuPage County, Illinois, do hereby certify that there are no delinquent general taxes, no unpaid forfeited taxes, and no redeemable tax sales against any of the land included in the annexed plat. Given under my hand and seal at Wheaton, DuPage County, Illinois, this _______ day of ___________, A.D. 20___. 
___________ 
County Clerk 
e.  CERTIFICATE AS TO SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS 
STATE OF ILLINOIS   ) 
                   ) SS 
COUNTY OF DU PAGE ) 
I, ___________, Village Collector of the Village of Glen Ellyn, do hereby certify that there are no delinquent or unpaid current or forfeited special assessments or anydeferred installments thereof that have been apportioned against the tract of land included in the plat. 
Dated at Glen Ellyn, DuPage County, Illinois, this _______ day of ___________ , A.D. 20___. 
___________ 
Village Collector 
f.  VILLAGE ENGINEER'S CERTIFICATE AS TO STREETS, DOMESTIC WATER, AND SANITARY 
STATE OF ILLINOIS   ) 
                   ) SS 
COUNTY OF DU PAGE ) 
I, ___________, Village Engineer of the Village of Glen Ellyn, do hereby certify to the best of my knowledge and belief that all matters pertaining to plat requirements as prescribed in the regulations governing plats adopted by the Village Board of the Village of Glen Ellyn, Illinois, insofar as they pertain to the subject plat, have been complied with. I further certify to the best of my knowledge and belief that the required performance security is posted for the completion of the improvements covering sanitary sewerage system and domestic water supply and transmission system under the jurisdiction of the Village of Glen Ellyn, based on engineer's plans and specifications prepared by a licensed engineer and approved by all public authorities having jurisdiction, except:___________. I further certify that the street names have been examined by me and found to comply with the Village of Glen Ellyn regulations. 
Dated at Glen Ellyn, DuPage County, Illinois, this _______ day of ___________ , A.D. 20___. 
___________ 
Village Engineer 
g.  PLAN COMMISSION CERTIFICATE 
STATE OF ILLINOIS   ) 
                   ) SS 
COUNTY OF DU PAGE ) 
Approved by the Plan Commission of the Village of Glen Ellyn, DuPage County, Illinois, this _______ day of ___________, 20___. 
Signed ___________ 
     Chairman 
Attest ___________ 
    Recording Secretary 
h.  VILLAGE BOARD CERTIFICATION 
STATE OF ILLINOIS   ) 
                   ) SS 
COUNTY OF DU PAGE ) 
Approved by the President and Village Board of the Village of Glen Ellyn, DuPage County, Illinois, this _______ day of ___________, 20___. 
Signed ___________ Attest ___________ 
     President           Clerk 
I, ___________, Village Clerk of the Village of Glen Ellyn, Illinois, do hereby certify that the annexed plat was presented to and by ordinance duly approved by the Village Board of the Village of Glen Ellyn, at its meeting held on ___________ , A.D. 20___. In witness whereof I have hereunto set the seal of the Village of Glen Ellyn, Illinois. 
___________ 
Village Clerk 
Note: Certification on Final Plats of subdivision located in the unincorporated areas within one and one-half miles beyond the Glen Ellyn Village limits shall be those required by the DuPage County Subdivision Regulations, except when Village of Glen Ellyn Subdivision Regulations are more restrictive, the applicable Village of Glen Ellyn, Subdivision Certifications shall also be required. 
(Ord. 5334, 2-28-2005, memorandum of 12-22-2017) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This is a chronological listing of the ordinances of the Village of Glen Ellyn, IL adopted after June 2017 used in this Code. Repealed or superseded laws at the time of the republication and any omitted materials are not reflected in the table. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
this Code 6494  6-26-2017 1(Exh. A) 8-6-1-8-6-23 1-7-1 6511  6-26-2017 2 3-19-11(O) 3 3-19-8(W)2. 4 3-19-12 5 3-19-13(A) 6513  7-17-2017 1, 2 7-6-2 3       Added 7-6-3(D)4., 5. 4 7-6-3(F) 5 7-6-4(A) 6518  7-26-2017 2 3-19-12 6519  7-24-2017 2       Rpld Tit. 2, ch. 8, §§ 2-8-1-2-8-8 3       Added 2-4-5(C)       Rnbd 2-4-5(C), (D)       as 2-4-5(D), (E) 4 1-7-10(B)2. 5 4-5-17(G)1.(a) 6-8 4-5-17(G)2.-4 6520  7-24-2017 2(Exh. B) 10-3-1(O) 10-4-17-1(A)¶, (B)¶ 10-4-17-2(A)¶, (B)¶ 10-7-2(A)       Added 10-10-12(A), (C)       Rnbd 10-10-12(A)-(H)       as 10-10-12(B), (D)-(J) 10-10-15(A)2., 3. 11-3-6 3       Added 4-1-4(A)6.(b)       Rnbd 4-1-4(A)6.(b)-(m)       as 4-1-4(A)6.(c)-(n) 6529  9-11-2017 1 9-5-6 6530  9-11-2017 1 9-5-7 Email 12-22-2017 Tit. 11, ch. 7 6532  9-25-2017 2 3-19-12 6534  9-25-2017 2, 3 3-19-11, 3-19-12 6537 10-23-2017 2 3-19-12 6561 11-13-2017 1 7-11-28 6567  1- 8-2018 1       Rpld 9-2-11 2       Added 9-2-12(A)7.       Rnbd 9-2-12(A)7.-9.       as 9-2-12(A)8.-10. 6570  1-22-2018 1, 2 9-5-7, 9-5-8 6576  2-12-2018 1 9-4-4(I) 6585  3-12-2018 1 3-32-8 6587  4- 1-2018 2 3-19-11(Q) 3 3-19-12 4 3-19-13(A) 6591  4-23-2018 1 3-6-2 2 3-6-1 3-6-6 3-6-12 3 3-6-4 6592  4- 9-2018 1 7-6-2       Added 7-6-10 6593  4- 9-2018 1 9-5-19(B), (E) 2 9-2-4(C) 9-2-5(I) 3 9-3-11(B), (D) 4 9-5-8 6594  4- 9-2018 2 3-19-11(C) 3 3-19-12 4 3-19-13(A) 6595  4-23-2018 1       Rpld 7-9-30       Added 7-9-30 6601  5-14-2018 2(Exh. D.1) 10-2-2 2(Exh. D.2) 10-4-5(E)2 2(Exh. D.3) 10-4-6(D)3 2(Exh. D.4) 10-4-7(D)3 2(Exh. D.5) 10-4-8(F)3 2(Exh. D.6) 10-4-14(A) 2(Exh. D.7) 10-4-15(A) 2(Exh. D.8) 10-4-15(B) 2(Exh. D.9) 10-4-15(G)14 2(Exh. D.10) 10-4-17-1(A) 2(Exh. D.11) 10-4-17-1(B) 2(Exh. D.12) 10-4-17-2(A) 2(Exh. D.13) 10-5-4(A)2(a) 2(Exh. D.14) 10-5-4(A)4 2(Exh. D.15) 10-5-5(B)4 2(Exh. D.16) 10-5-5(B)4 2(Exh. D.17) 10-5-5(C)3 2(Exh. D.18) 10-5-13(M)2(b) 2(Exh. D.19) 10-5-15(H) 2(Exh. D.20) 10-8-6(A) 2(Exh. D.21) 10-10-15(C)4 2(Exh. D.22) 10-11-2, Fig. 3 2(Exh. D.23) 10-11-2, Fig. 15 6603  5-29-2018 1 4-1-3 2 4-1-4 3-5 4-1-5(c)1-(c)3 6 4-1-6(B)10 7 4-1-8(B)13 8 4-8-3(D) 9 5-2-1(B)13 10 8-1-13(D) 11, 12 8-1-16 13 8-4-8 6607  6- 4-2018 2(Exh. B.1) 10-2-2 2(Exh. B.2, B.3) 10-4-17-1(A), (B) 2(Exh. B.4) 10-5-5(B)4 2(Exh. B.5) 11-3-9(B), (D), (F) 2(Exh. B.6) 11-4-4(C) 2(Exh. B.7) 11-4-8(A) 6608  6-25-2018 1 4-1-4(D) 2 8-6-13(C) 3 8-6-13(C)10 4 8-6-13(C)11 5 8-6-15(A) 6 8-6-15(A)6(d) 6615  6-25-2018 1-5 9-2-12(E), (I), (H), (Q), (R) 6617  7-16-2018 1 7-6-3(F) 2 7-6-4(A) 6619  8-27-2018 2(Exh. B.1) 10-2-2 2(Exh. B.2) 10-4-5(B) 2(Exh. B.3) 10-4-6(B)7 2(Exh. B.4) 10-4-7(B)8 2(Exh. B.5) 10-4-8(B)7 2(Exh. B.6) 10-4-9(B)7 2(Exh. B.7) 10-4-10(A)4 2(Exh. B.8) 10-4-10(B)8 2(Exh. B.9) 10-4-11(A)3 2(Exh. B.10) 10-4-11(B)7 2(Exh. B.11) 10-4-12(A) 2(Exh. B.12) 10-4-14(B)14 2(Exh. B.13) 10-4-16(B)6 2(Exh. B.14) 10-4-17-1(B)20 2(Exh. B.15) 10-4-17-2(B)17 6625  8-27-2018 1(Exh. A) 4-1-4 6629  9-24-2018 1(Exh. A)       Added 3-44-1-3-44-12 6630  9-24-2018 2 3-19-12 6633 10- 8-2018 1 9-2-12 2 9-5-7 6634 10-22-2018 1 9-2-12 2 9-5-8 3 9-5-14 6637 11-12-2018 2 2-13-2(A)1 6638 11-12-2018 2 3-19-12 6639 11-12-2018 1       Added 9-5-20 6641 11-12-2018 1       Rpld 4-4-1-4-4-9       Added 4-4-1-4-4-3 6651 12-10-2018 2 3-19-12 6652 12-10-2018 2       Added 2-1-5 6656 12-10-2018 2(Exh. B.1, B.2) 4-5-3 2(Exh. B.3, B.4) 4-5-4(R)3, (R)8 2(Exh. B.5, B.6) 4-5-5(H), (O) 2(Exh. B.7-B.9) 4-5-6 2(Exh. B.10) 4-5-10 2(Exh. B.11) 4-5-11 6659 12-10-2018 1       Added 9-2-13 2 9-5-8 6660  1-14-2019 1 9-4-2 6667  1-14-2019 1, 2       Added 9-7-1, 9-7-2 6668  1-28-2019 1 9-2-12(A)4 2, 3 9-5-8 6669  1-28-2019 2(Exh. B) 10-4-17-1(A)44 6674  2-25-2019 2 1-7-10 1-13A-5 1-13C-1 2-13-3 2-13-5, 2-13-6 2-13-10 3-1-8 3-40-4 3-40-9 3-40-15, 3-40-16 3-41-5 3-43-15 4-1-4, 4-1-5 4-1-10, 4-1-11 4-4-1 4-5-4 4-5-17 4-8-3 8-1-8, 8-1-9 8-1-20 8-6-4 8-6-13 8-6-15 10-2-2 10-3-3 10-4-3 10-5-5 10-5-8 10-5-13 10-5-15 10-10-1-10-10-3 10-10-6-10-10-17 11-2-2 11-3-2-11-3-9 11-4-8, 11-4-9 11-6-6 6677  2-25-2019 1 3-23-3 2 3-23-10 6684  3-11-2019 2(Exh. B) 10-5-5(B)4 6687  4- 8-2019 1 7-11-28 6692  5-13-2019 2 3-19-12 6698  5-28-2019 2 3-19-12  
