1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 1/366
ORDINANCES PENDING CODIFICATION
Ordinances listed under this folder in the table of contents to the left, have been passed,
but have not been incorporated in the actual code. Please contact the office of the clerk if
there are any questions concerning the ordinances listed.
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
VILLAGE OF INVERNESS
______________________________________________________________________________
ORDINANCE NO. 17-984_______
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE VILLAGE OF
INVERNESS VILLAGE CODE
(Re: Amending Title 4 “BUILDING REGULATIONS”
in its entirety)
______________________________________________________________________________
ADOPTED BY THE
CORPORATE AUTHORITIES
OF THE
VILLAGE OF INVERNESS, ILLINOIS
THIS __12____ DAY OF ____September_________, 2017.
______________________________________________________________________________
Published in pamphlet form by authority of the Corporate Authorities of the Village of Inverness, Cook County, Illinois, this ______ day of ____________, 2017.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 2/366
Ordinance No. 17-_____
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE VILLAGE OF
INVERNESS VILLAGE CODE
(Re: Amending Title 4 “BUILDING REGULATIONS”
in its entirety)
WHEREAS, the Corporate Authorities of the Village find that it is in the best interests of the Village and its residents to amend Title 4 of the Village of
Inverness Village Code by revising it in its entirety; now, therefore,
BE IT ORDAINED by the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Inverness, Cook County, Illinois, in exercise of its authority as a Home Rule
unit, as follows:
SECTION 1: The President and Board of Trustees hereby find that the recitals hereinabove set forth are true and correct and are incorporated into the text
of this Ordinance as its findings to the same extent as if each such recital had been set forth herein in its entirety.
SECTION 2: That Title 4, BUILDING REGULATIONS, of the Village of Inverness Village Code is hereby amended by the deletion of the existing title in
its entirety and the addition, in lieu thereof, of a new Title 4, which new Title shall read as follows:
Title 4 - BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL BUILDING PROVISIONS
4-1-1: SHORT TITLE; DESIGNATION OF PARTS:
A. This title, including the rules and regulations it adopts by reference, is entitled the INVERNESS BUILDING CODE. The number or letter designations used to set off or identify
its various parts refer to sections, subsections, paragraphs, rules, regulations or other divisions as the text or arrangement may indicate. Reference to any of these parts may
be by such designation alone.
B. To the extent that any provisions of this title are inconsistent with other provisions of this title or of this code, the more restrictive provisions shall prevail, except that to the
extent that the provisions of this chapter are inconsistent with any provisions of the code, regulations, standards, or appendices adopted in this title, in such event the
provisions of this chapter shall govern and prevail.
4-1-2: SCOPE OF PROVISIONS; PERMITS REQUIRED:
A. Each regulated building and structure, part and/or appurtenance thereof, both existing and hereafter erected or installed, shall be so maintained that the occupants and users
thereof and all others are reasonably safe from the hazards of fire, explosion, collapse, contagion and spread of infectious disease.
B. The owner of record of the subject real estate or his employee contractor, or beneficiary on behalf of such owner shall obtain a permit, as hereinafter provided by this title, in
advance, and all other requirements of these building regulations shall be complied with whenever a building or structure or part or appurtenance thereof, including, but not
limited to, any electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, or any portion thereof, located within the limits of the village is constructed, erected, installed, altered,
converted, remodeled, structurally repaired, moved, demolished or its use or occupancy is established or changed.
C. WORK EXEMPT FROM PERMIT OF THIS SECTION: Exemption from permit requirements of this code section shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be
done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this section or any other code and ordinances of this Village. Permits shall not be required for the following:
1. BUILDING:
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 3/366
a. Accessory buildings or structures, provided that the area does not exceed 150 square feet or has plumbing, gas or electric installed and shall not be placed in any
setback areas required by village code. Metal accessory buildings and sheds shall be prohibited.
b. Retaining walls that are not over 4 feet in height measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless supporting a surcharge and or directly adjacent
to a walking surface area.
c. Stoops, sidewalks and driveways within same footprint.
d. Patio flatwork; not including areas served by special use P.U.D. Ordinance and or Home Owner Associations.
e. Wood deck board surface replacement.
f. Interior: painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, wood flooring, cabinets, countertops, doors (within same opening and in like kind) and similar finish work.
g. Exterior: painting, siding, windows (within same opening), doors (within same opening), tear-off and re-roofs, fascia, soffit, gutters and similar finish work.
h. Swings and other playground equipment and shall not be placed in any building setback areas required by village code.
i. Coy Ponds and Fountains must be less than 24 inches in depth, not electrically powered and shall not be placed in any building setback area required by village code.
j. Window awnings supported by an exterior wall that do not project more than 54 inches from the exterior wall, do not require additional support and are not electrically
powered.
k. Tents on private property. Village Board approval required prior to erecting a tent on any Village property.
2. ELECTRICAL:
a. Replacements of attachment plug receptacles, but not the outlets therefor.
b. Replacement of branch circuit overcurrent devices of the required capacity in the same location.
c. Electrical wiring, devices, appliances, apparatus or equipment operating at less than 25 volts and not capable of supplying more than 50 watts of energy.
d. Minor repair work, including the replacement of lamps or the connection of approved portable electrical equipment to approved permanently installed receptacles.
3. GAS:
a. Portable heating, cooking or clothes drying appliances.
b. Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval or listing of equipment or make such equipment unsafe.
c. Portable fuel-cell appliances that are not connected to a fixed piping system and are not interconnected to a power grid.
4. MECHANICAL:
a. Portable heating appliances.
b. Portable ventilation appliances.
c. Portable cooling appliances.
d. Steam, hot or chilled-water piping within any heating or cooling equipment regulated by village code.
e. Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval or listing of equipment or make such equipment unsafe.
f. Replacement of a through-wall A/C unit in like kind and size.
g. Fixed-in-place A/C condenser unit replacement in like kind and size.
h. Forced air furnace unit replacement in like kind and size.
i. Radon mitigation systems for existing homes not required to be electrically powered.
j. Portable fuel-cell appliances that are not connected to a fixed piping system and are not interconnected to a power grid.
5. PLUMBING:
a. The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste or vent pipe; provided, however, that if any concealed trap, drainpipe, water, soil, waste or vent pipe becomes
defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace the same with new material, such work shall be considered as new work and may be subject to permit as
required by this section.
b. The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes, valves or fixtures, and the removal and re-installation of water closets, provided such repairs do not
involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of valves, pipes or fixtures.
c. Emergency repair or replacement of septic sewer lateral from building to septic tank. If not so equipped, a cleanout shall be added within 5 feet of the building.
d. Hot water heater replacement in like kind and size.
4-1-3: ADMINISTRATION; ENFORCEMENT:
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 4/366
The office of building official is hereby created in which is vested the power and duty to administer and enforce all the provisions of this title and such other regulations as are
designated by the board of trustees by ordinance or by direction of the village president. Wherever in this title the term building official or building officer is used, said reference
shall be to the building official as herein created.
A. Building Official Appointment: The village president shall appoint as building official a person who is qualified by professional or practical training and experience to conduct the
affairs and carry out the duties of that office.
B. Duties: The services of the building official and/or deputy building officials shall be provided by one or more persons acting as employees of the village or acting as
independent contractors pursuant to a contract or contracts approved by the board of trustees.
C. Term Of Office: The building official shall have no fixed term of office but shall serve at the pleasure of the president and may be terminated with or without cause by the
president but shall serve until a successor has been appointed and qualified.
D. Inquiries And Reports: The building official shall inquire into and report upon any matter pertaining to building and zoning as may be requested by the president and/or board of
trustees.
E. Deputy Building Official Appointment: The village president may also appoint such deputy building officials as are needed and qualified to carry out efficiently the duties and
powers assigned to them by said village president or building official, and there are hereby created the offices of deputy building officials, who shall be appointed by the
president. The number of such deputies shall be determined, from time to time by the president and board of trustees, and each such deputy shall serve at the pleasure of
the president and may be terminated with or without cause by the president. Each such deputy shall have the same powers and duties as are assigned to the building official
but shall be subject to the direction of the building official.
F. Compensation: The building official and deputy building officials shall receive such compensation, if any, as employees of the village or as independent contractors of the
village, as may be fixed by the board of trustees from time to time.
G. Department Records: The building official shall keep official records of applications received, permits and certificates issued, fees collected, reports of inspections, and notices
and orders issued.
4-1-4: BUILDING PERMIT FEES:
A. New Construction and Alterations: The fees for all building permits shall be six dollars ($6.00) for each one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) of scaled cost of construction, or
fraction thereof.
The scaled cost of construction shall be determined by the method below:
Type Of Structure Construction Cost
One- and two-family and multiple-family residential structures, per square foot for all finished and/or unfinished space $ 100.00
Business, offices, institutional structures, per square foot for all finished and/or unfinished space 100.00
Manufacturing, industrial structures, per square foot for all finished and/or unfinished space 100.00
Accessory residential structure, and decks per square foot for all finished and/or unfinished space or surface 50.00
Fireplaces (added value of each) 2,500.00
The scaled cost of construction of an addition, alteration or remodeling to a particular type of structure shall be determined at the same rate as the scaled cost of construction of
the existing structure would be determined if new.
There shall be a permit fee for new fences of fifteen dollars ($15.00) per one hundred (100) linear feet or fraction thereof.
In addition to the fees otherwise herein provided for, a fee surcharge of fifty percent (50%) of total building fees will be collected if construction is started before a construction
permit is issued, including site, building, fence demolition, etc., not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00).
Other applicable fees shall be as follows:
Certificate of
occupancy and
administrative costs
$25.00
Insurance fee $25.00 (fixed charge)
Off street parking
facilities permit
$50.00
Permit for moving of
buildings
$6.00 per $100.00 of estimated cost of work
Permit extension fee Each and every extension of such a building permit beyond the initial term thereof as authorized by section 107.9 of the Inverness building
code, a fee surcharge of fifty percent (50%) of the original total building fees shall be paid by the permittee prior to the grant of each such
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 5/366
extension
Plan review fee $60.00 per hour of actual time required by the building inspector for such plan review, with a minimum charge of one-half (1/2) hour, plus
reimbursement to the village for any out of pocket expenses incurred by the village in such plan review
Reinspection fee $100.00 for each inspection after both the initial inspection and after the first reinspection of the same project or of some portion thereof or of
the work of each separate trade due to noncompliance (i.e., the cost of the initial inspection and the first reinspection are included in the specific
permit fees)
Removal of stop work
order fee
$52.00
Septic permit $300.00
Septic repair permit $150.00
Sign permits The fee for signs, billboards and other display of structures for which permits are required under the provisions of the basic code shall be in
accordance with title 5, chapter 5 of this code
Site development
permit
$200.00
Swimming pool permit $200.00
Temporary certificate of
occupancy
$250.00
Tennis court permit $100.00
Well permit $50.00
B. Fees For Demolition Or Removal Of Building Or Structure Or Tanks: The fee for a permit for the demolition of a building or structure shall be at the rate of three dollars ($3.00)
for each one hundred (100) square feet of floor area of the building or structure. The fee for removal of miscellaneous structures such as underground storage tanks shall be
thirteen dollars ($13.00) for each item. A performance bond and a road bond shall be posted for each demolition permit in accordance with section 4-1-5 of this chapter.
C. Electrical Permit And Inspection Fees: In addition to the above fees, the following electrical permit and inspection fees are hereby established:
1. For the inspection of original installations in a single-family residence, during construction of such residence including all circuits, fixtures, receptacles and equipment:
For a residence to contain up to 1,000
square feet of livable floor area
$70.00
For a residence to contain 1,001 to
2,000 square feet of livable floor area
$85.00
For a residence to contain 2,001 to
3,000 square feet of livable floor area
$105.00
For a residence to contain in excess
of 3,000 square feet of
livable floor area
$105.00 plus $55.00 for each 1,000 square feet of area
or any fraction thereof in excess of 3,000 square feet
2. For the inspection of electrical installations in any nonresidential building during construction of such building including all circuits, fixtures, receptacles and equipment:
For a building to contain up to 1,000
square feet of usable floor area
$70.00
For a building to contain 1,001 to
2,000 square feet of usable floor area
$85.00
For a building to contain 2,001 to
3,000 square feet of usable floor area
$105.00
For a building to contain in excess of
3,000 square feet of usable floor area
$105.00 plus $25.00 for each 1,000 square feet of area
or any fraction thereof in excess of 3,000 square feet
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 6/366
3. For each inspection of additional electrical outlets on existing circuits, there shall be no charge.
4. For inspection of any electrical installation in any existing building, and for additional or replacement circuits in an existing building or for additional circuits in any
remodeling or enlargement of an existing building:
For remodeling or additions affecting up
to 1,000 square feet of usable floor area
$70.00
For remodeling or additions affecting
1,001 to 2,000 square feet of usable
floor area
$85.00
For remodeling or additions affecting
2,001 to 3,000 square feet of usable
floor area
$105.00
For remodeling or additions affecting in
excess of 3,000 square feet of usable
floor area
$105.00 plus $55.00 for each 1,000 square feet of
usable floor area or any fraction thereof in excess of
3,000 square feet
5. If additional electrical inspections are required by reason of inaccurate or incomplete information supplied by the applicant, a charge of sixty dollars ($60.00) per hour shall
be made for the time consumed in making any such additional inspection.
D. Plumbing Permit And Inspection Fees: The fee for each plumbing permit shall be twenty dollars ($20.00) plus ten dollars ($10.00) for each fixture included in the system, such
as, but not limited to, bathtubs, lavatories, closets, sinks, laundry tubs, drinking fountains, floor drains, and/or any installed receptacles, devices or other appliances which are
supplied with water or which receive or discharge liquids or liquid borne wastes, with or without discharge into the drainage system with which they may be directly or
indirectly connected shall be considered a fixture, but in no event shall the fee be less than the out of pocket expenses incurred by the village for its plumbing inspection
contractor relative to such permit and the related inspections. The fee for each plumbing permit shall defray the village's charges for all initial plumbing inspections plus one
reinspection related to such permit. If more than one reinspection is required related to any plumbing permit, a charge of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per reinspection shall
be paid by the permittee.
E. Refunds: Whenever, after application for a building permit and prior to any building site preparation and/or construction of permanent improvements on the property, the
applicant requests that the application be withdrawn and any permits issued revoked, there shall be refunded to such applicant all building permit fees paid and all watersewer
connection and similar fees paid excepting, however:
1. Plan review charges;
2. An additional charge, if appropriate, to reimburse the village for time spent or charges incurred other than usual plan review; and
3. Recapture charges which may have been paid by the village to others entitled thereto.
F. Deposits: A non refundable deposit shall be paid at the time of permit application. This deposit will be applied to the permit fee when a permit is issued.
1. A $75.00 non refundable deposit shall be required for all applications where the construction value is estimated to be less than or equal to $5,000.00.
2. A $250.00 non refundable deposit shall be required for all applications where the construction value is estimated to exceed $5,000.00.
3. A $500.00 non refundable deposit shall be required for all applications where the construction value is estimated to exceed $10,000.00.
4. A $1,000.00 non refundable deposit shall be required for all applications where the construction value is estimated to exceed $500,000.00.
5. A $5,000.00 non refundable deposit shall be required for all applications where the construction value is estimated to exceed $1,000,000.00.
6. A $7,500.00 non refundable deposit shall be required for all applications where the construction value is estimated to exceed $2,000,000.00.
7. A $10,000.00 non refundable deposit shall be required for all applications where the construction value is estimated to exceed $5,000,000.00.
4-1-5: BONDS:
A. Performance Bond:
1. Each person who applies for a building permit for the construction of any new building, for an addition to an existing building, for remodeling of an existing building, or who
applies for any site development permit to be issued pursuant to chapter 8 of this title or for any demolition permit shall post with the village collector a cash performance
bond as follows:
a. One thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for any addition to an existing building or for any remodeling of an existing building where the total estimated scaled cost of
construction is in excess of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) but does not exceed one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00), or for any demolition permit.
b. One thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for any site development permit to be issued pursuant to chapter 8 of this title where the cost of the site work does not exceed one
hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00).
c. Two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for any new building or for any addition to an existing building or for remodeling of any existing building where the total estimated
scaled cost of construction exceeds one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00); and
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 7/366
d. Two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for any site development permit to be issued pursuant to chapter 8 of this title where the cost of the site work exceeds
one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00).
2. Such bond shall be refunded to the applicant if the village president finds that the construction, demolition and/or site work has been completed in compliance with this code
and all other applicable rules, regulations and ordinances of the village and with state law. Otherwise, said performance bond shall be forfeited to the village without
prejudice to the rights of the village to require compliance with this code and all other applicable rules, regulations and ordinances and with state law.
B. Road Bond:
1. Each person who applies for a building permit for the construction of any new building, for an addition to an existing building, or for remodeling of an existing building, or who
applies for any site development permit to be issued pursuant to chapter 8 of this title, or for any demolition permit shall post with the village collector a cash road bond as
follows:
a. One thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for any addition to an existing building or for any remodeling of an existing building where the total estimated scaled cost of
construction is in excess of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) but does not exceed one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) or for any demolition permit;
b. One thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for any site development permit to be issued pursuant to chapter 8 of this title where the cost of the site work does not exceed one
hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00);
c. Two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for any new building or for any addition to an existing building or for remodeling of any existing building where the total estimated
scaled cost of construction exceeds one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00); and
d. Two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for any site development permit to be issued pursuant to chapter 8 of this title where the cost of the site work exceeds
one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00).
2. Such road bond shall be refunded to the applicant if the village president finds that the construction, demolition and/or site work has been completed without any substantial
damage to the streets, roads or highways within the village, including immediate removal of any mud or debris therefrom. Otherwise, said cash road bond shall be forfeited
to the village, without prejudice to the rights of the village to require compliance with this code and all other applicable rules, regulations and ordinances and with state law.
C. Release Of Bonds: The requirements for the release of the bonds specified in subsections A and B of this section shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following
requirements:
1. A reasonably mature lawn which shall inhibit erosion shall be established and must extend through the ditch and parkway to the near edge of the paved roadway.
2. For all new construction and when work is performed in the right of way, culverts under driveways shall be constructed of corrugated metal or concrete, be at least twelve
inches (12") in diameter and extend at least five feet (5') beyond the edges of the driveway and be terminated in flared end sections. Any damage to an existing culvert
sustained during the construction shall have been repaired. In order that drainage not be impaired, ditches shall be properly graded, and culverts shall be cleaned of debris
and silt.
3. Drainage pipes from curtain drains, sump pumps, roof drains, etc., shall end twenty feet (20') from any lot line and shall not extend into any right of way or any ditch or swale
within the right of way or directly onto the neighboring property.
4. No posts (other than standard mailbox posts complying with the requirements of this code), and no rocks, structures, lights, light posts, or obstructions of any kind shall exist
in the right of way. In addition, no structures (except for light posts) such as sheds, swing sets, shall be placed within the building setbacks.
5. Construction and landscaping shall be completed to that stage where the need for further heavy equipment or vehicles such as cement trucks, end loaders, etc., is unlikely.
6. Public roads shall be in the same condition as existed before construction commenced.
7. Damage to, or debris left upon, neighboring lots or rights of way attributable to the permittee's construction shall be repaired or removed. Ditch grading shall remain
unimpaired at all times on adjacent lots so that drainage shall not be impeded in a manner which might result in standing water or soil erosion. Erosion fences or other such
environmental protections, if required, shall be in place.
8. There shall be no evidence that the septic system is malfunctioning or of violations of this code relative to the septic system. Sprinkler systems shall not be installed within
twenty five feet (25') of the septic seepage field.
D. Forfeiture: Any failure to comply with the provisions of subsections A, B, and/or C of this section or any other provisions of this code or any other applicable rules, regulations
or ordinances of the village or the state law shall result in the forfeiture of any such cash bond held by the village; provided, however, that prior to any such forfeiture, the
village shall give thirty (30) days' written notice by U.S. mail, postage prepaid, to the applicant at his last known address, that such action is contemplated and that the
applicant has the right to request a hearing before the village president on the question of such forfeiture within that time period, and that if such applicant fails to do so, said
bond shall be automatically forfeited. If any such cash bond is unclaimed for two (2) years, the same may be forfeited to the village by resolution adopted by the village board;
provided, however, that prior to the passage of such a resolution, the village shall give thirty (30) days' written notice by U.S. mail, postage prepaid, to the applicant at his last
known address, that such forfeiture is contemplated if such applicant fails to claim the funds in question within that time period.
4-1-6: PERMIT APPLICATIONS:
A. Form of Application:
1. Application for such permits shall be made to the village administrator, who shall refer it to the building official. The application shall be filed and shall contain the legal
description, real estate index number and street address for the land on which the work is to be done. The application for building permit shall be accompanied by two (2) for
residential and four (4) for commercial sets of plans and specifications showing the work to be done; such plans and specifications shall be verified by the signature either of
the owner of the premises or by the architect or contractor in charge of operations.
2. When required by the building official, plans shall be drawn to scale and shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the nature and extent of the work proposed and shall show in
detail that it will conform to the provisions of the Inverness Building Code and all relevant laws, ordinances, rules and regulations. Plans shall include a plat of survey, drawn
to scale, showing all easements, drainage facilities, adjacent grades, property lines, the proposed building and every existing building on the property. The building official
may require the plans and specifications to be certified and stamped by a registered architect or structural engineer licensed by the state of Illinois. For any construction
project where the scale construction cost therefor may exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), the building official shall require such certificate and stamp be provided for
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 8/366
the plans for such project by such a registered architect or by a structural engineer licensed by the state of Illinois. Soil tests may be required if in the opinion of the building
official and/or the village engineer and/or village president or his designee, tests are deemed necessary.
3. Each applicant for a building permit shall deliver a copy of the following acknowledgement executed by the applicant and the owners of record of the property which is the
subject of the application:
Acknowledgement of Possible Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions of Record:
The undersigned, having applied to the Village of Inverness for a building permit, acknowledges:
(a) That there may be private covenants, conditions and restrictions running with the title to the property which is the subject of their permit applications which regulate,
govern, control and/or affect what type of improvements may be made on the subject property;
(b) That the Village, by issuance of a building permit has no power to and does not abrogate, vary, terminate, waive or release any such covenants, conditions and
restrictions of record which may be applicable to the subject property;
(c) That the undersigned remains obligated to comply with such covenants, conditions and restrictions of record notwithstanding the fact that they have received a
building permit from the Village of Inverness;
(d) That the undersigned and their attorney should review a title insurance policy or title insurance commitment for the subject property to determine what covenants,
conditions and restrictions of record are in fact applicable to the subject property; and
(e) That, in consideration for the issuance of a building permit, the undersigned further agree to hold harmless and indemnify the Village, its officers, employees and
agents, from any cost, claim, expense or liability to the Village, resulting directly or indirectly from or related to, any violation claimed by the undersigned of such covenants,
conditions and restrictions of record as may be applicable to the subject property, including reasonable attorneys' fees and other costs of defense.
B. Description Of Work: The application shall contain a general description of the proposed work, its location, the use and occupancy of all parts of the building or structure and of
all portions of the site or lot not covered by the building, provisions for special inspections as required by sections 1704 and 1705 of the International Building Code, 2015, as
adopted in chapter 2 of this title, and such additional information as may be required by the building official. The application must also contain a plat of survey prepared by a
registered Illinois land surveyor showing lot dimensions, total area, all existing improvements, all easements of record and all building and setback lines required by the
zoning ordinance or any recorded document, provided, however, no such plat of survey shall be required for a condominium unit where all proposed and actual work is
confined to the interior of the existing structure.
C. Time Limitation Of Application: An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned one hundred eighty (180) days after the date of
filing, unless such application has been pursued in compliance with this title or a permit has been issued; except that the building official is authorized to grant one or more
extensions of time for additional periods not exceeding one hundred eighty (180) days in total. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated.
4-1-7: PERMIT TIME LIMITATIONS:
Whenever any building permit is issued, the construction contemplated by such building permit shall begin within three (3) months from the date of the issuance of such building
permit and such construction shall be completed within the time prescribed from the date of the issuance of such building permit:
New homes and demolition/rebuild projects 24 months
Nonresidential structures 24 months
Residential additions 2,500 square feet or greater 18 months
Residential additions less than 2,500 square feet 12 months
Pools 9 months
Septic repairs/modifications 9 months
Accessory structures, decks and all other exterior work, except as specified above 6 months
All other interior work, except as specified above 12 months
except that if said permit has expired or been abandoned: a) the building official may, in his discretion, and if there is reasonable cause shown, grant one or more extensions of
time for said permit, all of which shall not exceed, in the aggregate, one hundred eighty (180) days for any such permit if there is reasonable cause shown; and b) in addition, the
village president may, in his discretion, and if there is reasonable cause shown, grant one or more extensions of time for such permit, all of which extensions shall, in the
aggregate, not exceed one hundred eighty (180) days for any such permit. In the event such construction is not begun within said three (3) month period, the building permit shall
be null and void. The building or structure shall be completed within the period referred to above from the date of issuance of said permit and the extensions thereof as authorized
by this section. Each day any building or structure remains incomplete after the expiration of such period and any extensions thereof as authorized by this section shall be
deemed to be a separate offense.
This title shall not require changes in the construction documents, construction or designated occupancy of a structure for which a lawful permit has been heretofore issued or
otherwise lawfully authorized, and the construction of which has been pursued in compliance with this title unless said permit has expired or been abandoned.
4-1-8: FOUNDATION SURVEYS REQUIRED:
A. A plat of survey (also known as a "spot survey") shall be required when any foundation is completed. A plat of the lot(s) or parcel(s) of land, or parts or portion thereof, drawn
to a scale showing the actual dimensions of the lot(s) or parcel(s), the location of all buildings and improvements, including excavations and foundation walls, and the
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 9/366
elevation of all levels of the top of foundation with respect to United States geological survey (USGS) datum, and certified by a registered land surveyor licensed by the state
as a true copy of the lot(s) or parcel(s) shall be submitted to the building official for review and approval of the foundation elevation and location immediately after the
foundation walls have been completed. Said plat or spot survey must meet the following requirements:
1. Such survey shall be prepared by and certified by a professional land surveyor registered in the state;
2. The legal description must be clearly set forth thereon;
3. All information on such plat must be legible;
4. The location of all foundations, buildings and improvements upon the lot or parcel shall be defined by measurements perpendicular to the boundaries;
5. Exterior dimensions of all foundations, buildings and improvements at ground level shall be shown.
B. No further construction other than backfilling shall occur until the foundation wall elevations shown on the plat have been reviewed and approved by the village engineer.
Acceptance of the location and elevation of foundation walls shall be shown by a stamp on the plat of survey marked "APPROVED, Village of Inverness Village Engineer",
with the date and signature of the village engineer.
4-1-9: CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY:
A. General: Except as provided for in subsection B of this section, no building hereafter erected shall be used or occupied in whole or in part until a certificate of use and
occupancy shall have been issued for same by the building official. The nature of the proposed use and occupancy of the property, including the permitted business or
occupation, if any, or other purpose for which such certificate of occupancy is issued shall be specified in such certificate and the use and occupancy of such premises shall
not be altered or modified without application for and issuance of a new certificate of occupancy.
B. Temporary Occupancy: Upon the request of the holder of a permit and the payment of the required fee, the building official may issue a temporary certificate of occupancy for a
building or structure, or part thereof, before the entire work covered by the permit shall have been completed, provided such portion or portions may be occupied safely prior
to full completion of the building or structure and occupancy shall have a term specified by the building and zoning officer not exceeding ninety (90) days from the date of
issuance. Any occupancy permitted by a temporary certificate of occupancy shall be discontinued upon the expiration of such temporary certificate.
C. Certificate Of Occupancy; Issuance Procedure: If, as a result of appropriate inspection, the building official determines that all construction has been completed in compliance
with the building permit and all village ordinances, and the proposed use and occupancy of the premises will comply with all such ordinances, the building official shall issue
to the owner a signed certificate of occupancy, and the building official shall then immediately transmit to the assessor a copy thereof.
4-1-10: FINAL AS BUILT SURVEYS REQUIRED:
A. Prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit, a final as built topographical survey of the lot grading shall be submitted to and approved by the village engineer. Said surveys
shall also be prepared by a registered land surveyor. After the receipt of such final as built survey, the village engineer shall conduct a final site inspection.
B. Final as built surveys shall show the following information:
1. Property lines (dimensioned), building lines, easements;
2. Lot corners (must be monumented by an iron pipe);
3. Building foundations at ground level, including dimensions;
4. Foundation location measurements relative to all property lines showing clearly that no building setback lines or easements have been encroached upon;
5. Bench mark description and elevations;
6. The following elevations shall be shown at USGS datum:
a. Top of foundation elevation for each level, and approximate grade change by scale;
b. Brick ledge, if applicable;
c. Garage floor elevation;
d. Centerline and edge of street or top of curb, if same exists, opposite front corners of property (indicate if final surface or not);
e. Ground at twenty five foot (25') intervals along:
(1) Roadside ditch flow line;
(2) Lot lines;
(3) Drainage swale flow lines.
f. Driveway culverts;
g. At locations where proposed elevations are indicated on approved final lot grading plan.
7. A final occupancy permit shall not be issued if the property is not in compliance with the approved foundation plat of survey, the approved site plan, the approved septic plan,
and the approved final lot grading plan and the approved final engineering for the subdivision.
4-1-11: UNAUTHORIZED CHANGES IN SITE GRADING PROHIBITED:
A. No grades within the village shall be disturbed or otherwise altered except as allowed pursuant to a site development permit issued by the village engineer.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 10/366
B. Any change in grading done without authorization of the village engineer shall be regraded and restored to its original approved grades, at owner's expense. If not completed
within fourteen (14) days, regrading may be ordered by the village and charged to owner.
C. No final occupancy permit or other indication of approval of new construction shall be issued or given by the building official until all grade requirements set forth in this section
and other applicable provisions of this code have been met.
D. The applicant, i.e., developer, contractor, and/or the builder, shall provide to the village, prior to the issuance of any occupancy permit, a statement signed by the applicant and
buyer/new owner, if any, stating that grades of the property purchased shall not be altered without a duly issued site development permit, and that any other improvements to
the property shall require permits prior to any construction of such improvements.
4-1-12: GENERAL DRAINAGE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Nonresidential Properties: All properties, other than residentially zoned properties, shall be drained into village approved drainage structures or into storm water detention
facilities within said property. Drainage onto properties that abut a nonresidential property shall be strictly prohibited unless such drainage reasonably maintains an existing or
historic drainage pattern or unless those other properties are designed to accommodate such drainage as approved by the village engineer.
B. Residential Properties: Residentially zoned lots or parcels shall be graded and drained in such a manner as to reasonably maintain existing or historic drainage patterns from
and onto other abutting properties. To the greatest extent practical, drainage shall be directed into village approved drainage swales and/or easements provided and
approved for such use.
C. Approval Required For Further Alterations: The passage of drainage to or from other properties shall not be obstructed or altered from the latest plan approved by the village
engineer, without the further written approval of such village engineer.
D. Existing Field Tiles, Drains And Storm Sewers To Be Repaired, Replaced And/Or Rerouted: If any existing field tile, drain, or storm sewer is destroyed, damaged or interrupted
during the course of any construction, said tile, drain, or storm sewer shall be immediately repaired, replaced and/or rerouted in a manner approved by the village engineer in
order to maintain the existing or historic drainage patterns, unless, based upon the written determination of the village engineer and based upon evidence submitted to such
village engineer, such tile, drain, or storm sewer should be abandoned.
E. Surface Drainage: Surface drainage shall not be directed into any right of way unless approved by the village engineer.
F. Point Of Discharge To Be Set Back; Certain Connections To Storm Sewers Required:
1. The point of discharge (i.e., the release at or above grade) of any sump pump drain, swimming pool drain, downspout drain or any other conduit, pipe, impervious surface,
or drain which channels, collects or conveys water related to any structure or improvement shall be set back at least twenty feet (20') from any property line of the lot or
parcel on which the structure or improvement is located unless such conduit, pipe, impervious surface, or drain is connected directly to a storm sewer within a public right of
way (or one offered for dedication) or within a recorded drainage easement and such connection and the manner of such connection shall have been approved in advance
in writing by the village engineer.
2. Every sump drain, swimming pool drain, downspout drain or any other conduit, pipe, impervious surface, or drain which temporarily, occasionally, periodically, or
permanently channels, collects or conveys unpolluted water related to any structure or improvement shall be connected to a storm sewer which is within a public right of way
(or one offered for public dedication) or within a recorded drainage easement if such a storm sewer exists, and such connection shall have been approved in advance in
writing by the village engineer.
4-1-13: FOUNDATION GRADING:
A. All foundation grades shall be established in such a manner as to achieve the free and unobstructed flow of surface water away from the buildings.
B. Every application for a building permit shall show the proposed foundation grade and set forth a grading plan for the proposed construction of the entire lot, determined in
accordance with this section and all other applicable provisions of this code. No building permit shall be issued unless the proposed foundation grade for the building and
grading plan is in accordance with the provisions of this section and all other applicable provisions of this code.
C. No building permit shall be issued by the building official unless he has on file an approved final grading plan for such subdivision, and the proposed foundation elevation and
lot grading for the lot in question shall substantially comply with same.
D. Every building constructed in a location for which a final grading plan is on file shall conform to said final grading plan.
4-1-14: FIRE SUPPRESSION SYSTEMS:
Notwithstanding anything contained in this code to the contrary, all buildings with a "building area", as defined in C. Chapter 3 of this title, in excess of four thousand eight
hundred (4,800) square feet or required by Chapter 9 of the IBC or IFC and all townhouses as defined in the IRC shall be equipped with a full functioning operational fire
sprinkling system meeting NFPA standard no. 13, 13D, or 13R as applicable.
4-1-15: TRAFFIC IMPACT STUDY REQUIRED:
A traffic impact study prepared by a registered professional engineer qualified in traffic analysis shall be obtained at the applicant's expense and reviewed and approved by the
board of trustees prior to the issuance of any building permit or any site development permit for any nonresidential use when either such use will include or will utilize more than
fifty (50) parking spaces or when such use is likely to generate peak hour traffic volumes of greater than fifty (50) vehicles per hour. The traffic impact study shall identify those
improvements by the applicant reasonably necessary to mitigate, to the extent possible, the traffic impacts specifically and uniquely attributable to such proposed use.
4-1-16: VIOLATIONS:
A. Notice Of Violation: The building official shall serve a notice of violation or order on the person responsible for the erection, construction, alteration, extension, repair, use or
occupancy of a building, structure, accessory building, or fence in violation of the provisions of this title, or in violation of a detailed statement or plan approved hereunder, or
in violation of a permit certificate issued under the provisions of this title; and such order shall direct discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the
violation.
B. Penalties: Any person who shall violate a provision of this title or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements hereof, who shall erect, construct, alter, or repair a building or
structure in violation of an approved plan or directive of the building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this title, shall be guilty of a petty
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 11/366
offense, punishable by a fine of not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
C. Unlawful Continuance: Any person who shall continue any work in or about the structure after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is
directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00).
4-1-17: APPEALS:
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the building official involving the interpretation of this title, the Inverness building code, may petition for an appeal of said decision to the
zoning board of appeals. Upon such appeal being made, the zoning board of appeals shall hold a public meeting and shall make a recommendation to the board of trustees to
affirm, overrule, or modify the decision of the building official as the facts may indicate. No appeal or variation from this title shall be granted, except by an ordinance approved by
the board of trustees.
4-1-18: CONSTRUCTION PARKING:
No owner of property, contractor, and/or other permittee, who has been issued any village permit, including, but not limited to, any building permit, demolition permit, site
development permit, septic permit, or other permit issued by the village authorizing any construction activity pursuant to this code ("village permits"), nor any contractor,
subcontractor or material supplier of such owner, contractor, or permittee, shall cause, permit, or allow:
A. Any vehicles and/or equipment, related to activity which is or should be the subject of such a village permit, to be parked or stored on any such village right of way, unless
specifically authorized by a special condition of such a permit; and
B. Any nonrubber tired equipment used in any activity related to such village permit(s) to be loaded or unloaded, except within the boundary lines of the property which is the
subject of such village permit(s), and in no event shall such loading or unloading occur within the boundary lines of any public or private right of way.
The restrictions of this section shall not be applicable to any work within a right of way which has been duly authorized by the entity having maintenance jurisdiction over said
right of way.
CHAPTER 2
INVERNESS BUILDING CODE
4-2-1: INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE ADOPTED:
The International Building Code, 2015 edition (IBC), of the International Code Council, is hereby adopted, except for such deletions and substitutions of sections as herein
provided, as part of the Inverness Building Code (hereinafter sometimes referred to as "IBC" and sometimes referred to in this chapter as "this code").
4-2-2: AMENDMENTS, DELETIONS, ADDITIONS AND MODIFICATIONS:
The following amendments, deletions, additions and modifications are hereby made to the Inverness Building Code as adopted in section 4-2-1 of this chapter:
Sections 101.4.3, 103, 104.1, 104.2, 104.3, 104.5, 104.7, 105.1, 105.1.1, 105.1.2, 105.2, 105.2.1, 105.2.2, 105.2.3, 105.3, 105.3.1, 105.3.2, 105.4, 105.5, 107.3.2, 110.1, 110.2,
110.3, 111.2, 113, 113.1, 113.2, and 113.3 of the IBC are hereby deleted and are not adopted as parts of the Inverness building code. See Chapter 1 for additional administrative
requirements.
Section 101.1 shall be and is hereby amended to read as follows:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the "Inverness Building Code", hereinafter sometimes referred to as "this code".
Section 101.2 shall be and is hereby amended to read as follows:
101.2 Scope. The provisions of this code shall apply to the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, relocation, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use
and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures.
Exceptions:
1. Detached one- and two-family dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than two stories above grade plane in height (plus any mezzanine as
authorized by this code) with a separate means of egress and their accessory structures shall comply with the Inverness Building Code.
2. All other existing buildings shall comply with this code, the Inverness Building Code.
Section 101.4 shall be and is hereby amended to read as follows:
101.4 Referenced Codes. The other codes referenced in this code shall be considered part of the requirements of this code in their entirety.
Section 101.4.4 shall be and is hereby amended to read as follows:
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 12/366
101.4.5 Property Maintenance. The provision of the International Property Maintenance Code (2015), which is hereby adopted, shall apply to existing structures and
premises; equipment and facilities; light, ventilation, space heating, sanitation, life and fire safety hazards; responsibilities of owners, operators and occupants; and
occupancy of existing premises and structures.
Section 101.4.5 shall be and is hereby amended to read as follows:
101.4.5 Fire Prevention. The provisions of the International Fire Code (2015), which is hereby adopted, shall apply to matters affecting or relating to structures, processes
and premises from the hazard of fire and explosion arising from the storage, handling or use of structures, materials or devices; from conditions hazardous to life,
property or public welfare in the occupancy of structures or premises; and from the construction, extension, repair, alteration or removal of fire suppression and alarm
systems or fire hazards in the structure or on the premises from occupancy or operation, provided, however, section 903.2.7 of the international fire code (2015) shall be
amended to provide as follows:
"903.2.7 Group R. An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with section 903.3 shall be provided throughout all buildings with a group R fire area, provided,
however, that this requirement shall not be applicable to R-3 residential occupancies as defined in said fire code, except where and in the manner that automatic sprinkler
systems are otherwise required by this village code."
Section 108.5 of the Inverness Building Code shall be added and is hereby amended to read as follows:
108.5 Accessory Buildings Or Structures. It shall be unlawful to build any garage, shed or other accessory building or structure before the main building is built on the
subject property, and no building permit shall be issued for same, before the main building is built on the subject property, and no accessory building shall be used as a
residence.
Section 1805.4.3 shall be and is hereby amended to read as follows:
Section 1805.4.3 Drainage Discharge. Any floor base and foundation perimeter drain hereinafter installed shall discharge by mechanical means or by a combination of
mechanical means and gravity into an approved drainage system that complies with the Inverness plumbing code. However, systems relying only on gravity shall not be
permitted.
Chapters 29, 30 and 32, of the IBC are hereby deleted and not adopted as part of the Inverness building code.
The following appendices of the IBC shall be adopted:
Appendix F Rodent proofing
Appendix I Patio Covers
CHAPTER 3
RESIDENTIAL BUILDING CODE
4-3-1: RESIDENTIAL CODE FOR ONE- AND TWO-FAMILY DWELLINGS ADOPTED:
The International Residential Code for One- and Two-family Dwellings, 2015 edition (IRC), of the International Code Council, is hereby adopted, except for such deletions and
substitutions of sections as herein provided, as part of the Inverness residential building code (hereinafter sometimes referred to as the "IRBC" and sometimes in this chapter
referred to as "this code").
4-3-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
The following amendments, deletions, additions, and modifications are hereby made to the Inverness residential building code as adopted in section 4-3-1 of this chapter:
Sections 101.4.3, 103, 104.1, 104.2, 104.3, 104.5, 104.7, 105.1, 105.1.1, 105.1.2, 105.2, 105.2.1, 105.2.2, 105.2.3, 105.3, 105.3.1, 105.3.2, 105.4, 105.5, 107.3.2, 110.1, 110.2,
110.3, 111.2, 113, 113.1, 113.2, and 113.3 of the IBC are hereby deleted and are not adopted as parts of the Inverness building code. See Chapter 1 for additional administrative
requirements.
The following chapters of the IRC are NOT adopted and are hereby deleted in their entirety:
Chapter 11, Energy;
Chapter 25, Plumbing Administration;
Chapter 26, General Plumbing Requirements;
Chapter 27, Plumbing Fixtures;
Chapter 28, Water Heaters;
Chapter 29, Water Supply And Distribution;
Chapter 30, Sanitary Drainage;
Chapter 31, Vents;
Chapter 32, Traps;
Chapter 34, General Requirements;
Chapter 35, Electrical Definitions;
Chapter 36, Services;
Chapter 37, Branch Circuits And Feeder Requirements;
Chapter 38, Wiring Methods;
Chapter 39, Power And Lighting Distribution;
Chapter 40, Devices And Luminaries;
Chapter 41, Appliance Installation;
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 13/366
Chapter 42, Swimming Pools;
Chapter 43, Class 2 Remote-Control Signaling;
Section R101.1 shall be and is hereby amended to read as follows:
R101.1 Title. These provisions shall be known as the "Inverness Residential Building Code".
Section R101.2 shall be and is hereby amended to read as follows and the "exception" which was previously part thereof is deleted:
R101.2 Scope. The provisions of the Inverness residential building code shall apply to the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment,
use and occupancy, location, removal and demolition of detached one- and two-family dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than two stories
(plus any mezzanine or habitable attic authorized by this code) in height with a separate means of egress and their accessory structures. In addition, the provisions of the
Inverness residential building code shall not apply to manufactured housing which is hereby prohibited.
Section R102.7 shall be and is hereby amended to read as follows:
R102.7 Existing Structures. The legal occupancy of any structure existing on the date of adoption of this code shall be permitted to continue without change, except as is
specifically covered in this code, the International Property Maintenance Code (2015), which is hereby adopted, or the International Fire Code (20153), which is also hereby
adopted, or as is deemed necessary by the building official for the general safety and welfare of the occupants and the public, provided, however, section 903.2.7 of the
International Fire Code (2015) shall be amended to provide as follows:
"903.2.7 Group R. An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with section 903.3 shall be provided throughout all buildings with a group R fire area, provided,
however, that this requirement shall not be applicable to R-3 residential occupancies as defined in said fire code, except where and in the manner that automatic sprinkler
systems are otherwise required by this village code."
Section R103 is hereby deleted in its entirety and the following shall be and hereby is substituted therefor:
R103. Building Department; Creation Of Enforcement Agency. The village of Inverness building department is hereby created and the official in charge thereof shall be known
as the building official.
Section R104.10.1 is hereby deleted in its entirety.
Section R105 is hereby deleted in its entirety.
Section R106.1.4 is hereby deleted in its entirety.
Section R106.3.3 is hereby deleted in its entirety.
Section R109.1.3 is hereby deleted in its entirety.
Section R109.3 shall be and is hereby amended to read as follows:
R109.3 Requests For Inspections: It shall be the duty of the permit holder or their agent to notify the building official that such work is ready for inspection. Requests for
inspections by the building official or the village engineer or any other village officer or employee as required by this code shall be made at least two (2) working days in
advance. It shall be the duty of the person requesting any inspections required by this code to provide access to and means for inspection of such work.
The exception found in section R110.1 is hereby deleted in its entirety.
Section R110.4 is hereby deleted in its entirety with the following added See section 4-1-9 of this ordinance.
Section R111 is amended by adding a new section R111.4 which shall read as follows:
R111.4 Building Demolition. Before a building or structure is demolished or removed, the owner or agent shall cause all utility providers to disconnect and sever their
respective service connections to the premises.
Section R112 is hereby deleted in its entirety.
Section R202 shall be and is hereby amended to add the following definitions in alphabetical order:
ATTIC, HABITABLE: A finished area, not considered a story, complying with all of the following requirements:
1. All habitable areas and spaces shall have emergency escape and rescue provisions per section R310, whether or not said areas and spaces are used for sleeping.
2. Any and all emergency escape and rescue provisions shall face and be clearly visible from the public street.
3. The maximum sill height of said emergency escape and rescue provisions shall not exceed 24 feet above the immediate finished grade below, and shall be no more
than 2 feet back from roof eave below.
4. The total limits of space finished within the attic shall be not more than 1/3 of the finished space of the floor immediately under the attic.
5. The entire residence shall be equipped with a full functioning operable fire sprinkling system meeting NFPA standard no. 13, 13D, or 13R as applicable together with a
backup electrical supply sufficient to power system pumping equipment.
BUILDING AREA. The area included within the surrounding exterior walls (or exterior walls and fire walls) exclusive of vent shafts and courts. Areas of the building not
provided with surrounding walls shall be included in the building area if such areas are included within the horizontal projection of the roof or floor above.
FIRE WALL. Fire walls shall be constructed of masonry with a UL fire rated design of at least 2 hours. Fire walls shall extend from the foundation to a termination point at
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 14/366
least 30 inches above the roof or to the underside of the roof sheathing if the roof sheathing is constructed of fire-retardant-treated wood for a distance of 4 feet on both
sides of the wall. Each portion of a building separated by one or more fire walls shall be considered a separate building.
Section R202 shall be and is also hereby amended by the amendment of the definition of "accessory structure" which shall read as follows:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A detached building or structure, the use of which is incidental to that of the main building and which is located on the same lot. It shall be
unlawful to build any accessory structure before the main building is built on the subject property, and no building permit shall be issued for same, before the main building is
built on the subject property, and no accessory structure shall be used as a separate residence. Notwithstanding any provision contained in this title to the contrary, no
accessory building or structure shall require a building permit unless it exceeds one hundred fifty (150) square feet in ground area or has plumbing, gas, or electric service
installed therein and connected thereto but any such accessory building or structure shall otherwise comply with the requirements of this title. Metal accessory buildings and
sheds shall be prohibited
Section R202 shall be and is hereby amended by the amendment of the definition of "mezzanine, loft", which shall hereafter read as follows:
MEZZANINE, LOFT. An intermediate level or levels between the floor and ceiling of any story with an aggregate floor area of not more than one-third (1/3) of the area of the
room or space in which the level or levels are located and which shall be open and unobstructed to the room in which such mezzanine or loft is located except for walls not
more than 42 inches (1,067 mm) high, columns, and posts.
Section R202 shall be and is also hereby amended by the amendment of the definition of "townhouse" which shall read as follows:
TOWNHOUSE. A single-family dwelling unit constructed in a group of two or more attached dwelling units in which each dwelling unit extends from foundation to roof and
with open space on at least two sides.
Table R301.2 (1) is hereby amended to read as follows:
Ground snow load: 30 pounds per square foot
Wind speed: 115 mph
Topographical effect No
Special wind region No
Wind-borne debris No
Seismic design category: Design category A
Weathering: Severe
Frost line depth: 42 inches below grade
Termite: Moderate to heavy
Winter design temperature: 0°F
Ice barrier underlayment required: Yes
Flood hazards: Official flood prone map, as revised on January 31, 1984, FIRM, effective on November 6, 2000
Air freezing index: 2000
Mean annual temperature: 50°F.
Section R301.2.2.4.1 shall be and is hereby amended to read as follows:
R301.2.2.4.1 Building Height. Buildings shall be limited to the lesser of two stories (plus any mezzanine or habitable attic authorized by this code) with separate means of
access of limits as given in table R602.10.1 and further subject to the limitations of the zoning ordinance of the Village of Inverness.
Section R302.5.1 shall be and is hereby amended to read as follows:
R302.5.1 Opening Protection. Openings from a private garage directly into a room used for sleeping purposes shall not be permitted. Other openings between the garage
and residence shall be equipped with solid wood doors not less than 13/4 inches in thickness, solid or honeycomb core steel doors not less than 13/4 inches thick, or 90-
minute fire-rated doors. The residence shall be protected from the garage with a 6-inch (6") high concrete gas curb at the common wall.
Section R302.6 shall be and is hereby amended to read as follows:
R309.2 Separation Required. The garage shall be completely separated from the residence and its attic area by not less than 5/8-inch (16 mm) type X fire rated gypsum
board or its equivalent applied to the garage side. Where the separation is a floor-ceiling assembly, the structure supporting the separation shall also be protected by not less
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 15/366
than 5/8-inch (16 mm) type X fire rated gypsum board or its equivalent. The same material shall be installed in every furnace room.
Section R309.3 is hereby deleted in its entirety.
Section R317.2 shall be and is hereby amended to read as follows:
R317.2 Townhouses. Each townhouse shall be considered a separate building if separated by a firewall as defined in section R202. At a minimum, townhouses shall be
separated by fire-resistance-rated wall assemblies meeting the requirements of R302 for exterior walls and shall, in addition, be subject to the fire suppression system
requirements of section 4-1-14 of the village code.
Exception: A common 2-hour fire-resistance-rated wall is permitted for townhouses if such walls do not contain plumbing or mechanical equipment, ducts or vents in the
cavity of the common wall. Electrical installations shall be installed in accordance with the Inverness electrical code. Penetrations of electrical outlet boxes shall be in
accordance with section R317.3.
Section R322 is hereby deleted in its entirety.
Section R401 is hereby amended by adding a new section R401.5 which shall read as follows:
R401.5 Trenched Foundations. Trenched foundations will be allowed provided soils information prepared and certified by a soils testing laboratory approved by the village
engineer is provided substantiating the use of same. Trenched foundations will be allowed only in those areas where the character of the soil is such that the trench walls will,
in the opinion of the building official, remain stable and in place during the placement of the foundations, footings and walls.
Sections R402.1, R402.1.1 and R402.1.2 are hereby deleted in their entirety.
Section R403.1 shall be and is hereby amended to read as follows:
R403.1 General. All exterior walls shall be supported on continuous solid or fully grouted masonry or concrete footings, or other approved structural systems which shall be of
sufficient design to accommodate all loads according to section R301 and to transmit the resulting loads to the soil within the limitations as determined from the character of
the soil. Footings shall be supported on undisturbed natural soils or engineered fill.
Section R405.1 shall be and is hereby amended to read as follows:
Section R405.1 Concrete Or Masonry Foundations. Drains shall be provided around all concrete or masonry foundations that retain earth and enclose habitable or usable
spaces located below grade. Drainage tiles, gravel or crushed stone drains, perforated pipe or other approved systems or materials shall be installed at or below the area to
be protected and shall discharge by mechanical means into an approved drainage system. Gravel or crushed stone drains shall extend at least 1 foot (305 mm) beyond the
outside edge of the footing and 6 inches (153 mm) above the top of the footing and be covered with an approved filter membrane material. The top of open joints of drain tiles
shall be protected with strips of building paper, and the drainage tiles or perforated pipe shall be placed on a minimum of 2 inches (51 mm) of washed gravel or crushed rock
at least one sieve size larger than the tile joint opening or perforation and covered with not less than 6 inches (153 mm) of the same material.
The following appendices of the IRC are adopted:
Appendix A Sizing and Capacities of Gas Piping
Appendix B Sizing of Venting Systems
Appendix C Exit Terminal s of Mechanical Draft and Direct vent Systems
Appendix F Passive Radon Gas Controls
Appendix K, Sound Transmission
Appendix O Automatic Vehicle Gates
CHAPTER 4
INVERNESS PLUMBING CODE
4-4-1: PLUMBING INSPECTOR:
A. Position Created, Appointment: There is hereby created the position of plumbing inspector, an administrative position of employment in the village. Said inspector shall be
appointed by the village president.
B. Building Officer Ex Officio Plumbing Inspector: Unless and until a plumbing inspector is appointed by the village president, the building officer shall be ex officio plumbing
inspector and shall have all the powers and perform all the duties connected with that office.
C. General Duties Of Inspector: It shall be the duty of the plumbing inspector to see to the enforcement of all provisions of the ordinances of the village relating to plumbing and
plumbing equipment, and to make such inspections and perform such tests as may be necessary in the enforcement of such ordinances.
4-4-2: STOP ORDERS AUTHORIZED; OBEDIENCE; PENALTY:
A. The plumbing inspector shall have the power to order work stopped on the construction, alteration or repair of plumbing equipment when such work is being done without a
permit or otherwise being done in violation of any ordinance of the village.
B. Work shall not be resumed after the issuance of such a stop order except on written permission of the plumbing inspector; provided, that if the stop order is an oral one, it shall
be followed by a written stop order within twenty four (24) hours.
C. Any person who shall continue work in violation of a stop order of the plumbing inspector shall be guilty of a violation of this code, and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed each day on which any work in violation of such order is done.
4-4-3: PLUMBING CODE ADOPTED:
That certain printed document entitled "Illinois state plumbing code", May 2014, published by the state of Illinois department of public health, office of health regulation, 535 West
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 16/366
Jefferson Street, Springfield, IL 62761, and available from said department plumbing code section, at least three (3) copies of which code were on file in the office of the village
clerk for inspection and/or copying by the public for at least thirty (30) days prior to the adoption thereof, is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter as the
rules and regulations governing the construction, installation, alteration or repair of plumbing in the village; and it shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install, alter or
repair, or cause to be constructed, installed, altered or repaired any plumbing in the village in violation of or without complying with those rules and regulations, and each and all
of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said code, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this code, with the
additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, as set forth in section 4-4-4 of this chapter.
4-4-4: AMENDMENTS, DELETIONS, ADDITIONS, MODIFICATIONS TO THE PLUMBING CODE:
The following amendments, deletions, additions and modifications are hereby made to the plumbing code:
A. The state plumbing code "administrative authority" as used in this code means the building officer of the village or the village president.
B. Water lines within buildings shall be constructed of the following materials:
Below grade - copper type K
Above grade - copper type L or galvanized steel
C. The use of copper waste and vent lines is prohibited in buildings connected to septic systems.
4-4-5: HARMFUL WASTES PROHIBITED; DAMAGING SEWER OR DRAIN:
A. No garbage, dead animals or obstructions of any kind whatever, including broken glass or any similar articles, or any oil, lubricating grease, gasoline or other flammable liquids
shall be placed, thrown or deposited in any receiving basin or sewer or ditch or culvert and any person so offending or causing any such obstruction or substance to be so
placed so as to be carried into such basin or sewer or ditch or culvert shall be guilty of a violation of this code.
B. Any person injuring, breaking or removing any portion of any receiving basin covering flag, manhole, vent or any part of any sewer or drain shall be guilty of a violation of this
code.
C. Proper interceptors shall be installed in any establishment, such as bottling plants, where there is a likelihood of such prohibited material flowing into the sewer, to intercept
such material.
4-4-6: INJURY TO DISPOSAL FACILITIES:
A. Any person who shall, by himself or another person, directly or indirectly, willfully or maliciously damage or obstruct any sewer, house drain, cesspool, septic tanks, seepage
field, water closet pipe, catch basin, manhole, ditch, culvert, protection pier or any appurtenances thereto, now or hereafter to be laid or constructed in the village shall be
guilty of a violation of this code, and shall be further liable to pay all expenses incurred on account of repairs or damages resulting from such willfull or malicious act.
B. Any person who shall, by himself or another, destroy or injure the bank of any ditch, gully or open drain or culvert or place any substance therein, tending to obstruct the same
or render it obnoxious, or shall, by himself or another, directly or indirectly tap any public ditch or drain in the village or connect any private sewer, drain or ditch therewith,
without the written consent of the village had and obtained, shall be guilty of a violation of this code.
4-4-7: OVERHEAD PLUMBING:
All new buildings with basements, floors, rooms or occupancy areas below ground level at the building site and served by a public or private sewer system, shall be served by
overhead plumbing. No building permit application will be accepted nor any permits issued for construction of any structure unless plans and specifications therefor provide for
overhead plumbing as required by this section.
4-4-8: FOOTING DRAINS:
Footing drains shall be connected to sump pumps for further discharge into a seepage trench or dry well installed and used only for this purpose or, where available, into a storm
sewer or a drainage ditch if approved by the village. No footing drain or drainage tile shall be connected to the sanitary sewer system.
4-4-9: POINT OF DISCHARGE TO BE SET BACK; CERTAIN CONNECTIONS TO STORM SEWERS REQUIRED:
A. The point of discharge (i.e., the release at or above grade) of any sump pump drain, swimming pool drain, downspout drain or any other conduit, pipe, impervious surface, or
drain not connected to a septic system or to a sprinkler system which channels, collects or conveys water related to any structure or improvement shall be set back at least
twenty feet (20') from any property line of the lot or parcel on which the structure or improvement is located unless such conduit, pipe, impervious surface, or drain is
connected directly to a storm sewer within a public right of way (or one offered for dedication) or within a recorded drainage easement and such connection and the manner
of such connection shall have been approved in advance in writing by the village engineer.
B. Every sump drain, swimming pool drain, downspout drain or any other conduit, pipe, impervious surface, or drain not connected to a septic system or to a sprinkler system
which temporarily, occasionally, periodically, or permanently channels, collects or conveys unpolluted water related to any structure or improvement shall be connected to a
storm sewer which is within a public right of way (or one offered for public dedication) or within a recorded drainage easement if such a storm sewer exists within seventy five
feet (75') of the point on the perimeter of such improvement or structure where such conduit, pipe, or drain commences, and such connection shall have been approved in
advance in writing by the village engineer.
CHAPTER 5
INVERNESS ELECTRICAL CODE
4-5-1: DEFINITION:
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 17/366
The term "electrical equipment", as used in this chapter, means conductors, fittings, devices, fixtures and other equipment installed for the utilization of electricity for light, heat or
power. It does not include radio apparatus or equipment for wireless reception of sounds and signals, and it does not include apparatus, conductors or other equipment installed
for or by public utilities, including common carriers which are under the jurisdiction of the Illinois commerce commission, for use in their operation as public utilities.
4-5-2: ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR:
A. Position Created; Appointment: There is hereby created the position of electrical inspector, an administrative position of employment in the village. The electrical inspector shall
be appointed by the village president.
B. Ex Officio Inspector: Unless and until an electrical inspector shall be appointed by the president, the building officer shall act as ex officio electrical inspector and shall have all
of the powers and perform all of the duties connected with that office.
C. General Powers Of Inspector: The electrical inspector shall have the right during reasonable hours to enter any building in the discharge of his official duties, or for the purpose
of making an inspection or test of the electrical equipment therein; and he shall have the authority to enforce all provisions of this chapter relating to electrical wiring and
equipment. If entry to any occupied residence or apartment is refused, the electrical inspector shall seek a search warrant authorizing such entry. He shall have the power to
order or otherwise cause the current in any wire or conduit to be turned off whenever this becomes necessary for the protection of life or limb, or property.
4-5-3: INSPECTIONS REQUIRED; CONCEALING WIRING PROHIBITED:
The electrical inspector shall make all inspections necessary to see to the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter relating to electricity; and no electric wiring shall be
covered or concealed until it has been inspected and approved.
4-5-4: APPROVAL OF INSTALLATIONS; USING UNAPPROVED INSTALLATIONS:
A. Inspection Certificate: The electrical inspector shall issue a certificate after each inspection in which the wiring or apparatus is found to be in compliance with the terms of this
chapter and with the rules hereby adopted.
B. Unlawful Use: It shall be unlawful to use or turn on power into any wires or apparatus hereafter installed for which such certificate has not been issued because the permit was
not secured for installation or because the work was not completed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
C. Temporary Use: The building official may, in his discretion, give temporary permission for a reasonable time to supply and use current in part of an electric installation before
such installation has been fully completed and the final certification of approval has been issued; provided, that the part covered by the temporary certificate complies with all
the requirements specified for temporary lighting, heat or power as specified in the Inverness electrical code as hereinafter adopted.
D. Final Inspections And Tests: On completion of the work, the building officer shall inspect the work and cause tests to be made of the operation of the entire system to ensure
compliance with all requirements.
4-5-5: CODE ADOPTED:
Pursuant to the recommendations of the electrical commission of the village, there is hereby adopted as providing safe and practical standards and specifications for the
installation, alteration and use of electrical equipment in the village, the National Electrical Code, 2014 edition, published by the National Fire Protection Association, and adopted
by the American National Standards Institute, except for such amendments, deletions, additions and/or modifications as hereinafter provided.
4-5-6: AMENDMENTS TO ELECTRICAL CODE:
The following amendments, deletions, additions and/or modifications are hereby made to the Inverness electrical code as adopted in section 4-5-5 of this chapter:
See Chapter 1 for additional administrative requirements.
A. Section 250.104.(A)(1) of the Inverness electrical code is hereby amended by the addition of a subparagraph (a) thereto, which subparagraph shall provide as follows:
"(a) Grounding shall be bonded to the street side of the water supply with a bonding jumper around the water meter."
B. Article 300 of the Inverness electrical code is hereby amended by the addition of a new section 300.1A which shall read as follows:
"300.1A: WIRING METHODS: Notwithstanding anything contained in this article or code to the contrary, all wiring for services, feeders and branch circuits installed on or
within buildings shall be installed in electrical metallic tubing (as defined in article 358), in intermediate metal conduit (as defined in article 342), provided, however, (1)
sections of armored cable (as defined in article 3203) not exceeding six feet in length where necessary may be permitted but only with prior express and specific written
approval of the electrical inspector; and (2) other approved methods which would provide equal or superior protection to conductors may be permitted but only if such method
or methods have received the prior express and specific approval of the electrical inspector."
C. Section 310.1 of the Inverness electrical code is hereby amended by the addition of the following subparagraph at the end of the present text thereof, which subparagraph
shall provide as follows:
"Notwithstanding anything contained in this article or elsewhere in this code, any feeder or branch feeder circuit of less than fifty (50) amperes shall use copper rather than
aluminum wire."
4-5-7: REGULATIONS GOVERNING PERMITS:
There is hereby adopted as reasonable rules and regulations governing the issuance of permits for electrical installations or alterations, the following:
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 18/366
A. Required: It shall be unlawful to install or alter any electric equipment or wiring without having first obtained a permit therefor.
B. Application Required: Applications for such permits shall be made, in writing, to the building official.
C. Application Contents: Each such application shall contain the name of the owner of the premises to be served, the name of the contractor doing the work, and the nature of the
work to be done, and where the work consists of new installation or extensive repairs or alterations, plans and specifications of the work shall accompany the application.
4-5-8: PERMIT AND INSPECTION FEES:
4-5-9: STOP ORDERS:
A. The electrical inspector shall have the power to order all work stopped on construction or alteration or repair of buildings in the village when such work is being done in
violation of any provision of this chapter relating thereto.
B. Work shall not be resumed after the issuance of such an order except on the written permission of the electrical inspector; provided, however, that if the order is an oral one, it
shall be followed by a written stop order within twenty four (24) hours. Such stop order may be served by a police officer.
CHAPTER 6
TENNIS COURTS
4-6-1: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to construct, maintain, install or enlarge any tennis court in the village except in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
4-6-2: LOCATION:
No portion of a tennis court shall be located within the setback lines as established by the zoning ordinance of the village. No part of a tennis court shall be located between the
front line of any residence located on the same lot as the court and any street abutting said lot. For the purpose of this chapter, the front line of any residence shall be a line
drawn parallel to any road abutting the lot and intersecting the point of the residence located closest to the road.
4-6-3: ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. Any fence which encloses a tennis court shall be entirely of metal and colored dark green or black.
B. Only a standard sized tennis court shall be constructed. A tennis court shall be constructed only as an accessory use to a residence and the residence must be erected prior to
the construction of a tennis court.
C. Tennis courts may not be lit, nor may they be built over any part of a septic system.
4-6-4: PERMIT REQUIRED:
Prior to the construction, installation, enlargement or alteration of any tennis court or the fence surrounding same, a permit shall be obtained from the village. Drawings and plans
shall be presented to the building officer for examination and approval, and each tennis court shall be constructed in conformity with the approved plans.
CHAPTER 7
SWIMMING POOLS
4-7-1: INTERNATIONAL SWIMMING POOL AND SPA CODE ADOPTED:
The International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, 2015 edition (ISPSC), of the International Code Council, is hereby adopted, except for such deletions and substitutions of
sections as herein provided, as part of the Inverness Swimming Pool Code (hereinafter sometimes referred to as the "ISPSC" and sometimes in this chapter referred to as "this
code").
4-7-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
The following amendments, deletions, additions, and modifications are hereby made to the Inverness residential building code as adopted in section 4-7-1 of this chapter:
The following chapters of the IRC are not adopted and are hereby deleted in their entirety:
Section 101.1 shall be and is hereby amended to read as follows:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the "Inverness Swimming Pool Code", hereinafter sometimes referred to as "this code".
Sections 101.4.3, 103, 104.1, 104.2, 104.3, 104.5, 104.7, 105.1, 105.1.1, 105.1.2, 105.2, 105.2.1, 105.2.2, 105.2.3, 105.3, 105.3.1, 105.3.2, 105.4, 105.5, 107.3.2, 110.1, 110.2,
110.3, 111.2, 113, 113.1, 113.2, and 113.3 of the IBC are hereby deleted and are not adopted as parts of the Inverness building code. See Chapter 1 for additional administrative
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 19/366
requirements.
4-7-3: LOCATION:
No portion of an outdoor swimming pool, including appurtenant equipment, enclosing barrier and other structures as required by this chapter, shall be located less than twenty
five feet (25') from any property line, or less than one hundred feet (100') from any residence, existing at the time of construction of the pool, on any other property. No portion of
any swimming pool shall be located within twenty five feet (25') from any septic tank or any septic field. No part of any swimming pool shall be located between the front line of
any residence located on the same lot as the pool and any street abutting said lot. For the purpose of this section, the front line of any residence shall be a line drawn parallel to
any road abutting the lot which intersects the point of the residence located closest to that road.
4-7-4: PERMIT REQUIRED:
Prior to the construction, installation, enlargement or alteration of any swimming pool or appurtenances, a permit shall be obtained from the building officer. Drawings and plans
first shall be presented to the building officer for examination and approval, and each pool shall be constructed in conformity with the approved plans. Said drawings and plans
shall identify the side and rear yards of the property on which the swimming pool is proposed to be located as such yards are established by the village zoning ordinance. A hot
tub or spa shall not require a permit unless it has a permanent electrical and/or plumbing connection.
4-7-5: INSPECTION:
The building officer may, in his discretion, from time to time, inspect any swimming pools to determine whether or not all applicable provisions of this code regarding health,
sanitation and safety are being complied with.
4-7-6: GENERAL CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS:
A. Walk Areas: Unobstructed walk areas not less than thirty six inches (36") wide shall be provided immediately adjacent to and extending entirely around the pool. The walk area
shall be constructed of impervious material, and the surfaces shall be of such as to be smooth and easily cleaned and of nonslip construction. The slope of the walks shall
have a pitch of at least one-fourth inch to one foot (1/4":1'), designed so as to prevent back drainage from entering the pool.
B. Steps Or Ladders: No less than two (2) or more means of egress in the form of steps or ladders shall be provided for all swimming pools, one of which shall be located at the
deep end of the pool and one of which shall be located at the shallow end of the pool. Treads of steps and ladders shall be constructed of nonslip material and at least three
inches (3") wide for their full length. Steps and ladders shall have a handrail on both sides.
4-7-8: ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. Electrical Installations: All electrical installations provided for, installed and used in conjunction with private residential swimming pools shall be in conformance with chapter
5 of this title regulating electrical installations and NFPA 70 (2005) and to the extent the provisions of this chapter, chapter 5 of this title, and/or NFPA 70 (2005) are
inconsistent, the more restrictive provisions shall govern and prevail.
B. Electrical Conductors: No current carrying electrical conductors shall cross private residential swimming pools, either overhead or underground or within fifteen feet (15') of
such pools. No type MC cable shall be permitted in conjunction with swimming pools.
C. Metal Fences, Enclosures Or Railings: All metal fences, enclosures or railings near or adjacent to swimming pools, which might become electrically alive as a result of contact
with broken overhead conductors or from any other cause, shall be effectively grounded.
D. Underwater Lighting Fixtures: Underwater lighting fixtures shall be approved for the service.
E. Location Of Receptacle: Where a permanently installed pool is installed at a dwelling unit(s), at least one GFCI protected one hundred twenty five (125) volt receptacle shall be
located a minimum of ten feet (10') (3.05 m) from and not more than twenty feet (20') (6.10 m) from the inside wall of the pool.
F. Nuisances: Pools shall be operated with due consideration to the comfort and well being of adjoining property owners. Lighting shall be directed so as not to constitute a
nuisance or annoyance to other property owners.
4-7-9: RESCUE DEVICES:
Every swimming pool shall be equipped with one or more throwing ring buoys not less than fifteen inches (15") in diameter and having sixty feet (60') of three-sixteenths inch
(3/16") line attached or other material of such length but of equivalent strength, and one or more light but strong poles with blunted ends and not less than twelve feet (12') in
length, for making reach assists or rescue.
CHAPTER 8
EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL
4-8-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
The regulations contained in this Chapter governing the clearing, grading, excavating and transporting of or otherwise disturbing land, are established for the purpose of avoiding
or lessening the following situations and to provide minimum standards to safeguard persons, to protect property and to prevent the despoliation of the environment and to
promote the public welfare by regulating and controlling the design, construction, quality of materials and the construction, use and maintenance of any development or other
activity which disturbs or breaks the topsoil or otherwise results in the movement of earth on land situated within the corporate limits of the Village:
A. That the washing, blowing and falling of eroded soil across and upon roadways endangers the health and safety of users thereof by decreasing vision and reducing traction of
road vehicles;
B. That said soil erosion necessitates the costly repairing of gullies, washed out fills and embankments;
C. That the sediment from said soil erosion tends to clog sewers and ditches and to pollute and silt rivers, streams, lakes and reservoirs;
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 20/366
D. That said sediment limits the use of water and waterways for most beneficial purposes, destroying fish and other aquatic life and that said sediment is costly and difficult to
remove;
E. That said sediment reduces the channel capacity of waterways, resulting in greatly increased chances of flooding at grave danger to public health and safety; and
F. That stripping and disturbing and breaking the topsoil of land tends to destroy the physical characteristics of such land and its natural beauty.
4-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter, certain terms used herein are defined as follows:
BORROW: Material not native to the site under development which is hauled or otherwise transported for placement thereon.
BUILDING PERMIT: A permit issued by the Village for the construction, erection or alteration of a structure or building as required by this Code.
CERTIFY or CERTIFICATION: That the specific inspections and tests where required have been performed, and that such tests comply with the applicable requirements of this
Chapter.
CUBIC YARDS: The unit of measurements for the amount of material in excavation and/or fill determined by the "average end area method", or other method approved by the
Village Engineer.
EXCAVATION: Any act by which organic matter, earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other similar material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced, relocated or
bulldozed and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
EXISTING GRADE: The vertical location of the existing ground surface prior to excavation or filling.
FILL: Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material is deposited, placed, replaced, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or otherwise artificially moved to a new
location and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
GRADING: Excavation, fill or borrow, or any combination thereof and shall include the conditions resulting from any excavation or fill.
LAND SURVEYOR: A registered surveyor of the State of Illinois.
PARCEL: All contiguous land in one ownership.
PERMIT OFFICER: Those officers or employees authorized by the Village President to enforce this Chapter.
PERMITTEE: Any person to whom a site development permit is issued.
PERSON: Any person, firm or corporation being a legal entity, public or private, the State of Illinois and its agencies or political subdivisions, and the United States of America, its
agencies and instrumentalities, and any agent, servant, officer or employee of any of the foregoing.
REMOVAL: Cutting vegetation to the ground or stumps, complete extraction or killing by spraying.
SITE: A lot resulting from any subdivision approved after January 1, 1974 and any of the following whether approved before or after January 1, 1974:
A. Any subdivision of property; or
B. Any planned unit development; or
C. Any combination of lots or sites where grading work is performed as a single unified operation.
SITE DEVELOPMENT or ALTERATION: Altering terrain and/or vegetation and constructing driveways.
SITE DEVELOPMENT or ALTERATION PERMIT: The permit provided for and required by this Chapter and in other applicable provisions of this Code.
VACANT: Land on which there are no structures, or, only structures which are secondary to the use or maintenance of the land itself.
VILLAGE: The Village of Inverness.
VILLAGE BOARD: Inverness President and Board of Trustees.
4-8-3: STANDARDS:
The following general principles shall apply to any and all applications and plans for and the granting of a permit provided for herein and the work carried out pursuant to such
plans and permit:
A. The smallest practical area of land shall be exposed at any given time during development.
B. Such minimum area of exposure shall be kept to as short a duration of time as is practical.
C. Temporary vegetation or, where appropriate, mulching or other nonviable cover, shall be used to protect areas exposed during development.
D. Sediment basins, debris basins, desilting basins or silt traps shall be installed and maintained where necessary to remove sediment from run-off waters from land undergoing
development
E. Increased run-off shall be impounded and released in accordance with Title 7 of this Code.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 21/366
F. Permanent, final plant covering or structures shall be installed as soon as possible.
G. The plan of development shall relate to the topography and soils of the site so that the lowest potential for erosion is created.
H. Natural plant covering, trees, shrubbery and vines shall be retained and protected so far as is consistent with developing the site.
4-8-4: PLANS AND SITE DEVELOPMENT OR ALTERATION PERMIT:
A. When Permit is Required: Before land is cleared, graded, excavated, transported or otherwise disturbed by the movements of earth for purposes including, but not limited to,
the construction of buildings, the mining of minerals, including sand and gravel, the development of golf courses, and the construction of roads and streets by any person, or
any alterations to the topography of proposed or existing developments, a site development or alteration permit embodying the proposed earth movement shall be obtained
from the Permit Officer, where development comes under any one or more of the following provisions, unless such development is exempted therefrom by subsection B of
this Section:
1. Excavation, fill, borrow or any combination thereof, which will exceed one hundred (100) cubic yards.
2. Fill will exceed three feet (3') in vertical depth at its deepest point measured from the natural ground surface.
3. Excavation will exceed four feet (4') in vertical depth at its deepest point.
4. Excavation, fill, borrow or a combination thereof will exceed an area of five thousand (5,000) square feet of ground surface.
5. Plant cover is to be removed from an area exceeding five thousand (5,000) square feet on any vacant parcel of land or any parcel of land in excess of ten (10) acres.
B. When a Separate Permit under this Chapter is not Required:
1. Excavations below finished grade for septic tanks and drain fields, tanks, water and sewer and sewer pipes, vaults, tunnels, equipment basements, swimming pools,
cellars or footings of buildings or structures for which a building and/or septic permit has been applied for and said permit application contains all the information required
by this Chapter.
2. Excavation or removal of vegetation in public utility easements by public utility companies for the purpose of installing underground utilities.
3. Tilling of the soil for fire protection purposes.
4-8-5: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
A. No site development or building permit shall be issued until the developer submits a site development plan, together with other submissions required by this Chapter and any
other applicable ordinances of the Village, and certifies that any land clearing, construction or development involving the movement of earth shall be in accordance with such
plan and submissions.
B. Each application for a site development permit shall be made by the owner of the property or his authorized agent to the Permit Officer on a form furnished for that purpose.
C. When grading or plant cover removal is proposed as a part of a building permit application, the building permit application and the site development permit application may be
combined, and one plot plan, in the number of copies required by the Permit Officer, may be submitted showing building plans and site development plans. An Illinois
Registered Professional Engineer or Registered Illinois Land Surveyor shall certify as to the accuracy of the existing and proposed topography. The requirements for
individual lots may be met by reference to a subdivision or planned unit development for which a site development permit has been issued, subject to the review by the Permit
Officer.
D. With respect to site developments, a vicinity sketch, showing acreage of site, boundary lines, zoning, type of proposed sewer and water facilities, location of existing utilities,
buildings and drains on and within one hundred feet (100') of the site; provided, however, that in the event adjacent property owners refuse access to their property so that
exact measurements may not be furnished, then the best available information regarding such utilities, buildings and drains on such property shall be acceptable, together
with a legend and scale. There shall be included on or with such a vicinity sketch:
1. A soil map of the subject property showing the predominant soil types on the site based on the soil maps prepared by the United States Department of Agriculture or soil
borings for the specific property.
2. Such information on those areas abutting or adjacent to the site showing existing drainage patterns and the drainage course that may affect, or be affected by, the
development of the site.
3. The name an address of the developer or owner.
4. The name and address of any consulting firm retained by the applicant, together with the name of applicant's principal contact at such firm.
5. Limits of natural flood plain(s), if any, as defined in Title 7 of this Code.
6. Areas to be sodded, seeded, mulched or paved.
7. Acreage of area to be vegetatively stabilized, if any.
8. Areas to be left undisturbed.
E. With respect to site grading, existing topography of the site and a one hundred foot (100') adjacent peripheral strip, proposed contours and final grades, and street profiles; and
indicating what measures will be employed to protect cut and fill slopes from surfaces runoff. In the event adjacent property owners will not permit access to their property so
that accurate measurements of property within one hundred feet (100') cannot be furnished as required by this paragraph, then approximate dimensions of adjacent property
shall be acceptable.
F. Storm drainage by means of a plan based upon a storm drainage study with a one hundred (100) year rainfall return frequency (24-hour duration) including a drainage area
map and computations, and indicating existing conditions at proposed and natural outlets, including:
1. Whether the drainage course if bare earth or vegetated.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 22/366
2. Whether the constructed outlet will be in open sun, open shade, or dense shade.
3. Whether the natural or proposed outlet is subject to long term or continuous flow.
4. Whether the existing outlet is actively eroding.
5. Whether there if evidence of a high water table (permanent or seasonal).
6. Whether the area is subject to seepage or spring flow.
7. The elevation of normal water level in all proposed and natural outlets.
8. A profile below outlet for a sufficient distance to indicate the natural gradient of the accepting natural outlet and/or stream channel.
9. A cross section and profile of existing stream channels where applicable.
10. A ditch design and computations of all seeded, sodded, or bare earth outlets, ditches and similar water conduction facilities.
G. Estimate schedule and phasing development of site:
Phase I Stripping and/or clearing
Phase II Rough grading and construction
Phase III Final grading and vegetative establishment
Phase IV Maintenance
All erosion and sediment control plans submitted to the Permit Officer for approval shall show all erosion and sediment control measures planned to provide protection
throughout all the phases of construction listed above. These plans shall also include any off-site borrow and spoil areas; sewer lines, utility lines, and haul and access roads,
and shall further indicate.
1. The start of clearing date.
2. Duration of exposure of disturbed areas.
3. Installation of temporary sediment control measures (vegetative and structural) by phase and date.
4. Installation of storm drainage improvements by phase and date.
5. Paving of streets and parking areas, if any by phase and date.
6. Establishment of permanent vegetative cover (plans will show what will be done to shorten the duration of exposure of disturbed areas as soon after grading as
possible), including seeding mixes and rates, type of sod, seedbed preparation, seeding dates, line and fertilizer application, temporary seedings, if needed, mulching,
or similar stabilization procedures.
7. Details of all structural sediment control measures.
8. Computations for sediment basins, if any.
H. The "Procedures and Standards for Urban Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control in Illinois", published October, 1981, or current edition ("said Handbook"), and the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency's "Standards and Specifications for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control, October, 1987", as amended from time to time ("said IEPA
Standards"), are both hereby incorporated into this Chapter and made a part hereof by this reference, and said IEPA Standards and said Handbook shall constitute the
requirements, criteria and factors which should enter into the preparation of a site development plan. In the event of conflict between provisions of said IEPA Standards and
said Handbook, the more restrictive provisions shall control.
4-8-6: LETTER OF CREDIT:
In developments where the aggregate volume of grading will be over one thousand (1,000) cubic yards, the applicant shall be required to file with the Village Administrator a letter
of credit in a form satisfactory to the Village Attorney in the amount deemed sufficient by the Permit Officer to cover engineering, inspection fees, incidental expenses and all the
costs of improvements, landscaping and maintenance of landscaping for such periods as specified by the Village.
4-8-7: REVIEW PROCEDURES:
To further the specific purposes of this Chapter, the following review procedures are established:
A. Grading Work Under Five Hundred Cubic Yards: Where the aggregate volume of grading on any site or contiguous group of sites is in excess of one hundred (100) cubic yards
but not over five hundred (500) cubic yards, the Permit Officer shall review the application for the proposed site development permit. If the Permit Officer finds that the
application for the proposed grading plan is in conformance with the provisions of this Chapter and that all other ordinances of the Village pertaining to site development
permits are complied with, he shall issue a permit with such reasonable conditions as he may deem necessary to secure substantially the objectives of this Chapter and other
applicable ordinances of the Village.
B. Grading and/or Removal of Vegetation Work in Excess of One Thousand Cubic Yards: Where the aggregate volume of grading on any site or contiguous group of sites is in
excess of one thousand (1,000) cubic yards, or the proposed cuts and fills exceed at their maximum point, three feet (3') for cuts and four feet (4') for fills, or where approval
to remove plant cover is required by this Chapter.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 23/366
1. The Permit Officer shall refer the application and his recommendations to the Village Engineer for review and recommendation to the Village Board, together with
recommendations on other applicable subdivision regulation.
2. Upon receipt of the recommendations of the Village Engineer by the Village Board, and upon approval by the Village Board, the Village President shall sign the plat of
subdivision or other development documents.
3. The Permit Officer shall issue a site development permit upon compliance with the conditions established by the Village Board and with other applicable ordinances of
the Village.
C. Prohibition of Earth Removal: No site development permit shall be issued for an intended building site unless such permit is accompanied by or combined with a valid building
permit issued by the Village.
4-8-8: APPEALS:
The applicant, as well as any person who has received notice of filing of the application for site development permit may appeal the decision of the Permit Officer to the Village
Board. Upon receipt of a notice of appeal, the Board shall schedule and hold a public hearing. The Board shall render a decision within thirty (30) days of the completion of the
hearing. Factors to be considered on review and findings to be made may include, but shall not be limited to, possible saturation of fill and unsupported cuts by water, both natural
and domestic; surface water run-off that produces erosion and silting of drainage ways; the nature and type of soil or rock that, when disturbed by the proposed grading, may
create earth movement and produce slopes that cannot be landscaped through grading or removal of vegetation.
4-8-9: RESPONSIBILITY:
Failure of the Village officials to observe or recognize hazardous or unsightly conditions or to recommend denial of the site development permit, or of the Village Board to deny
said permit, shall not relieve the permittee from responsibility for the condition or damage resulting therefrom, and shall not result in any liability on the part of the Village, its
officers of agents, for any condition or damage resulting therefrom.
4-8-10: RETENTION OF PLANS:
Plans, specifications and reports for all site development permits shall be retained in original form or on microfilm by the Permit Officer.
4-8-11: INSPECTIONS:
A. The Permit Officer shall make inspections as hereinafter required and shall either approve that portion of the work completed or shall notify the permittee wherein the same
fails to comply with the site development permit. Where it is found by inspection that conditions are not substantially as stated or shown in the said plan, the Permit Officer
may stop further work until approval of a revised grading plan conforming to the existing conditions is obtained by the permittee. Plans for grading work, bearing the stamp of
approval of the Permit Officer, shall be maintained at the site during the progress of the grading. Until the final inspection is made, a copy of the site development permit or
the building permit indicating permission to grade has been granted by the Village shall be prominently displayed on the property involved so as to be visible from the street
on which the property fronts. In order to obtain inspections in accordance with the following schedule, the permittee shall notify the Permit Officer at least two (2) full working
days before the said inspection is to be made:
1. Preconstruction site inspection.
2. Rough Grading: When all rough grading has been completed.
3. Final Inspection: When all work, including installation of all drainage improvements and other structures and required planting, has been completed.
B. The permittee shall also submit current photographic evidence of condition of the site and the existence of all erosion and sedimentation control measures on the site at the
time of each of the inspections as specified in subsection A of this section and at such time or times as directed by the permit officer.
4-8-12: OPERATION STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS:
A. Applicability: All earth moving and grading operations not specifically exempted by the provisions of this chapter shall comply with the applicable standards and requirements
set forth in this section in addition to the other requirements of this chapter.
B. The Illinois environmental protection agency's "Standards And Specifications For Soil Erosion And Sediment Control, October, 1987", as amended from time to time ("IEPA
standards") and "Procedures And Standards For Urban Soil Erosion And Sedimentation Control In Illinois, published in October, 1981", or current edition ("the handbook") are
hereby respectively incorporated into this section and made a part hereof by this reference, for the purpose of delineating procedures and methods of operation under
development plans approved in this section. In the event of conflict between provisions of said IEPA standards and said handbook, the more restrictive provisions shall
control. In the event of a conflict between the said IEPA standards and the other provisions of this chapter, said IEPA standards shall govern. In the event of a conflict
between the provision of said handbook and the other provisions of this chapter, the other provisions of this chapter shall control.
C. Special Precautions:
1. If, at any stage of the grading, the permit officer determines by inspection that the nature of the formation is such that further work as authorized by an existing permit is
likely to imperil any property, public way, watercourse or drainage structure, the permit officer may require, as a condition to allowing the work to be done, that such
reasonable safety precautions be taken as he considers advisable to avoid the likelihood of such peril. "Special precautions" may include, but shall not be limited to,
specifying a less steep exposed slope, construction of additional drainage facilities, berms, terracing, compaction or cribbing and installation of plant materials for erosion
control.
2. Where it appears that storm damage may result because the grading is not complete, work may be stopped and the permittee required to install temporary planting to
control erosion, install temporary structures or take such other measures as may be required to protect adjoining property or the public safety. On large operations or
where unusual site conditions prevail, the permit officer may specify the time of starting grading and time of completion or may require that the operations be conducted in
specific stages so as to ensure completion of protective measures or devices prior to the advent of seasonal rains.
D. Expiration Of Permit: Every site development permit shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the work authorized by such permit has not been commenced within
one hundred eighty (180) days, or is not completed within one year from the date of issue; except that the permit officer may, if the permit holder presents satisfactory
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 24/366
evidence that unusual difficulties have prevented work being started or completed within the specified time limits, grant a reasonable extension of time if written application is
made before the expiration date of the permit.
4-8-13: EXCEPTIONS, FEES AND VIOLATIONS:
A. Exceptions: The village board may authorize exceptions to any of the requirements and regulations set forth in this chapter.
1. Application For Exception: Application for any exception shall be made by a verified petition of applicant stating fully the grounds of the application and the facts relied upon
by the petitioner. Such petition shall be filed with the site development permit application. In order for the land referred to in the petition to come within the provisions of this
section, it shall be necessary that the village board make findings of facts with respect thereto:
a. That the land is of such shape or size or is affected by such physical conditions or is subject to such title limitations of record that it is impossible or impractical for
the applicant to comply with the specified regulations of this chapter.
b. That the exception is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the petitioner.
c. That the granting of the exception will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property in the vicinity of the subject property.
2. Referral Of Proposed Exception: Each proposed exception may be referred by the village board to qualified persons for investigation and such persons shall transmit to the
village board their recommendations, which recommendations shall be reviewed along with all other matters submitted prior to the granting of any exception.
3. Village Board: After consideration thereon, the village board, by resolution, may approve of the site development permit application with the exceptions and conditions it
deems necessary or it may disapprove of such site development permit application and exception application or it may take such other action as is appropriate.
B. Revocation Of Permit: In the event any person holding a site development permit pursuant to this chapter violates the terms of the permit, or conducts or carries on said site
development in such a manner as to materially have an adverse effect on the health, welfare or safety of persons residing or working in the neighborhood of the property of
the said permittee, or conducts or carries on said site development so that it is materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property or improvements in the
neighborhood, the permit officer shall temporarily revoke or suspend the permit.
C. Fees: Permit fees and bonds shall be as respectively required in sections 4-1-4 and 4-1-5 of this title.
D. Violations: This chapter shall not be construed as authorizing any person to maintain a private or public nuisance upon their property, or to perform any act which the statute or
case law of the state of Illinois would not permit regarding drainage and waterways and compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall not be a defense in any action to
abate such nuisance or involving water rights. No person shall construct, enlarge, alter, repair or maintain any grading, excavation or fill, or cause the same to be done,
contrary to or in violation of any provisions of this chapter, and no person shall fail to do any act required by this chapter. Any person violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed,
continued or permitted.
CHAPTER 9
INVERNESS MECHANICAL CODE
4-9-1: INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE ADOPTED:
The International Mechanical Code, 2015 edition (IBC), of the International Code Council, is hereby adopted, except for such deletions and substitutions of sections as herein
provided, as part of the Inverness Building Code (hereinafter sometimes referred to as "IMC" and sometimes referred to in this chapter as "this code").
4-7-2: AMENDMENTS, DELETIONS, ADDITIONS AND MODIFICATIONS:
The following amendments, deletions, additions and modifications are hereby made to the Inverness Building Code as adopted in section 4-2-1 of this chapter:
Sections 101.4.3, 103, 104.1, 104.2, 104.3, 104.5, 104.7, 105.1, 105.1.1, 105.1.2, 105.2, 105.2.1, 105.2.2, 105.2.3, 105.3, 105.3.1, 105.3.2, 105.4, 105.5, 107.3.2, 110.1, 110.2,
110.3, 111.2, 113, 113.1, 113.2, and 113.3 of the IBC are hereby deleted and are not adopted as parts of the Inverness building code. See Chapter 1 for additional administrative
requirements.
Section 101.1 shall be and is hereby amended to read as follows:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the "Inverness mechanical code", hereinafter sometimes referred to as "this code".
Section 101.2 shall be and is hereby amended to read as follows:
101.2 Scope. The provisions of this code shall apply to the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, relocation, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment,
use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or
structures.
CHAPTER 10
VILLAGE ARCHITECT
4-10-1: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
A. To promote the public health, safety, morals, comfort and general welfare of the citizens of the Village.
B. To preserve and enhance the values of property throughout the Village.
C. To protect and to stabilize the general appearance of buildings, structures, landscaping and open areas lying within the Village along the lines presently existing.
D. To ensure adequate light, air and privacy for property lying within the Village.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 25/366
E. To encourage and promote acceptability, attractiveness, cohesiveness and compatibility of new buildings, development, remodeling and additions so as to maintain and
improve the established standards of values of property and to continue the present architectural characteristics of buildings lying within the Village.
4-10-2: CREATION AND TERM OF OFFICE:
There is hereby created the office of Village Architect to be appointed by the Village President with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees. Such appointment shall be
for a term of three (3) years. The Village Architect may be removed from office at any time by the Village President with approval of the Board of Trustees.
4-10-3: QUALIFICATIONS:
The Village Architect shall be a resident of the Village and shall serve without compensation. He shall be a registered architect holding a certificate of registration issued by the
Department of Registration and Education of the State, or a person who is recognized as expert in matters of aesthetic judgment by virtue of training, education and experience
(such as registered architects, landscape architects, real estate appraisers and land planners) and possessing qualities of impartiality and broad judgment. The Village Architect,
before entering his official duties, shall take the oath of office prescribed by law for Village officials.
4-10-4: VACANCIES:
A vacancy in the office of Village Architect shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner in which original appointments are required to be made.
4-10-5: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The Village Architect shall have the following powers and duties:
A. To consult with and cooperate with the Plan Commissioner or other Village officials on matters affecting the appearance of the Village.
B. To study exterior design drawings, landscape and site plans and materials and to make recommendations to the Board of Trustees as to the architectural or aesthetic aspects
thereof.
C. To consider the effects of building or reconstruction plans on property values in the Village.
D. To hold hearings, when required, on the issuance of certificates of appropriateness as provided by this Chapter, in connection with questions pertaining to applications for
building permits and to issue or deny such certificates pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter.
4-10-6: CERTIFICATE REQUIRED:
No building or other permit, otherwise required under ordinances of the Village for the erection, construction, alteration or repair of any building or structure shall be issued except
upon the granting of a certificate of appropriateness by the Village Architect. This requirement shall not preclude the issuance of a building permit without such certificate if the
enforcing officer, who is authorized to deny or issue such permit, shall determine that no "external architectural feature" as hereinafter defined is involved in the work for which the
building permit is sought.
The term "external architectural feature" as used in this Chapter shall mean the architectural style and general arrangement of such portion of a building or structure as is
designed to be open to view from a public street, place, or way, including the kind, color and texture of the building material and the types of windows, doors, lights, attached or
ground signs, and other fixtures appurtenant to such building or structure.
4-10-7: CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS, PRELIMINARY CONSIDERATION:
The Village Architect shall, at the written request of a prospective applicant for a certificate of appropriateness, give consideration to preliminary exterior drawings, sketches,
landscape and site plans and materials on a specific project before a formal application is filed, and shall provide such advice, counsel, suggestions and recommendations on
matters pertaining to aesthetics or otherwise as he may deem necessary to guide said prospective applicant in the development of a plan. The Village Architect shall act in an
advisory capacity only, with regard to preliminary plans, and shall provide consultation only on projects for which preliminary drawings and materials are furnished by prospective
applicants, and shall not participate in the development of basic concepts, plans or drawings. All hearings held by the Village Architect to consider preliminary plans shall be
public. Upon finding the preliminary exterior drawings, sketches, landscape and site plans and materials are appropriate to or compatible with the character of the immediate
neighborhood and the Village, the Village Architect will issue preliminary approval. Such approval will be irrevocable, and makes the issuance of the certificate of appropriateness
mandatory upon application, unless the final presentation does not substantially comply with the preliminary presentation upon which the preliminary approval was based.
4-10-8: CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS, FINAL HEARINGS:
Upon the filing of an application for building permit for which a certificate of appropriateness is or may be required under the provisions of this Chapter, the permit enforcing officer
shall immediately transmit said application to the Village Architect. The fact that an application for a certificate of appropriateness has been filed shall not be cause for the permit
enforcing officer to delay the review of plans relating to the building and zoning aspects of the project, while said application is pending. The Village Architect shall consider the
application for a building permit and other necessary evidence such as exterior elevation renderings submitted by the applicant or his agent or attorney and from Village officials
or other persons as to whether the external architectural features of the proposed building or structure complies with the requirements of this Chapter.
4-10-9: APPROVAL OF VILLAGE ARCHITECT:
If preliminary approval has not been requested under the terms and provisions of this Chapter, prior to making his decision, the Village Architect may make recommendations to
the applicant as to changes in the exterior drawings, sketches, landscaping, site plans and materials which in the judgment of the Village Architect would tend to effect the general
purposes of this Chapter. The Village Architect shall make his decision within fifteen (15) days after the hearing is closed and shall issue to the Building Officer a certificate of
appropriateness, unless the Village Architect finds that the plans submitted do not conform to this Chapter and that the proposed building or structure will be inappropriate to or
incompatible with, the character of the immediate neighborhood and of the Village and cause substantial depreciation in property values. If preliminary approval was previously
granted by the Village Architect as provided in this Chapter, the Village Architect shall issue a certificate of appropriateness immediately; provided, that the final drawings, plans
and materials as presented comply in all respects with the preliminary presentation upon which the preliminary approval was based.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 26/366
4-10-10: APPEAL:
All final decisions of the Village Architect under this Chapter may be appealed by the applicant to the Board of Trustees. Notice of such appeal shall be filed within ten (10) days
after such final decision with the Village President, or his or her designee, who, upon receipt thereof, shall notify the Board of Trustees, which shall consider the appeal at the next
regular meeting of the Board which occurs more than seven (7) days after the filing of the appeal. The decision of the Board of Trustees shall be final.
4-10-11: FOLLOW-UP BY BUILDING OFFICER:
Upon the granting of a certificate of appropriateness, the exterior drawings, sketches, landscape and site plans, renderings and materials upon which said certificate was granted
shall be turned over to the Building Officer whose responsibility shall be to determine from time to time as the project is in progress and finally upon its completion that there have
been no unauthorized substantial deviations from the evidence upon which the granting of the certificate of appropriateness was originally based.
CHAPTER 11
PAYMENTS OF AND DEPOSITS FOR OUT OF POCKET EXPENSES
4-11-1: OUT OF POCKET EXPENSES:
Petitions to appeal from a decision of the zoning enforcement officer and/or to appeal from a decision of the building official, petitions for a variation or a special use, petitions for
a change in or amendment to the zoning ordinance or zoning map, or applications or petitions for plat approval, requests for building site assessments and any petitions or
applications for any permit or approval or variation required under any provision of this code must be accompanied by the specified application fee required by this code or as
established by resolution (which is intended to cover the costs of the review and processing of such petition or application which are difficult to identify) and such deposits for
reimbursable out of pocket expenses as required by the applicable ordinances or resolutions of the president and board of trustees. No action shall be taken on any such petition,
request or application until the specified fee has been paid and all required deposits made unless the board of trustees specifically waives the requirement of the payment of
same. All petitioners or applicants shall be required to pay to the village any out of pocket expenses incurred by the village in the village's review and consideration of their
petition, request or application, including, but not limited to, engineering fees, court reporter charges including the costs of any necessary transcripts, legal fees and expenses of
such other consultants as the village deems appropriate and necessary, and such petitioners or applicants may also be required to execute an agreement to make such
reimbursement.
CHAPTER 12
PREEMPTION OF AFFORDABLE HOUSING, PLANNING AND APPEAL ACT
4-12-1: FINDINGS:
A. The village president and board of trustees of the village of Inverness, Cook County, Illinois, find that the village of Inverness, Cook County, Illinois (the "village") is a home rule
municipal corporation as provided in article VII, section 6 of the 1970 constitution of the state of Illinois and, pursuant to said constitutional authority, may exercise any power
and perform any function pertaining to its government and affairs for the protection of the public health, safety, morals and welfare.
B. The village president and board of trustees further find that the availability of affordable housing in the village is a matter pertaining to the public health, safety and welfare and,
therefore, the adoption of plans, ordinances, regulations and other legislative and administrative actions to provide for the development of affordable housing are matters
pertaining to the government and affairs of the village and, consequently, are within the constitutional grant of home rule authority to the village.
C. The village president and board of trustees further find that the few areas where infrastructure for public sanitary sewers and a public water service might be available have
already been developed, and the remainder of the village has already fully been developed with single-family homes which are supported by private wells and individual
sewage disposal systems, and to support redevelopment of existing single-family homes or single-family lots for this purpose would unfairly impact existing homeowners and
their respective neighborhoods and would create an environmental disaster in terms of the health and sanitation regulations of this code which govern the installation and
maintenance of individual private sewage disposal systems.
D. The village president and board of trustees further find that the state of Illinois has enacted the affordable housing, planning and appeal act, public act 93-595, effective
January 1, 2004, as amended by public act 93-678, and as now or hereafter amended (collectively, the "act"), which provides for the designation of particular municipalities in
the state as either "exempt" or "nonexempt", based on the amount of housing in those municipalities determined under the act to be "affordable", requires nonexempt
municipalities to develop and submit to the state on or before April 1, 2005, an "affordable housing plan", and provides that, beginning January 1, 2009, developers who have
been denied land use approvals by a "nonexempt" municipality may appeal such a decision to a "state housing appeals board", in order to seek relief from the decision.
E. The village president and board of trustees further find that the village has been identified by the Illinois housing development authority as a municipality that will be
"nonexempt" under the act and, therefore, would, but for this chapter, be subject to the requirements of the act aforesaid, including possible appeal of local land use decisions
to the state housing appeals board.
F. The village president and board of trustees further find that the act does not preempt home rule authority and that there is considerable uncertainty over provisions of the act
governing local land use decisions and possible loss of local control over those decisions, and that the public interest would be best served by the village not ceding its final
authority over local land use decisions to a state board or commission.
G. The village president and board of trustees further find that the act constitutes both an unfunded mandate, the implementation of which would require local expenditures which
will result in little, if any, local impact and a "one size fits all" approach that does not consider the unique circumstances of individual communities, including, but not limited to,
for example, the fact that the village of Inverness is fully developed, the fact that the village has extremely limited infrastructure, and the fact that a significant number of
affordable housing units are available immediately adjacent to or within a short distance of the village of Inverness.
H. The village president and board of trustees further find that it is extremely unlikely that any reasonable opportunity for the development of affordable housing within the village
will be identified in the foreseeable future, given the continually increasing cost of land within the village, which makes it prohibitive to implement.
I. The village president and board of trustees further find that the village will give due consideration to any viable opportunity to accommodate new affordable housing options
within the village in the unlikely event that any such opportunities are ever presented to develop or redevelop significant parcels for residential uses in the village of Inverness
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 27/366
for this purpose, and the village pledges to work on a cooperative basis with any such proposed developer(s) to facilitate the development of affordable housing in Inverness
consistent with the other well reasoned zoning, planning and environmental policies of the village.
J. The village president and board of trustees further find that the village, as a home rule municipality, has the authority to adopt ordinances and to promulgate ordinances, rules
and regulations that pertain to its government and affairs. Article 7, section 6(a) of the Illinois constitution provides that "[. . .] Except as limited by this section, a home rule
unit may exercise any power and perform any function pertaining to its government and affairs including, but not limited to, the power to regulate for the protection of the
public health, safety, morals and welfare". The act does not preempt home rule authority, based on the following:
1. In article 7, section 6(m), the Illinois constitution specifically provides that "powers and functions of home rule units shall be construed liberally".
2. The general powers granted in section 6(a) continue in force even if the general assembly adopts less stringent or conflicting statutes, so long as the general assembly
does not preempt the use of home rule powers.
3. The general assembly has not preempted the power of the village to except itself from the coverage of the act. The act does not contain home rule preemption, and the
general assembly failed to approve the act by the three-fifths (3/5) majority constitutionally required to preempt the powers of a home rule unit.
4. The act does not supersede the powers of home rule units of local government.
5. In Kalodimos v. Village Of Morton Grove, 103 Ill.2d 483, 502, 470 N.E.2d 266 (1984), the Illinois supreme court found that "Home rule is predicated on the assumption that
problems in which local governments have a legitimate and substantial interest should be open to local solution and reasonable experimentation to meet local needs, free
from veto by voters and elected representatives of other parts of the state who might disagree with the particular approach advanced by the representatives of the locality
involved or fail to appreciate the local perception of the problem".
6. The act does not supersede the powers of home rule units of local government.
7. The act does not contain any express statement that affordable housing is purely a matter of statewide interest or give the state exclusive authority over affordable
housing. On the contrary, the act provides that each nonexempt unit of local government establish its own plans and policies for achieving levels of affordable housing.
8. The act's requirement of local based planning is inconsistent with the type of exclusive state control required for home rule preemption. This inconsistency is apparent not
only in the language of the act but also in the application of the act. IHDA was charged with the responsibility of determining which communities fell within the ambit of the
act. Out of the one thousand two hundred ninety eight (1,298) municipalities in the state, IHDA determined that the act applied only to forty nine (49) municipalities, or
municipalities constituting approximately 4.7 percent of the state's population based on the 2000 census. All of the nonexempt communities identified by IHDA are in Cook,
Lake, DuPage, Will, McHenry or Kane counties. Not one is downstate. IHDA's determination further validates that affordable housing is not purely a matter of statewide
interest or concern.
9. The act does not specifically limit local governments' concurrent exercise of municipal planning, development and zoning power or specifically declare the state's exercise
of those powers under the act to be exclusive. Rather, the opposite is true. The act requires the local exercise of authority and discretion in establishing plans and
implementing regulations relating to affordable housing.
10. There is no indication in the act that the provision of affordable housing and the act's attendant derogation of local land use planning and zoning regulations are not a
subject within a home rule unit's government and affairs.
11. The house floor debate on the act contains numerous statements and representations by the act's sponsor, Representative Sloane, that the act was not intended to apply
to home rule units of local government.
K. The village president and board of trustees further find that compliance by the village of Inverness with the act is impractical and is not in the best interests of the village.
L. The village president and board of trustees further find that the village of Inverness comprehensively regulates planning, zoning and development within its boundaries.
M. The village president and board of trustees further find that the village also intends that pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, all decisions about Inverness' housing needs
and future development will continue to be made at the local level and not be subject to appeal to a state board or commission.
N. The village president and board of trustees further find that, based on all the foregoing, the village intends this chapter to constitute the total, comprehensive and exclusive
regulation of the subject matter of affordable housing within the village of Inverness generally, by the village in the exercise of the village's home rule authority,
notwithstanding any provision of the act, and that this chapter shall totally displace and preempt the act and all its provisions as permitted under the village's constitutional
home rule authority.
4-12-2: PURPOSE AND POLICY:
This chapter codifies the village's abrogation of the act, and any amendments thereto within the corporate limits of the village. The village board of trustees has specifically found
since the village is fully developed and that it comprehensively regulates planning, zoning and development within its corporate limits, that the village's compliance with the act
and any amendments thereto is impractical and not in the best interests of the health, safety and welfare of the village. The village board of trustees has determined that the act
shall not apply within the corporate limits of the village. The village will give due consideration to any viable opportunity to accommodate new affordable housing within the village
when opportunities are presented to develop or redevelop significant parcels for residential use within the village, consistent with the other well reasoned zoning, planning, and
environmental policies of the village.
4-12-3: EXERCISE OF HOME RULE AUTHORITY:
This chapter is specifically enacted pursuant to the village's home rule authority granted under the Illinois constitution, article VII, section 6. This chapter shall constitute an
exercise of the home rule authority of the village of Inverness on the subject matter hereof under the constitution and laws of the state of Illinois.
4-12-4: PREEMPTION, ABROGATION OF AFFORDABLE HOUSING, PLANNING AND APPEAL ACT:
The village board of trustees, pursuant to its home rule authority, abrogates the application of the act and any amendments thereto, within the corporate limits of the village, and
the act and any amendments thereto shall not apply within the corporate limits of the village. This chapter shall totally preempt and displace each and every provision of the
affordable housing, planning and appeal act, 310 Illinois Compiled Statutes 67/1 et seq. (public act 93-595, effective January 1, 2004, as amended by public act 93-678), and as
now or hereafter amended (collectively, the "act"), and said act shall not be applicable to or within the village of Inverness. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing,
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 28/366
pursuant to this chapter enacted pursuant to the home rule authority of this village, no land use decision of the village of Inverness shall be subject to appeal to a state housing
appeals board described in the act, as now or hereafter amended
4-12-5: AFFORDABLE HOUSING, PLANNING AND APPEAL ACT SUPERSEDED BY VILLAGE ORDINANCES:
This chapter, and this code of which it is part, the village zoning ordinance, and the village's official comprehensive plan, shall entirely supersede the affordable housing, planning
and appeal act and any amendments thereto, and shall fully occupy the field in relation to matters of planning, building, zoning and development within the corporate limits of the
village.
CHAPTER 13
INVERNESS FUEL GAS CODE
4-13-1: INTERNATIONAL FUEL GAS CODE ADOPTED:
The International Fuel Gas Code, 2015 edition (IBC), of the International Code Council, is hereby adopted, except for such deletions and substitutions of sections as herein
provided, as part of the Inverness Building Code (hereinafter sometimes referred to as "IFGC" and sometimes referred to in this chapter as "this code").
4-13-2: AMENDMENTS, DELETIONS, ADDITIONS AND MODIFICATIONS:
The following amendments, deletions, additions and modifications are hereby made to the Inverness Building Code as adopted in section 4-2-1 of this chapter:
Sections 101.4.3, 103, 104.1, 104.2, 104.3, 104.5, 104.7, 105.1, 105.1.1, 105.1.2, 105.2, 105.2.1, 105.2.2, 105.2.3, 105.3, 105.3.1, 105.3.2, 105.4, 105.5, 107.3.2, 110.1, 110.2,
110.3, 111.2, 113, 113.1, 113.2, and 113.3 of the IBC are hereby deleted and are not adopted as parts of the Inverness building code. See Chapter 1 for additional administrative
requirements.
Section 101.1 shall be and is hereby amended to read as follows:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the "Inverness fuel gas code", hereinafter sometimes referred to as "this code".
Section 101.2 shall be and is hereby amended to read as follows:
101.2 Scope. The provisions of this code shall apply to the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, relocation, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment,
use and occupancy, location of existing buildings.
CHAPTER 14
INVERNESS PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
4-13-1: INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE GAS CODE ADOPTED:
The International Property Maintenance Code, 2015 edition (IBC), of the International Code Council, is hereby adopted, except for such deletions and substitutions of sections as
herein provided, as part of the Inverness property maintenance (hereinafter sometimes referred to as "IPMC" and sometimes referred to in this chapter as "this code").
4-13-2: AMENDMENTS, DELETIONS, ADDITIONS AND MODIFICATIONS:
The following amendments, deletions, additions and modifications are hereby made to the Inverness Building Code as adopted in section 4-2-1 of this chapter:
Sections 101.4.3, 103, 104.1, 104.2, 104.3, 104.5, 104.7, 105.1, 105.1.1, 105.1.2, 105.2, 105.2.1, 105.2.2, 105.2.3, 105.3, 105.3.1, 105.3.2, 105.4, 105.5, 107.3.2, 110.1, 110.2,
110.3, 111.2, 113, 113.1, 113.2, and 113.3 of the IBC are hereby deleted and are not adopted as parts of the Inverness building code. See Chapter 1 for additional administrative
requirements.
Section 101.1 shall be and is hereby amended to read as follows:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the "Inverness property maintenance code", hereinafter sometimes referred to as "this code".
Section 302.4 insert 8 inches
Section 304.14 insert April 15 to October 15
Section 602.3 insert September 15 to May 15
Section 602.4 insert September 15 to May 15
Adopt Appendix A Boarding Standards
CHAPTER 15
INVERNESS EXISTING BUILDING CODE
4-13-1: INTERNATIONAL EXISTING BUILDING CODE ADOPTED:
The International Existing Building Gas Code, 2015 edition (IBC), of the International Code Council, is hereby adopted, except for such deletions and substitutions of sections as
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 29/366
herein provided, as part of the Inverness existing building code (hereinafter sometimes referred to as "IEBC" and sometimes referred to in this chapter as "this code")
4-13-2: AMENDMENTS, DELETIONS, ADDITIONS AND MODIFICATIONS:
The following amendments, deletions, additions and modifications are hereby made to the Inverness Building Code as adopted in section 4-2-1 of this chapter:
Sections 101.4.3, 103, 104.1, 104.2, 104.3, 104.5, 104.7, 105.1, 105.1.1, 105.1.2, 105.2, 105.2.1, 105.2.2, 105.2.3, 105.3, 105.3.1, 105.3.2, 105.4, 105.5, 107.3.2, 110.1, 110.2,
110.3, 111.2, 113, 113.1, 113.2, and 113.3 of the IBC are hereby deleted and are not adopted as parts of the Inverness building code. See Chapter 1 for additional administrative
requirements.
Section 101.1 shall be and is hereby amended to read as follows:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the "Inverness Existing Building gas code", hereinafter sometimes referred to as "this code".
Section 101.2 shall be and is hereby amended to read as follows:
101.2 Scope. The provisions of this code shall apply to the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, relocation, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment,
use and occupancy, location of existing buildings.
CHAPTER 16
INVERNESS ACCESSIBILITY CODE
4-13-1: ILLINOIS ACCESSIBILITY CODE ADOPTED:
The Illinois Accessibility Code, 1997 edition (IBC), is hereby adopted, except for such deletions and substitutions of sections as herein provided, as part of the Inverness
accessibility code (hereinafter sometimes referred to as "IAC" and sometimes referred to in this chapter as "this code").
4-13-2: AMENDMENTS, DELETIONS, ADDITIONS AND MODIFICATIONS:
The following amendments, deletions, additions and modifications are hereby made to the Inverness Building Code as adopted in section 4-2-1 of this chapter:
All conflicts between this code and the International Building Code shall result in the application of the strictest of the requirements.
CHAPTER 17
INVERNESS ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE
4-13-1: ILLINOIS ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE ADOPTED CODE ADOPTED:
The Illinois Energy Conservation Code, is hereby adopted, except for such deletions and substitutions of sections as herein provided, as part of the Inverness conservation code
(hereinafter sometimes referred to as "IECC" and sometimes referred to in this chapter as "this code").
4-13-2: AMENDMENTS, DELETIONS, ADDITIONS AND MODIFICATIONS:
The following amendments, deletions, additions and modifications are hereby made to the Inverness Building Code as adopted in section 4-2-1 of this chapter:
There are no amendment, alterations or deletion to the International Conservation Code as adopted by the Illinois Energy Conservation Act.
CHAPTER 18
INVERNESS URBAN WILDLAND INTERFACE CODE
4-13-1: INTERNATIONAL URBAN WILDLAND INTERFACE CODE ADOPTED:
The International Urban Wildland Interface Gas Code, 2015 edition (IBC), of the International Code Council, is hereby adopted, except for such deletions and substitutions of
sections as herein provided, as part of the Inverness urban wildland interface code (hereinafter sometimes referred to as "IUWIC" and sometimes referred to in this chapter as
"this code")
4-13-2: AMENDMENTS, DELETIONS, ADDITIONS AND MODIFICATIONS:
The following amendments, deletions, additions and modifications are hereby made to the Inverness Building Code as adopted in section 4-2-1 of this chapter:
Sections 101.4.3, 103, 104.1, 104.2, 104.3, 104.5, 104.7, 105.1, 105.1.1, 105.1.2, 105.2, 105.2.1, 105.2.2, 105.2.3, 105.3, 105.3.1, 105.3.2, 105.4, 105.5, 107.3.2, 110.1, 110.2,
110.3, 111.2, 113, 113.1, 113.2, and 113.3 of the IBC are hereby deleted and are not adopted as parts of the Inverness building code. See Chapter 1 for additional administrative
requirements.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 30/366
CHAPTER 19
INVERNESS FIRE CODE
4-13-1: INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE ADOPTED:
The International Fire Code, 2015 edition (IBC), of the International Code Council, is hereby adopted, except for such deletions and substitutions of sections as herein provided,
as part of the Inverness fire code (hereinafter sometimes referred to as "IFC" and sometimes referred to in this chapter as "this code")
4-13-2: AMENDMENTS, DELETIONS, ADDITIONS AND MODIFICATIONS:
The following amendments, deletions, additions and modifications are hereby made to the Inverness fire code as adopted in section 4-2-1 of this chapter:
Sections 101.4.3, 103, 104.1, 104.2, 104.3, 104.5, 104.7, 105.1, 105.1.1, 105.1.2, 105.2, 105.2.1, 105.2.2, 105.2.3, 105.3, 105.3.1, 105.3.2, 105.4, 105.5, 107.3.2, 110.1, 110.2,
110.3, 111.2, 113, 113.1, 113.2, and 113.3 of the IBC are hereby deleted and are not adopted as parts of the Inverness building code. See Chapter 1 for additional administrative
requirements.
Section 101.1 shall be and is hereby amended to read as follows:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the "Inverness fire code", hereinafter sometimes referred to as "this code".
Section 101.2 shall be and is hereby amended to read as follows:
101.2 Scope. The provisions of this code shall apply to the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, relocation, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment,
use and occupancy, location of existing buildings.
903.2 add the following:
Notwithstanding anything contained in this code to the contrary, all buildings with a "building area", as defined in C. chapter 3 of this title, in excess of four thousand eight hundred
(4,800) square feet or required by Chapter 9 of the IBC or IFC shall be equipped with a full functioning operational fire sprinkling system meeting NFPA standard no. 13, 13D, or
13R as applicable.
"903.2.7 Group R. An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with section 903.3 shall be provided throughout all buildings with a group R fire area, provided, however,
that this requirement shall not be applicable to R-3 residential occupancies as defined in said fire code, except where and in the manner that automatic sprinkler systems are
otherwise required by this village code.
5704.2.9.6,1 All flammable liquid installation shall comply with Zoning and require a special use permit.
5706.2.4.4 All flammable liquid installation shall comply with Zoning and require a special use permit.
5806.2 All flammable gas and cryogenic fluid installations shall comply with Zoning and require a special use permit.
6104.2 All propane installations shall comply with Zoning and require a special use permit
SECTION 3: If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Ordinance or any part thereof is for any reason held to
be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining
portions of this Ordinance, or any part thereof. The Board of Trustees hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph,
sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivision, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be
declared unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective.
SECTION 4: This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect on January 1, 2018.
Presented, read and passed by the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Inverness, Cook County, Illinois, on a roll call vote at a duly called
regular meeting of the Board of Trustees on the ________ day of , 2017, and deposited and filed in the Office of the Clerk of said Village on
said date.
ROLL CALL VOTE:
YEAS:
NAYS:
ABSENT:
ABSTAIN:
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 31/366
APPROVED by the President of the Village of Inverness,
Illinois, this ____ day of ____________, 2017.
___________________________________
John A. Tatooles, Village President
Village of Inverness
ATTEST:
____________________________
Village Clerk,
Village of Inverness
Recorded in the Record of Ordinances
of the Village as Ordinance No. 17-_______
____________________________
Village Clerk,
Village of Inverness
PUBLISHED IN PAMPHLET FORM THE ____ DAY OF _____________, 2017.
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
VILLAGE OF INVERNESS
______________________________________________________________________________
ORDINANCE NO. 2019-1004
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE VILLAGE OF
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 32/366
INVERNESS VILLAGE CODE
(Re: Providing for Lien for Removal Costs for Weeds and Other Nuisance Plants,
Amending Paragraph C. of Section 9-2A-3, “ENFORCEMENT”,
of Chapter 2A of Title 9)
______________________________________________________________________________
ADOPTED BY THE
CORPORATE AUTHORITIES
OF THE
VILLAGE OF INVERNESS, ILLINOIS
THIS ______ DAY OF _____________, 2019.
______________________________________________________________________________
Published in pamphlet form by authority of the Corporate Authorities of the Village of Inverness, Cook County, Illinois, this ______ day of ____________, 2019.
Ordinance No. 19-1004
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE VILLAGE OF
INVERNESS VILLAGE CODE
(Re: Providing for Lien for Removal Costs for Weeds and Other Nuisance Plants,
Amending Paragraph C. of Section 9-2A-3, “ENFORCEMENT”,
of Chapter 2A of Title 9)
WHEREAS, the Corporate Authorities of the Village find that it is in the best interests of the Village and its residents to amend the provisions of Chapter
2A-3 of Title 9 of the Village of Inverness Village Code by amending Paragraph C. of Section 9-2A-3, “ENFORCEMENT”; now, therefore,
BE IT ORDAINED by the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Inverness, Cook County, Illinois, in exercise of its authority as a Home Rule
unit, as follows:
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 33/366
SECTION 1: The President and Board of Trustees hereby find that the recitals hereinabove set forth are true and correct and are incorporated into the text
of this Ordinance as its findings to the same extent as if each such recital had been set forth herein in its entirety.
SECTION 2: That Paragraph C. of Section 9-2A-3 OF Chapter 2A of Title 9 of the Village of Inverness Village Code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
9-2A-3: ENFORCEMENT:
* * * * *
C. Costs As A Lien: The village administrator, or his designee, may cause the cutting of nuisance plants as defined in sections 9-2A-1 and 9-
2B-2 of this article, the trimming and/or the removal of bushes and trees when the owner(s) of real estate refuses or neglects to trim, and/or
remove them (“nuisance bushes and trees”) and to collect from the owner(s) of private property the reasonable cost thereof.
If the Village incurs a removal cost (any activity for which a removal cost was incurred) under Chapter 2A or 2B of this
article with respect to any underlying parcel, then the cost is a lien upon the underlying parcel effected superior to all other liens and
encumbrances except tax liens, if within one (1) year after such removal expense is incurred, the village files notice of lien in the office of
the recorder in the county in which such real estate is located.
The notice to be filed in the Recorder’s Office must consist of a sworn statement setting out:
1. a description of the underlying parcel that sufficiently identifies the parcel;
2. the amount of the removal cost; and
3. the date or dates when the removal cost was incurred by the Village.
Lien cost means the removal cost and the filing cost of the Notice of Lien.
If, for any one parcel, the Village engaged in removal activity on more than one (1) occasion during the course of one (1) year, the expenses
for abatement may be combined into a single notice of lien.
The removal cost is not a lien on the underlying parcel unless a notice is personally served on, or sent by certified mail to, the person to
whom was sent the tax bill for the general taxes on the property for the taxable year immediately preceding the removal activities. The notice
must be delivered or sent after the removal activities have been performed, and it must: (i) state the substance of 65 ILCS 5/11-20-15
and the substance of this section implementing said Statute; (ii) identify the underlying parcel, by common description; and (iii) describe the
removal activity.
However, the lien shall not be valid as to any purchaser whose rights in and to such real estate have arisen subsequent to the removal activity
and prior to the filing of such notice of lien, and the lien shall not be valid as to any mortgagee, judgment creditor or other lienor whose
rights in and to such real estate arise prior to the filing of such notice.
* * * * *
SECTION 3: This Ordinance shall not affect any punishment, discipline, infraction, or penalty or any action based on any other Ordinance of this Village
incurred before the effective date of this Ordinance, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the effective date of this Ordinance, for an
offense or violation committed or cause of action arising before this Ordinance, and said other ordinances as heretofore existing shall continue in full force and
effect for said limited purpose.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 34/366
SECTION 4: If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Ordinance or any part thereof is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions
of this Ordinance, or any part thereof. The Board of Trustees hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence,
clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivision, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared
unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective.
SECTION 5: This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval and publication, as required by law.
Presented, read and passed by the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Inverness, Cook County, Illinois, on a roll call vote at a duly called
regular meeting of the Board of Trustees on the ________ day of , 2019, and deposited and filed in the Office of the Clerk of said Village on
said date.
ROLL CALL VOTE:
YEAS:
NAYS:
ABSENT:
ABSTAIN:
APPROVED by the President of the Village of Inverness,
Illinois, this __9__ day of __July__________, 2019.
___________________________________
Village President,
Village of Inverness
ATTEST:
____________________________
Village Clerk,
Village of Inverness
Recorded in the Record of Ordinances
of the Village as Ordinance No. 19-1004
____________________________
Village Clerk,
Village of Inverness
PUBLISHED IN PAMPHLET FORM THE ____ DAY OF _____________, 2019.
PREFACE
This Village Code of the Village of Inverness, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to and including ordinance 18-997, passed July 10, 2018.
Ordinances of the Village adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this Village Code to the extent that they are in conflict or
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 35/366
inconsistent therewith. Consult the Village office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the Code has been amended, superseded
or repealed.
Sterling Codifiers
Coeur d'Alene, Idaho
ORDINANCE NO. 00-666
AN ORDINANCE RE-ADOPTING AND RE-ENACTING
THE VILLAGE OF INVERNESS VILLAGE CODE
AND ADDING A NEW SECTION 1-1-5 THERETO
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE PRESIDENT AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE VILLAGE OF INVERNESS, COOK COUNTY, ILLINOIS, in exercise
of the authority of this Village as a Home Rule Unit, as follows:
SECTION 1: The Village of Inverness Village Code, consisting of Titles 1 through 11, inclusive, in the form attached hereto, is hereby re-adopted
and re-enacted as the "Inverness Village Code" (hereinafter "said Code" or "the Code"), and shall be treated and considered as a new and original
comprehensive ordinance which shall supersede all other general and permanent ordinances of the Village passed on or before May 9, 2000, as
specified in said Code, except such as by reference thereto in this Ordinance or in said Code are expressly saved from repeal or continued in force
and effect for any purpose.
SECTION 2: Any and all additions or amendments to said Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the President and Board
of Trustees to make the same a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into said Code so that reference to the "Inverness Village Code"
shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments thereto.
SECTION 3: At least one (1) copy of said Code shall be kept on file in the Office of the Village Clerk, preserved in looseleaf form. It shall be the
express duty of the Village Clerk, or someone authorized by him or her, to insert in at least one copy in their designated places all amendments or
ordinances which indicate the intention of the President and Board of Trustees to make the same a part of said Code when the same have been
printed or reprinted in page form, and to extract from said Code all provisions which may from time to time be repealed by the President and Board
of Trustees. This amended copy of said Code shall be available for all persons desiring to examine the same and shall be considered the official
Inverness Village Code.
SECTION 4: In case any section of said Code, or any amendment thereto, for which a penalty is not provided, the general penalties as provided in
Chapter 4 of Title 1 of said Code shall apply to the section or the section as amended or in case such section or amendment contains provisions for
which a specific penalty other than the aforementioned general penalty is provided in another section in the same chapter as such section or
amendment thereto, the specific penalty so provided in such other section shall be held to relate to the section, or amendment thereto, unless such
penalty is specifically repealed therein.
SECTION 5: This Ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty or any action based on any general and permanent ordinance of the Village
superseded by this Ordinance incurred before the effective date of this Ordinance, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the
effective date of this Ordinance for any offense committed or cause of action arising before the effective date of this Ordinance and said prior
general and permanent ordinances as heretofore existing shall continue in full force and effect for said limited purpose.
SECTION 6: The Code hereby re-adopted is intended to codify and thereby supersede all general and permanent ordinances of the Village of
Inverness passed on or before May 9, 2000, and to the extent that any general and permanent ordinance of the Village has not been included in
said Code, by oversight or otherwise, said omitted ordinance(s) shall continue in full force and effect until their inclusion herein.
SECTION 7: A new Section 1-1-5 is hereby added to the Inverness Village Code which Section shall read as follows:
"1-1-5: This Village Code has been re-adopted by the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Inverness effective May 19, 2000 in exercise
of the authority of the Village of Inverness as a Home Rule municipality."
SECTION 8: If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Ordinance or any part thereof is for any reason
held to be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of
the remaining portions of this Ordinance, or any part hereof. The President and Board of Trustees hereby declare that it would have passed each
section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections,
subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid, or ineffective. The President and Board of Trustees
do hereby expressly exercise the Home Rule Authority of the Village of Inverness to waive, vary, cure and/or otherwise remove any procedural
defect or technical deficiency in the proceedings relative to the adoption of this Ordinance.
SECTION 9: This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect on May 20, 2000, which date is not less than ten (10) days from and after its passage,
approval and publication in pamphlet form pursuant to law.
SECTION 10: The Village Clerk is hereby authorized and directed to publish this Ordinance and the Inverness Village Code hereby re-adopted in
book or pamphlet form.
Presented, read and passed by the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Inverness, Cook County, Illinois, on a roll call vote at a duly
called regular or special meeting of the Board of Trustees on the 9TH day of May, 2000, and deposited and filed in the Office of the Clerk of said
Village on said date.
PUBLISHED IN PAMPHLET FORM THIS 9th DAY OF MAY, 2000.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 36/366
Title 1
ADMINISTRATIVE
Chapter 1
OFFICIAL VILLAGE CODE
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon adoption by the Board of Trustees, this Code is hereby declared to be and shall hereafter constitute the official Village Code of the Village of
Inverness. This Code of ordinances shall be known and cited as INVERNESS VILLAGE CODE, and is hereby published by authority of the Board of
Trustees and shall be kept up to date as provided in Section 1-1-3 of this Chapter under the direction of the Village Administrator acting for said
Village Board of Trustees. Any reference to the number of any section contained herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same
number, its appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference
is made to this Code by title in any legal document. (Ord. 92-468, 12-8-1992)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
This Code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received without further proof in all courts and in all administrative tribunals of this
State as the ordinances of the Village of general and permanent effect, except the excluded ordinances enumerated in Section 1-2-1 of this Title.
(1983 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending this Code shall set forth the title, chapter and section number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall
constitute a sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this Code.
(1983 Code)
1-1-4: CODE ALTERATION:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface in any way any section or any page of this Code in such a manner
that the meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages may be inserted according to the official instructions when
so authorized by the Village Board. The Village Administrator shall see that the replacement pages are properly inserted in the official copies
maintained in the office of the Village Administrator. Any person having in his custody an official copy of this Code shall make every effort to
maintain this Code in an up-to-date and efficient manner. He shall see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages when such are
delivered to him or made available to him through the office of the Village Administrator. Said Code Books, while in actual possession of officials and
other interested persons, shall be and remain the property of the Village and shall be returned to the office of the Village Administrator when
directed so to do by order of the Village President. (Ord. 92-468, 12-8-1992)
1-1-5: READOPTION1:
This Code has been readopted by the President and Board of Trustees of the Village effective May 19, 2000, in exercise of the authority of the
Village as a home rule municipality. (Ord. 00-666, 5-9-2000, eff. 5-20-2000)
Chapter 2
SAVING CLAUSE
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the Village passed prior to the adoption of this Village Code are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this
Village Code or are by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving clauses contained in the following sections), and
excluding the following ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries
and annexations; franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances
authorizing the execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or
other public places; ordinances establishing specific traffic regulations on certain streets or at certain intersections; improvement ordinances; bond
ordinances; ordinances relating to elections; zoning ordinances, including the Village of Inverness Zoning Ordinance, zoning variation ordinances,
special use ordinances, and planned unit development ordinances; the ordinance adopting the Village of Inverness Official Comprehensive Plan;
ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the Village; all special ordinances; and any ordinances amending any of
the foregoing.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 37/366
1-2-2: PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroads or railroad crossings with streets and other public ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public
utilities shall be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this Village Code or by virtue of the preceding Section, excepting as this Village Code may
contain provisions for such matters in which case this Village Code shall be considered as amending such ordinance or ordinances in respect to
such provisions only.
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance, whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any
offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or
claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty,
forfeiture or punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceeding
thereafter shall conform to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment be
mitigated by any provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by the consent of the party affected, applied to any judgment announced
after the new ordinances take effect.
This Section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions
upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the Village
herein repealed and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this Code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new
enactment of the same provisions; nor shall this Chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to
accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the Village under any ordinance or provision thereof
in force at the time of the adoption of this Village Code.
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Village Code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the
remaining portions of this Code, or any part thereof. The Village Board of Trustees hereby declares that it would have passed each section,
subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections,
subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective.
Chapter 3
DEFINITIONS
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
Whenever any word in any section of this Village Code importing the plural number is used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or
persons, any single matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included, although distributive words may not have been used.
Whenever any subject matter, party or person is referred to in this Village Code by words importing the singular number only, or the masculine
gender, several matters, parties or persons and females as well as males and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be included; provided, that these
rules of construction shall not be applied to any section of this Village Code which contains any express provision excluding such construction or
where the subject matter or content may be repugnant thereto.
The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the Village has been changed in the content of this Village Code to "Title", "Chapter", "Section"
and/or "subsection" or words of like import for organizational and clarification purposes only. Such change to the Village's ordinances is not meant to
amend the passage and effective dates of such original ordinances.
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this Code they shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such
meaning repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another.
BOARD, BOARD OF TRUSTEES, VILLAGE BOARD: Shall mean and include the President and Trustees of the Village of Inverness.
CODE: The Inverness Village Code and amendments thereto.
COMPUTATION OF TIME: The time within which any act provided by law is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including
the last, unless the last day is Saturday or Sunday or is a holiday as defined or fixed in any Statute now or hereafter in force in this State, and then it
shall also be excluded. If the day succeeding such Saturday, Sunday or holiday is also a holiday or a Saturday or Sunday, then such succeeding
day shall also be excluded.
CORPORATE or VILLAGE: The legal boundaries of the Village of Inverness.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 38/366
CORPORATE AUTHORITIES: The Board of Trustees.
COUNTY: County of Cook, State of Illinois.
DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY: Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department or some other Village officer to do some act or
perform some duty, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department or other officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates
to perform the required act or perform the duty unless the terms of the provision or section specify otherwise.
EMPLOYEE: Whenever reference is made in this Code to a Village employee by title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words,
"of the Village of Inverness".
FEE: A sum of money charged by the Village for a license or permit, unless otherwise indicated.
JOINT AUTHORITY: All words giving a joint authority to three (3) or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a
majority of such persons or officers unless otherwise provided by ordinance or Statute.
LETTER OF CREDIT: "Letter of credit" or "credit" as used in this Code means an agreement by a bank or other financial institution made at the
request of a customer that the issuer will honor drafts or other demands for payment upon compliance with the conditions specified in the credit. For
the purposes of this Code, the terms "letter of credit" or "credit" shall mean an irrevocable letter of credit. Any such letter of credit posted with the
Village shall comply with the following requirements:
A. It shall be issued by a bank or other financial institution acceptable to the Village President.
B. It shall be in an amount approved by the appropriate Village official and/or in compliance with the appropriate provisions of this Code.
C. It shall be in a form approved by the Village Attorney.
D. It shall provide that it will remain in force even though there have been amendments or modifications to the matter for which it was issued.
E. It shall, by its terms, not expire until thirty five (35) days after written notice of expiration has been sent by the issuer to the Municipality.
F. It shall provide that in the event the issuer fails to honor the Municipality's demand for payment under the terms of the letter of credit, the
issuer will be responsible for the attorney fees and other costs which may be incurred in enforcing collection.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession, occupation or activity.
MONTH: A calendar month.
NONTECHNICAL and TECHNICAL WORDS: Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the
language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed
and understood according to such meaning.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive or obnoxious to the health and welfare of the inhabitants of the Village; or any act or thing repugnant to, or creating
a hazard to, or having a detrimental effect on the property of another person or to the community.
OATH: Includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases, the words "swear" and
"sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed".
OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or
with others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this Code or the omission of any act required by the provisions of this Code.
OFFICER: Whenever reference is made in this Code to a Village officer by title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the
Village of Inverness".
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part
of such building or land.
PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization, government or any other group acting as a unit, as well as
a natural person.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Includes every description of money, goods, chattels, effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by
which any pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged, transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and
every right or interest therein.
PROPERTY: Includes real and personal property.
REAL PROPERTY: Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things direct to the
consumer.
STATE: "The State" or "this State" shall be construed to mean the State of Illinois.
STREET: Shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, cul-de-sacs, alleys, lanes, viaducts, circles, drives, courts, and all
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 39/366
other public ways in the Village, and shall include all areas thereof embraced between the property lines and dedicated, by common law or
otherwise, to the public use.
TENANT or OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person holding possession of the building or land pursuant to a written
or oral lease or who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others, excluding the owner of the premises.
TENSE: Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present.
VILLAGE: The Village of Inverness, County of Cook, State of Illinois.
VILLAGE PRESIDENT: The President of the Village may be referred to as "Mayor" or "President" of the Village.
WHOLESALER: The words "wholesaler" and "wholesale dealer" as used in this Code, unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to
relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in quantity to persons who purchase for the purpose of resale.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is
required by law to any official or public writing or bond required by law, it shall be in the proper handwriting of such person, or in case he is unable to
write, by his proper mark.
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of this Village Code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be
deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the
provisions of any division or section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the
catchlines, are amended or re-enacted.
1-3-4: NOTES NOT PART OF CODE:
The various notes which appear in small print throughout this volume, such as editor's notes, State law reference notes and cross references are
not to be considered part of this Code but are included by the editors solely to facilitate usage of this Code.
1-3-5: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the
numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein, or in the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections of any part thereof, by
subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby and the
subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances
until such time as this Village Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Village Code by the Board of
Trustees.
1-3-6: UNAUTHORIZED ALTERATION OR TAMPERING WITH CODE:
It shall be unlawful for any person in the Village to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portions of this Code, or to insert or
delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Village to be
misrepresented thereby.
1-3-7: EFFECT OF REPEAL OF ORDINANCES:
When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision shall be itself repealed, such repeal shall not be construed to revive such
former ordinance, clause or provision unless it shall be therein so expressly provided.
The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding
pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed. (1983 Code)
Chapter 4
GENERAL PENALTY
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY:
A. Fines: Except as otherwise provided in this code, any person violating any provision of this code shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars
($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day on
which a violation occurs or continues uncorrected. In addition thereto, any office held by such a person convicted of any violation of this chapter
shall become vacant and shall be so declared as part of the judgment of the court.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 40/366
B. Court Costs: Any person who shall be found guilty by a court of competent jurisdiction of violating a provision of this code or of failure to comply
with any requirement thereof, or of violating any permit, any approval, or any directive issued under the provisions of this code shall, in addition
to the fines and other penalties provided, be obligated to reimburse the village for its attorney fees to the extent permitted by law, court costs,
court reporter costs, expert witness fees, and all other out of pocket costs incurred by the village in the prosecution of said violation(s), or in the
collection of unpaid fines as hereinafter provided.
C. Unpaid Fines: A default in the payment of any fine, or any unpaid installment thereof, imposed pursuant to any provisions of this code may be
collected by any means authorized for the collection of money judgments. The village attorney is authorized to retain attorney(s) and private
collection agent(s) for the purpose of collecting any default in the payment of any such fine, or any unpaid installment(s) thereof, and any fees or
costs incurred by the village with respect to such attorney(s) or private collection agent(s) retained by the village attorney for this purpose shall
be an obligation of and be charged to the party or parties obligated to pay such fine or the unpaid installment(s) thereof.
D. Injunction: The village may make application to the circuit court for an injunction requiring conformance with this code and such other order(s) as
the circuit court deems necessary to secure compliance with this code. Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this code
may be enjoined by the circuit court from future violations and may also be required by the circuit court to restore the location of the violation in
question to the condition existing prior to commission of the violation or to bear the expense of such restoration.
E. Supervision Or Conditional Discharge Authorized: Notwithstanding anything contained in this code, any court of competent jurisdiction shall be
authorized to enter an order of supervision or conditional discharge as provided by the Illinois unified code of corrections, 730 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/1-1-1 et seq., for any violation of any provision of this code.
F. Violations: Nothing contained in this section shall preclude the village from instituting any other action, either legal or equitable, against any
"person", as defined in this section, for violating any provision of this code, and such other enforcement action(s) is also hereby authorized. The
penalties prescribed in this section are in addition to, and not in lieu of, any penalties, rights, remedies, duties or liabilities otherwise imposed or
conferred herein or by law.
G. Joint And Several Liability: The owner of record, beneficiaries, general agent and/or contractor for the building, premises and/or property where
such violation has been committed or shall exist, and the lessee or tenant of an entire building, premises or property, or any part thereof and any
other person who assists in such violation shall all be jointly and severally liable for any such violation. (Ord. 2008-862, 2-12-2008)
1-4-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
The penalty provided in this chapter shall be applicable to every section of this code the same as though it were a part of each and every separate
section. Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this code where any duty is prescribed or obligation imposed, or where any action
which is of a continuing nature is forbidden or is declared to be unlawful, shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense upon each day such duty or
obligation remains unperformed or such act continues, unless otherwise specifically provided in this code.
In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of this code, the prosecuting officer may elect
under which to proceed; but not more than one recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense; provided, that the revocation of
a license or permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced.
Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act constitutes a breach or violation of any section or provision of this code and there shall
be no fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach or violation, the provisions of this chapter shall apply. (1983 Code)
1-4-3: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this code designating the duties of any officer or employee shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any
fine or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of the board of trustees to impose such fine or penalty on such officer
or employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. (1983 Code)
1-4-4: SURETY BONDS:
Whenever a surety bond to indemnify the village is required, as a prerequisite to exercising the duties of any office or position, or to the issuance of
a license or permit or for the exercise of any special privilege, the surety on such bond shall be a corporation licensed and authorized to do business
in this state as a surety company which is acceptable to the village president, in the absence of specific provision to the contrary by ordinance.
Whenever in its opinion additional sureties or an additional surety may be needed on any bond to indemnify the village against loss or liability
because of the insolvency of the existing surety or sureties or for any other reason, the village may order a new surety for such bond. If such new
surety or sureties are not procured within ten (10) days from the time such order is transmitted to the principal on the bond, or his assignee, the
board may, at its option, declare the bond to be void, and thereupon such principal or assignee, shall be deemed to have surrendered the privilege
or position as condition of which the bond was required. (1983 Code)
Chapter 5
PRESIDENT AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 41/366
1-5-1: MEETINGS OF THE BOARD:
A. Regular Meetings: Effective January 1, 2017, the village board shall hold its regular meetings on the second Tuesday of each month at seven
o'clock (7:00) P.M. and no other notice of such meeting shall be required. The premises located at 1400 Baldwin Road in the village of Inverness
is hereby designated as the official village of Inverness Village Hall. The meeting place of the board of trustees shall be at the village of
Inverness Village Hall at 1400 Baldwin Road in the village of Inverness unless otherwise designated by the notice of such meeting.
B. Special Meetings; Vote Requirements: Special meetings of the board may be called by the president or any three (3) trustees upon written
request or notice at least forty eight (48) hours prior to the time specified for the meeting.
No vote or action of the board of trustees shall be rescinded or reconsidered at any special meeting of the board unless there be present at such
special meeting as many members of the board of trustees as were present at the meeting when such vote or action was taken.
C. Public Notice Of Meetings: In addition to any notice requirement prescribed above, public notice of meetings must be given as prescribed in
sections 2.02 and 2.03 of the Illinois open meetings act. (Ord. 16-975, 10-11-2016)
1-5-2: QUORUM REQUIRED:
A majority of the board of trustees shall constitute a quorum to do business, but no ordinance shall be passed except upon the favorable vote of a
majority of the elected members, as provided by statute. (1983 Code)
1-5-3: RULES AND PROCEDURES AT BOARD MEETINGS:
A. Agenda: The president shall determine the agenda and order of business for meetings of the board of trustees subject to amendment of the
agenda by a majority of the trustees.
B. Resolutions Reduced To Writing: Any resolution submitted to the board of trustees shall be reduced to writing before being voted upon on request
of any three (3) members of the board.
C. Addressing Meeting: No person other than the president or other members of the board of trustees shall address that body at any regular or
special meeting except upon consent of the presiding officer.
D. Suspension Of Rules: The rules of order, other than those prescribed by statute, may be suspended at any time by the consent of a majority of
the members present at any meeting.
E. Robert's Rules Of Order To Govern: "Robert's Rules Of Order" shall govern the deliberations of the board of trustees except when in conflict with
any of the foregoing rules.
F. Disturb Meeting: It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb any meeting of the board of trustees or of any committee thereof. (1983 Code)
1-5-4: COMMITTEES OF THE BOARD:
The president shall designate such standing and special committees of the board of trustees from time to time as he shall determine appropriate;
provided, that the board of trustees may, by a majority vote, direct that one or more committees be disbanded or additional committees created.
The members of committees shall be appointed by the president, subject to the right of the majority of the board of trustees to veto any appointment
at any board meeting where such appointment is announced. (1983 Code)
1-5-5: CONTENT OF MINUTES; APPROVAL:
A. The minutes of meetings of the board of trustees are intended to reflect the action of the board and comments, in summary form, from the
audience. Comments of any trustees will be included, in summary, on the specific request of the trustees.
B. The draft minutes will be presented with the agenda material for approval at the next regular board meeting. Any trustee desiring to correct or
elaborate on the draft minutes shall make a motion stating the matters to be corrected or elaborated on; such motion shall be voted upon by the
trustees, if seconded. (1983 Code)
1-5-6: TERM OF VILLAGE PRESIDENT:
The village president shall be elected and serve the term provided by statutes. (1983 Code)
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 42/366
1-5-7: DUTIES OF VILLAGE PRESIDENT:
The village president shall perform all duties required by statute or village ordinances. The village president shall be the presiding officer at all
regular and special meetings of the board of trustees and at all times when the board meets as a committee of the whole. (1983 Code)
1-5-8: VILLAGE PRESIDENT PRO TEM:
During the temporary absence or disability of the village president, the board of trustees shall elect one of its members to act as president pro tem
who during the absence or disability of the president, shall perform the duties pertaining to the office. (1983 Code)
1-5-9: VILLAGE PRESIDENT'S BOND, OATH, COMPENSATION:
Before entering upon the duties of his office, the village president shall give a bond with sureties to be approved by the board of trustees conditioned
upon his faithful performance of his duties, in the sum of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). He shall take the oath of office as prescribed by statute,
and shall receive such compensation as may be set from time to time by the board. (1983 Code)
1-5-10: OATH, TERM, COMPENSATION OF BOARD MEMBERS:
The members of the board of trustees shall take the oath of office, and shall serve that term of office prescribed by statutes, and shall receive such
compensation as may be provided by ordinance. (1983 Code)
1-5-11: VILLAGE PRESIDENT AND TRUSTEES AS CONSERVATORS OF THE PEACE:
A. The village president and each trustee shall be conservators of the peace and shall have the following powers and duties:
1. To arrest or cause to be arrested, with or without process, all persons who break the peace or are violating any municipal ordinance or any
criminal law of the state;
2. To commit arrested persons for examination;
3. To serve and execute all warrants for the violation of municipal ordinances or the state criminal law within the limits of the village;
4. All statutory and common law power of sheriffs;
5. To direct traffic and assist in traffic control;
6. To act as watchmen on special assignments;
7. To assist in parade control and to keep peace in all large gatherings in and about the community;
8. To assist in civil defense matters;
9. To assist in cases of riot, disaster and emergency control; and
10. To perform such other related duties as directed by the chief of police or the corporate authorities. (1983 Code)
B. Upon request of the chief of police, and with the consent of the individual asked to exercise powers as such conservator, the village president or
any trustee may assist the police department in the exercise of the powers above provided for. (1983 Code; amd. Ord. 2008-861, 2-12-2008)
1-5-12: SEAL DESCRIBED:
The corporate seal of the village shall be a circular disc with the words "Village of Inverness, Cook County, Illinois" on the perimeter, and the word
"SEAL" in the center thereof. (1983 Code)
1-5-13: FISCAL YEAR:
The fiscal year for the village shall begin on May 1 of each year and end on April 30 of the following year. (1983 Code)
1-5-14: PURCHASES AND EXPENDITURES BY VILLAGE PRESIDENT:
The village president shall have the authority to engage the services of the village engineers, village attorneys, or other consultants and to make
purchases of material, equipment, services or supplies and other expenditures authorized by the annual appropriation ordinance then in effect,
provided that each such purchase or expenditure or matter that will create an obligation in excess of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) shall first be
authorized by the corporate authorities, unless otherwise provided by said corporate authorities. (Ord. 00-656, 1-11-2000)
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 43/366
1-5-15: PREQUALIFICATION OF BIDDERS1; "RESPONSIBLE BIDDER" DEFINED:
A. The board of trustees may require that bidders for certain projects or a class of projects prequalify themselves, and that only bidders so
prequalified shall be permitted to submit bids. In determining the contracts on which prequalification will be available or shall be required, the
board of trustees shall consider some of the following standards:
1. The importance of the contract to the village;
2. The harm which could be done to the village through an improper or untimely performance;
3. The number of bidders without adequate qualification who could be expected to bid; and
4. The existence of objective criteria which could be set out in a prequalification questionnaire.
B. Where the board of trustees determines that prequalification shall be desirable for a contract or a class of contracts, the village administrator shall
publish a notice at least once ten (10) days in advance of the receiving of applications for prequalification in a newspaper, announcing that
prequalified persons or firms are being sought for a contract or a class of contracts, the place where information on prequalification may be
sought, and the time within and place where applications for prequalification will be received. In order to become prequalified, bidders must
complete a set of prequalification materials to be prepared and distributed by the village administrator. Any list shall be in force for a period of
one year unless the board of trustees shall sooner seek information from potential bidders to develop a new list. The village shall post the list of
prequalified bidders no less than ten (10) days before letting a contract which requires prequalification.
C. An application for prequalification may be denied or a bidder may be considered to not be a "responsible bidder" if so determined by the board of
trustees based upon the following criteria:
1. If a bidder submits a false statement in prequalification materials, or in any bid to the village, or to any other public entity;
2. If a bidder fails to comply with the prequalification rules or the terms of the invitation for bidding or request for proposals;
3. If a bidder fails to complete each applicable item of the prequalification materials or the bid form;
4. If a bidder lacks competency, experience, facilities or personnel as revealed by the prequalification materials or by separate investigation by
the village;
5. If a bidder has uncompleted work which might hinder or prevent the prompt completion of additional work if awarded;
6. If a bidder has failed to pay, or to satisfactorily settle, all bills due for labor and material on existing or former contracts with the village or other
entities;
7. If a bidder has defaulted under previous contracts with the village or with other entities;
8. If a bidder has an unsatisfactory performance record with the village or with other entities as shown by past work judged from the standpoint of
workmanship and/or progress; or
9. If a bidder has submitted misleading information on previous bid proposals with the village or with other entities.
D. The board of trustees shall always and does hereby reserve:
1. The right to waive technicalities in the bidding process;
2. The right to select the contractor it deems the lowest responsible bidder consistent with foregoing criteria at the time the contract is awarded;
and
3. The right to reject any and all bids. (Ord. 93-489, 8-10-1993)
1-5-16: INAUGURATION AND COMMENCEMENT OF TERMS OF NEWLY ELECTED VILLAGE OFFICERS:
The inauguration of newly elected village officers shall occur at the first regular or special meeting of the corporate authorities of the village in the
month of May following such election of such officers, after old business and prior to items of new business on the agenda. (Ord. 95-538, 3-14-
1995)
1-5-17: RULES FOR PARTICIPATION IN MEETINGS VIA ELECTRONIC MEANS:
Members of any public body of the village, including, but not limited to, members of the village board, may participate in meetings via electronic
means, provided no such participation in such meetings shall occur via such means unless in compliance with the following rules:
A. Purpose: The purpose of these rules is to prescribe rules for the participation by members of a public body of the village in meetings of such
public body in accordance with the Illinois open meetings act when such meeting is conducted wholly or partially via electronic means. These
rules for participation in meetings by members of any public body of the village via electronic means are intended to be consistent with and
supplement the Illinois open meetings act.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 44/366
B. Minutes Of Meetings: Minutes of the public body of the village shall reflect and record whether the members were physically present or present
by means of video or audio conference.
C. Limitations On Participation In Meetings Via Electronic Means: The following rules shall apply for the participation in any meeting at which any
member of a public body of the village is participating through the use of audio, video, or other electronic conference means:
1. If a quorum of the members of the public body of the village is physically present as required by the Illinois open meetings act, a member of
that body may attend the meeting by other means if the member is prevented from physically attending because of: a) personal illness or
disability, b) employment purposes or the business of the public body, or c) a family or other emergency. "Other means", for the purposes of
this section, shall mean attendance by video, audio, or other electronic means.
2. A quorum of members of a public body of the village must be physically present at the location of an open meeting. A quorum of members of a
public body of the village must also be physically present at the location of a closed meeting. Other members who are not physically present at
any open or closed meeting of such a public body may participate in the meeting by other means consistent with the rules set forth in this
section and the Illinois open meetings act.
3. If a member of a public body of the village wishes to attend a meeting by other means, the member must notify the recording secretary or
clerk of the public body before the meeting, unless such advance notice is impractical.
4. At the commencement of any such meeting of a public body of the village, the presiding officer shall announce such method of attendance of
those participating by other means to the public and the reason.
5. If the presiding officer of a public body of the village attends the meeting through the use of other means, he or she shall vacate the chair and
a duly elected or appointed temporary chair who is physically present shall preside.
6. When one or more members of a public body attend a meeting of such public body via other means, all votes shall be by roll call.
7. No more than two (2) members of a public body of the village may attend a meeting through the use of other means at the same remote
location.
8. When other means are used to allow a member of a public body to participate in a meeting without being physically present, each time a
member using such other means wishes to speak, such member shall endeavor to identify himself or herself by name and be recognized by
the presiding officer before speaking.
9. The village staff or consultants of the village are authorized to participate in the proceedings of any public body of the village by other means.
D. Member(s) Considered Present: Any member of a public body of the village shall be considered present wherein the member is present by other
means wherein voices are received by any location. (Ord. 2006-836, 10-10-2006, eff. 1-1-2007)
Chapter 6
VILLAGE OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
1-6-1: VILLAGE OFFICERS:
A. Elected: The following officers of the village are elected, hold office and perform their respective functions and duties as provided by statute:
Village president
Six (6) trustees
Village clerk
Elections for these municipal offices shall be conducted and held at such time as provided by statute.
B. Appointed: Appointive officers of the village, except as otherwise provided by statute or by this code, are appointed by the president, with the
advice and consent of the board of trustees. Said appointees shall hold office at the pleasure of the appointing authority and shall perform such
duties and functions set forth by the village and/or by statute. The appointed officers of the village include the following:
Village administrator
Village treasurer
Village collector
Village director of emergency and disaster services
C. Oath Required: Every officer of the village shall, before entering upon his duties, take the oath prescribed by statute.
D. Officers And Employees Generally: The provisions of this section shall apply alike to all officers and employees of the village, regardless of the
time of the creation of the office or position or of the time of the appointment of the officer or employee.
E. Duty To Turn Over Money Received: Every officer of the village shall turn over all money received by him in his official capacity, to the treasurer
with a statement showing the source from which the same was received.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 45/366
F. Availability Of Records: All records kept by any officer of the village shall be open to inspection by the village administrator, the president, or any
member of the board of trustees at all reasonable times, whether or not such records are required to be kept by statute or ordinance.
G. Bond Authorized: Every officer and employee shall, if required by the board of trustees, upon entering the duties of his office, give a bond in such
amount and with such sureties as may be determined by the board, such sureties to be rated AA-1, conditioned upon the faithful performance of
the duties of his office or position. (1983 Code)
H. Compensation Of Trustees: Effective upon the commencement of their respective terms following April 7, 2009, each trustee shall be
compensated at the rate of four thousand two hundred dollars ($4,200.00) per year and until that time, the trustees shall continue to be
compensated at the rate of one thousand eight hundred dollars ($1,800.00) per year. Said amount(s) shall be payable monthly during each such
fiscal year. For their respective terms commencing after April 7, 2009, each trustee shall no longer receive any unallocated expense allowance,
but each trustee shall remain eligible for reimbursement for specific expenses incurred on behalf of the village.
I. Compensation Of Village President: Effective upon the commencement of his or her respective terms following April 7, 2009, the salary for the
office of village president shall be based upon the number of terms and years served in that office whether by general election or election by the
board of trustees in the case of a vacancy. The compensation for village president shall be payable monthly during each fiscal year as follows:
First term of office:
Year 1 $10,920.00
Year 2 11,420.00
Year 3 11,920.00
Year 4 12,420.00
Second term of office:
Year 1 12,920.00
Year 2 13,420.00
Year 3 13,920.00
Year 4 14,420.00
Third term of office:
Year 1 14,920.00
Year 2 15,420.00
Year 3 15,920.00
Year 4 16,420.00
Fourth term of office:
Year 1 16,920.00
Year 2 17,420.00
Year 3 17,920.00
Year 4 18,420.00
Fifth and subsequent terms of office 19,420.00 per year
For any term of the village president commencing after April 7, 2009, the village president shall no longer receive an unallocated expense
allowance, but the village president shall remain eligible for reimbursement for specific expenses incurred on behalf of the village.
J. No Additional Compensation: No additional or supplemental compensation shall be paid to the village president or to any trustee based upon
attendance at meetings in their respective official capacity. (Ord. 08-878, 11-11-2008)
1-6-2: VILLAGE CLERK:
A. Salary: Effective on April 7, 2009, or on such date thereafter on which the new term of office for the village clerk shall commence, the village clerk
of this municipality shall be compensated at the rate of three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) per month, and thereafter until this subsection may
be amended to provide otherwise. (Ord. 08-878, 11-11-2008)
B. Duties: The duties of the village clerk shall be those duties as provided by statute or any such additional duties as may be provided by this code
or other ordinances of this village.
C. Deputy Clerk:
1. Office Created; Appointment: There is hereby created the office of deputy clerk. The village clerk is authorized to appoint a deputy clerk who
shall have the power and duty to execute all documents required by any law or ordinance to be executed by the clerk, and affix the seal of the
village thereto whenever required.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 46/366
2. Signing Documents: When signing any documents, the deputy clerk shall sign the name of the village clerk followed by the word "by" and the
deputy clerk's own name and the words "Deputy Clerk".
3. Duties: The powers and duties herein described shall be exercised by such deputy clerk only in the absence of the village clerk from his office
in the village hall or upon the village clerk's direction.
4. Authority; Power: Such deputy clerk shall have the authority and power herein described and such further power and authority as may be
provided by statutes.
5. Residency: The deputy clerk need not be a village resident.
D. Additional Duties: In addition to the duties herein provided, the clerk shall perform such other duties and functions as may be required by statute
or ordinance or otherwise assigned by the board of trustees. (1983 Code)
1-6-3: VILLAGE COLLECTOR:
A. Office Established; Appointment: The office of village collector is hereby established pursuant to statute commencing November 1, 1976. The
village collector shall be appointed by the president, with the approval of the board of trustees.
B. Salary: The village collector shall be compensated at the rate of two hundred dollars ($200.00) per month and thereafter until such time as this
chapter may be amended to provide otherwise.
C. Duties: The duties of the village collector shall be the statutory duties of the village collector and such other additional duties as may be assigned
by ordinances of this village.
D. President As Ex Officio Collector: In the absence of a village collector appointed by the village president and approved by the board of trustees,
the village president, or his or her designee, shall serve as ex officio village collector and perform all the duties of that office. (Ord. 92-468, 12-8-
1992)
1-6-4: VILLAGE TREASURER:
A. Office Created; Appointment: There is hereby created the office of village treasurer, who shall be appointed by the president and board of
trustees as provided by statute.
B. Bond: The village treasurer shall give a bond, before entering upon the duties of his office, in the sum required by the board of trustees, but such
amount shall not be less than that required by statutes. This bond shall be continued upon the performance of his duties by the treasurer, and
shall be conditioned to indemnify the village for any loss by reason of any neglect of duty or any act of the treasurer.
C. Deposits Required; Commingling: The village treasurer shall cause to be deposited all village funds in such depositories as may be selected from
time to time as provided by law; and he shall keep the deposit of the village money separate and distinct from his own money, and shall not
make private or personal use of any village money. (1983 Code)
D. Duties Generally, Signing Of Warrants: The village treasurer shall perform such lawful duties as may be prescribed for him by statute or
ordinance or otherwise by the board of trustees. He shall pay out money only on vouchers, bills or orders properly approved by the village board.
All warrants must be signed by the president and countersigned by the village treasurer or village collector or trustee for finance. (Ord. 92-468,
12-8-1992)
E. Service Charge On Uncollectible Checks: The village treasurer and the village collector, or their respective designees, are hereby authorized to
impose a twenty five dollar ($25.00) service charge for any check received and deposited by any of them which is subsequently returned by a
depository as uncollectible. The service charge shall be in addition to the amount of the check and shall be used to offset the expense incurred
in notifying the issuer of the uncollectible check and in reversing the revenue entry. (Ord. 86-282, 4-8-1986)
1-6-5: VILLAGE MARSHAL AND DEPUTY MARSHALS:
(Rep. by Ord. 2008-861, 2-12-2008)
1-6-6: INDEMNIFICATION OF VILLAGE OFFICERS:
A. If any claim or action is instituted against any present officer or employee or former officer or employee of this village based on an injury allegedly
arising out of an act or omission occurring within the scope of his or her employment or official duties as such employee or officer, the village
shall, to the extent permitted by law:
1. Appear and defend against the claim or action; and
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 47/366
2. Indemnify the officer or employee or former officer or employee for his or her attorney fees and court costs incurred in the defense of such
claim or action; and
3. Indemnify the officer or employee or former officer or employee for any judgment based on such claim or action; or
4. Indemnify the officer or employee or former officer or employee for any compromise or settlement of such a claim or action if approved in
advance by the village;
5. Provided, however, that the village shall not indemnify any officer or employee for any portion of a judgment representing an award of punitive
or exemplary damages.
B. For the purposes of this section the term "officer" shall include any elected or appointed official of the village; and the term "employee" shall
include all employees of the village.
C. Nothing in this section shall be construed as waiving any defense of the village or its employees or officers, including, but not limited to, any
defense provided by the Illinois local governmental and governmental employees tort immunity act as it may exist from time to time, in any action
brought against the village or such officer or employee.
D. The provisions of this section shall apply only where the village has been given notice of any actions brought against any village employee or
officer, based upon any action of such employee or officer within the scope of his authority as such. Any village officer or employee against
whom a claim or action is instituted, shall notify the village of such claim in writing within thirty (30) days of service of process upon said officer or
employee. (Ord. 87-313, 9-8-1987)
1-6-7: OTHER VILLAGE EMPLOYEES:
The village president shall and is hereby authorized to appropriate, hire, supervise and discharge, as he deems appropriate, all employees of the
village, and all such persons shall perform their duties subject to his direction, except as otherwise provided by this code or other applicable village
ordinances, or by statute. The following positions of employment with the village are hereby established, in addition to such other positions of
employment as the president and/or board of trustees may authorize from time to time:
Village Secretary: The position of village secretary is hereby established to provide general clerical and typing services at the direction of the village
president or his designee for those hours determined by the village president and to perform such other duties as may be assigned or delegated by
the village president. Any person employed in the position of village secretary shall be compensated at a rate not to exceed two thousand four
hundred sixty five dollars ($2,465.00) per month beginning January 1, 1991, as determined by the village president from time to time. (Ord. 91-416,
3-12-1991)
Chapter 7
VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR
1-7-1: POSITION CREATED; APPOINTMENT:
There is hereby created the position of village administrator who will act as an administrative assistant and be responsible to the village president.
The village administrator shall be appointed by the president with the concurrence of the board of trustees. (1983 Code)
1-7-2: TERM, REMOVAL, COMPENSATION, BOND:
The village administrator shall serve at the pleasure of the village president, who, with the concurrence of the board of trustees, may remove the
village administrator at any time. The village administrator shall receive such compensation as shall be fixed from time to time by the president and
board of trustees. The fidelity bond of the village administrator shall be in the amount determined by the village board. (1983 Code)
1-7-3: ACTING ADMINISTRATOR:
In the event of the temporary absence or disability of the village administrator, or in the event the position becomes vacant for any reason, the
village president may act as administrator, or may appoint an acting administrator who shall serve until the administrator returns to his duties or until
a regular appointment of a successor is made. (1983 Code)
1-7-4: POWERS, DUTIES GENERALLY:
The village administrator shall:
A. Perform all duties and exercise all powers delegated by the village president. (Ord. 94-519, 4-12-1994)
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 48/366
B. Have the power to hire and discharge all village employees, except police officers, with the consent of the president. (Ord. 2008-861, 2-12-2008)
C. Supervise all village employees, who shall perform their duties subject to direction of the village administrator, except that this authority shall not
extend to the members of any police or fire department or the collector.
D. Recommend to the president and/or to the board of trustees any measures desirable for the improvement of the village government or for the
enhancement of the general welfare of the residents of the village.
E. Attend all meetings of the president and board of trustees and give the corporate authorities all information possible on administrative matters
under his direction before them.
F. Cause village ordinances to be enforced, and investigate complaints relative to the government of the village.
G. Be responsible for all real estate, equipment and other property of the village except as otherwise required by law.
H. Keep or supervise the preparation and care of all records, except financial, and except as otherwise required by law or ordinance of the village.
I. Perform such duties and have such other powers as are provided by ordinance.
J. Maintain custody of all documents belonging to the village which are not assigned to the custody of some other officer by ordinance or statute.
(Ord. 94-519, 4-12-1994)
1-7-5: PURCHASES AND EXPENDITURES:
A. The Village Administrator shall be purchasing agent for the Village and shall make all purchases and other expenditures; provided, that each
purchase and/or such expenditure over five hundred dollars ($500.00) first shall be authorized by the corporate authorities, unless otherwise
provided by said corporate authorities.
B. The Village Administrator is authorized to engage the services of the duly appointed Village Engineer, Village Attorney or other appointed
consultants for any administrative matter that will create an obligation for such services not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), without
prior approval of the corporate authorities.
C. The Village Administrator shall report each month, or more often if required, bills, payrolls and other obligations then due and payable and make
such other reports from time to time as required by the Village President.
1-7-6: TIME DEVOTED TO POSITION:
The Village Administrator shall devote such time to the performance of his duties as shall be established from time to time by the President and
Board of Trustees and shall not engage in any other employment without the consent of the President and Board of Trustees. (1983 Code)
1-7-7: AUTHORITY OF VILLAGE PRESIDENT:
Notwithstanding anything contained in this Chapter or in this Village Code to the contrary, the Village President shall have the right, in a specific
instance, and/or for a definite period of time, at his or her sole discretion, to retain and solely exercise and/or perform any function, duty, power or
authority otherwise delegated by this Chapter or by this Village Code to the Village Administrator. (Ord. 92-468, 12-8-92)
Chapter 8
ILLINOIS MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT FUND
1-8-1: PARTICIPATION IN IMRF:
The Village elected to participate in the Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund effective January 1, 1980. (Ord. 91-425, 9-10-91)
Chapter 9
VILLAGE ETHICS AND GIFT BAN
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 49/366
1-9-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter may be cited as the VILLAGE ETHICS AND GIFT BAN ORDINANCE. (Ord. 04-777, 5-11-2004)
1-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall be given these definitions:
BOARD OF TRUSTEES: The board of trustees of the village of Inverness.
CAMPAIGN FOR ELECTIVE OFFICE: Any activity in furtherance of an effort to influence the selection, nomination, election, or appointment of any
individual to any federal, state, or local public office or office in a political organization, or the selection, nomination, or election of presidential or vice
presidential electors, but does not include activities: a) relating to the support or opposition of any executive, legislative, or administrative action, b)
relating to collective bargaining, or c) that are otherwise in furtherance of the person's official duties.
CANDIDATE: A person who has filed nominating papers or petitions for nomination or election to an elected office, or who has been appointed to fill
a vacancy in nomination, and who remains eligible for placement on the ballot at a regular election, as defined in section 1-3 of the election code1.
COLLECTIVE BARGAINING: Has the same meaning as that term is defined in section 3 of the Illinois public labor relations act2.
COMPENSATED TIME: With respect to an employee, any time worked by or credited to the employee that counts toward any minimum work time
requirement imposed as a condition of his or her employment, but for purposes of this chapter, does not include any designated holidays, vacation
period, personal time, compensatory time off or any period when the employee is on a leave of absence. With respect to officers or employees
whose hours are not fixed, "compensated time" includes any period of time when the officer is on premises under the control of the employer and
any other time when the officer or employee is executing his or her official duties, regardless of location.
COMPENSATORY TIME OFF: Authorized time off earned by or awarded to an employee to compensate in whole or in part for time worked in
excess of the minimum work time required of that employee as a condition of his or her employment.
CONTRIBUTION: Has the same meaning as the term is defined in section 9-1.4 of the election code3.
EMPLOYEE: A person employed by the village of Inverness, whether on a full time or part time basis or pursuant to a contract, whose duties are
subject to the direction and control of an employer with regard to the material details of how the work is to be performed, but does not include an
independent contractor.
EMPLOYER: The village of Inverness.
GIFT: Any gratuity, discount, entertainment, hospitality, loan, forbearance, or other tangible or intangible item having monetary value including, but
not limited to, cash, food and drink, and honoraria for speaking engagements related to or attributable to government employment or the official
position of an officer or employee.
LEAVE OF ABSENCE: Any period during which an employee does not receive: a) compensation for employment, b) service credit toward pension
benefits, and c) health insurance benefits paid for by the employer.
OFFICER: A person who holds, by election or appointment, an office created by statute or ordinance, regardless of whether the officer is
compensated for service in his or her official capacity.
POLITICAL ACTIVITY: Any activity in support of or in connection with any campaign for elective office or any political organization, but does not
include activities: a) relating to the support or opposition of any executive, legislative, or administrative action, b) relating to collective bargaining, or
c) that are otherwise in furtherance of the person's official duties.
POLITICAL ORGANIZATION: A party, committee, association, fund, or other organization (whether or not incorporated) that is required to file a
statement of organization with the state board of elections or a county clerk under section 9-3 of the election code4, but only with regard to those
activities that require filing with the state board of elections or a county clerk.
PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITY: A. Preparing for, organizing, or participating in any political meeting, political rally, political demonstration, or
other political event.
B. Soliciting contributions, including, but not limited to, the purchase of, selling, distributing, or receiving payment for tickets for any political
fundraiser, political meeting, or other political event.
C. Soliciting, planning the solicitation of, or preparing any document or report regarding anything of value intended as a campaign contribution.
D. Planning, conducting, or participating in a public opinion poll in connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political
organization for political purposes or for or against any referendum question.
E. Surveying or gathering information from potential or actual voters in an election to determine probable vote outcome in connection with a
campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political organization for political purposes or for or against any referendum question.
F. Assisting at the polls on election day on behalf of any political organization or candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum
question.
G. Soliciting votes on behalf of a candidate for elective office or a political organization or for or against any referendum question or helping in an
effort to get voters to the polls.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 50/366
H. Initiating for circulation, preparing, circulating, reviewing, or filing any petition on behalf of a candidate for elective office or for or against any
referendum question.
I. Making contributions on behalf of any candidate for elective office in that capacity or in connection with a campaign for elective office.
J. Preparing or reviewing responses to candidate questionnaires.
K. Distributing, preparing for distribution, or mailing campaign literature, campaign signs, or other campaign material on behalf of any candidate
for elective office or for or against any referendum question.
L. Campaigning for any elective office or for or against any referendum question.
M. Managing or working on a campaign for elective office or for or against any referendum question.
N. Serving as a delegate, alternate, or proxy to a political party convention.
O. Participating in any recount or challenge to the outcome of any election.
PROHIBITED SOURCE: Any person or entity who:
A. Is seeking official action: 1) by an officer or 2) by an employee, or by the officer or another employee directing that employee;
B. Does business or seeks to do business: 1) with officer or 2) with an employee, or with the officer or another employee directing that employee;
C. Conducts activities regulated: 1) by the officer or 2) by an employee, or by the officer or another employee directing that employee; or
D. Has interests that may be substantially affected by the performance or nonperformance of the official duties of officer or the employee.
VILLAGE PRESIDENT: The village president of the village of Inverness. (Ord. 04-777, 5-11-2004)
1-9-3: PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITIES:
A. No officer or employee shall intentionally perform any prohibited political activity during any "compensated time", as defined herein. No officer or
employee shall intentionally use any property or resources of the village of Inverness in connection with any prohibited political activity.
B. At no time shall any officer or employee intentionally require any other officer or employee to perform any prohibited political activity: 1) as part of
that officer's or employee's duties, 2) as a condition of employment, or 3) during any compensated time off (such as holidays, vacation or
personal time off).
C. No officer or employee shall be required at any time to participate in any prohibited political activity in consideration for that officer or employee
being awarded additional compensation or any benefit, whether in the form of a salary adjustment, bonus, compensatory time off, continued
employment or otherwise, nor shall any officer or employee be awarded additional compensation or any benefit in consideration for his or her
participation in any prohibited political activity.
D. Nothing in this chapter prohibits activities that are permissible for an officer or employee to engage in as part of his or her official duties, or
activities that are undertaken by an officer or employee on a voluntary basis which are not prohibited by this chapter.
E. No person either: 1) in a position that is subject to recognized merit principles of public employment or 2) in a position the salary for which is paid
in whole or in part by federal funds and that is subject to the federal standards for a merit system of personnel administration applicable to grant
in aid programs, shall be denied or deprived of employment or tenure solely because he or she is a member or an officer of a political committee,
of a political party, or of a political organization or club. (Ord. 04-777, 5-11-2004)
1-9-4: GIFT BAN:
Except as permitted by this chapter, no officer or employee, and no spouse of or immediate family member living with any officer or employee
(collectively referred to herein as "recipients"), shall intentionally solicit or accept any gift from any "prohibited source", as defined herein, or which is
otherwise prohibited by law or ordinance. No prohibited source shall intentionally offer or make a gift that violates this chapter. (Ord. 04-777, 5-11-
2004)
1-9-5: EXCEPTIONS:
Section 1-9-4 of this chapter is not applicable to the following:
A. Opportunities, benefits, and services that are available on the same conditions as for the general public.
B. Anything for which the officer or employee or his or her spouse or immediate family member, pays the fair market value.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 51/366
C. Any: 1) contribution that is lawfully made under the election code or 2) activities associated with a fundraising event in support of a political
organization or candidate.
D. Educational materials and missions.
E. Travel expenses for a meeting to discuss business.
F. A gift from a relative, meaning those people related to the individual as father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, uncle, aunt, great aunt, great
uncle, first cousin, nephew, niece, husband, wife, grandfather, grandmother, grandson, granddaughter, father-in-law, mother-in-law, son-in-law,
daughter-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, stepfather, stepmother, stepson, stepdaughter, stepbrother, stepsister, half brother, half sister, and
including the father, mother, grandfather, or grandmother of the individual's spouse and the individual's fiance or fiancee.
G. Anything provided by an individual on the basis of a personal friendship unless the recipient has reason to believe that, under the circumstances,
the gift was provided because of the official position or employment of the recipient or his or her spouse or immediate family member and not
because of the personal friendship. In determining whether a gift is provided on the basis of personal friendship, the recipient shall consider the
circumstances under which the gift was offered, such as:
1. The history of the relationship between the individual giving the gift and the recipient of the gift, including any previous exchange of gifts
between those individuals;
2. Whether to the actual knowledge of the recipient the individual who gave the gift personally paid for the gift or sought a tax deduction or
business reimbursement for the gift; and
3. Whether to the actual knowledge of the recipient the individual who gave the gift also at the same time gave the same or similar gifts to other
officers or employees, or their spouses or immediate family members.
H. Food or refreshments not exceeding seventy five dollars ($75.00) per person in value on a single calendar day; provided that the food or
refreshments are: 1) consumed on the premises from which they were purchased or prepared or 2) catered. For the purposes of this chapter,
"catered" means food or refreshments that are purchased ready to consume which are delivered by any means.
I. Food, refreshments, lodging, transportation, and other benefits resulting from outside business or employment activities (or outside activities that
are not connected to the official duties of an officer or employee), if the benefits have not been offered or enhanced because of the official
position or employment of the officer or employee, and are customarily provided to others in similar circumstances.
J. Intragovernmental and intergovernmental gifts. For the purpose of this chapter, "intragovernmental gift" means any gift given to an officer or
employee from another officer or employee, and "intergovernmental gift" means any gift given to an officer or employee by an officer or
employee of another governmental entity.
K. Bequests, inheritances, and other transfers at death.
L. Any item or items from any one prohibited source during any calendar year having a cumulative total value of less than one hundred dollars
($100.00).
Each of the exceptions listed in this chapter is mutually exclusive and independent of every other. (Ord. 04-777, 5-11-2004)
1-9-6: DISPOSITION OF GIFTS:
An officer or employee, his or her spouse or an immediate family member living with the officer or employee, does not violate this chapter if the
recipient promptly takes reasonable action to return a gift from a prohibited source to its source or gives the gift or an amount equal to its value to an
appropriate charity that is exempt from income taxation under section 501(c)(3) of the internal revenue code of 1986, as now or hereafter amended,
renumbered, or succeeded. (Ord. 04-777, 5-11-2004)
1-9-7: ETHICS ADVISOR:
A. The village president, with the advice and consent of the board of trustees shall designate an ethics advisor for the village of Inverness. The
duties of the ethics advisor may be delegated to an officer or employee of, or an independent contractor for, the village of Inverness.
B. The ethics advisor shall provide guidance to the officers and employees of the village of Inverness concerning the interpretation of and
compliance with the provisions of this chapter and state ethics laws. The ethics advisor shall perform such other duties as may be delegated by
the board of trustees. (Ord. 04-777, 5-11-2004)
1-9-8: COMPLAINTS:
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 52/366
A. Complaints alleging a violation of this chapter shall be filed with the village clerk.
B. Within five (5) business days after the receipt of a complaint, the village clerk shall send by certified mail, return receipt requested, a notice to the
respondent that a complaint has been filed against him or her and a copy of the complaint and provide a copy to each member of the board of
trustees. The village clerk shall send by certified mail, return receipt requested, a confirmation of the receipt of the complaint to the complainant
within five (5) business days after receipt by the village clerk. The notices to the respondent and the complainant shall also advise them of the
date, time, and place of the meeting to determine the sufficiency of the complaint and to establish whether probable cause exists to proceed.
C. Upon not less than forty eight (48) hours' public notice, the board of trustees shall meet to review the sufficiency of the complaint and, if the
complaint is deemed sufficient to allege a violation of this chapter, to determine whether there is probable cause, based on the evidence
presented by the complainant, to proceed. The meeting may be closed to the public to the extent authorized by the open meetings act. The
board of trustees shall issue notice to the complainant and the respondent of the board of trustees' ruling on the sufficiency of the complaint and,
if necessary, on probable cause to proceed, within ten (10) business days after receiving the complaint.
If the complaint is deemed by the board of trustees sufficient to allege a violation of this chapter and there is a determination of probable cause,
then the board of trustees shall notify in writing the attorney designated by the corporate authorities to prosecute such actions of such
recommendation that the complaint be initiated and adjudicated judicially. If the complaint is deemed by the board of trustees not sufficient to
allege a violation or if there is no determination of probable cause, then the board of trustees shall send by certified mail, return receipt
requested, a notice to the parties of the decision to dismiss the complaint, and that notice shall be made public.
If the complaint is deemed by the board of trustees sufficient to allege a violation of this chapter, then the board of trustees shall notify in writing
the attorney designated by the corporate authorities to prosecute such actions and shall transmit to the attorney the complaint and their
recommendation relative thereto and all additional documents in the custody of the board of trustees concerning the alleged violation, provided,
however, such recommendations shall not be binding on such attorney.
D. The board of trustees may also recommend any appropriate discipline up to and including discharge, if a person is found by a court of competent
jurisdiction guilty of a violation of this chapter.
E. A complaint alleging the violation of this chapter must be filed within one year after the alleged violation. (Ord. 04-777, 5-11-2004)
1-9-9: PENALTIES:
A. A person who intentionally violates any provision of section 1-9-3 of this chapter may be punished by a term of incarceration in a penal institution
other than a penitentiary for a period of not more than three hundred sixty four (364) days, and may be fined in an amount not to exceed two
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
B. A person who intentionally violates any provision of section 1-9-4 of this chapter is subject to a fine in an amount of not less than one thousand
one dollars ($1,001.00) and not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00).
C. Any person who intentionally makes a false report alleging a violation of any provision of this chapter to the local enforcement authorities, the
state's attorney or any other law enforcement official may be punished by a term of incarceration in a penal institution other than a penitentiary
for a period of not more than three hundred sixty four (364) days, and may be fined in an amount not to exceed two thousand five hundred
dollars ($2,500.00).
D. A violation of section 1-9-3 of this chapter shall be prosecuted as a criminal offense by an attorney appointed for that purpose by filing in the
circuit court an information, or sworn complaint, charging such offense. The prosecution shall be under and conform to the rules of criminal
procedure, and conviction shall require the establishment of the guilt of the defendant beyond a reasonable doubt.
A violation of section 1-9-4 of this chapter may be prosecuted as a quasi-criminal offense by an attorney appointed for that purpose by filing in
the circuit court an information, or sworn complaint, charging such offense. The prosecution shall conform to the rules of civil procedures and
conviction shall require establishment of guilt by a preponderance of the evidence.
E. In addition to any other penalty that may be applicable, whether criminal or civil, an officer or employee who intentionally violates any provision of
section 1-9-3 or 1-9-4 of this chapter is subject to discipline or discharge. (Ord. 04-777, 5-11-2004)
Chapter 10
RULES FOR PUBLIC HEARINGS
1-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of these rules:
DOCUMENT: The complete original (or a complete copy when the original is not available) and any nonidentical copy (whether different from the
original because of notes made on the copy or otherwise) of any writing, record, or other submittal, including, but not limited to, a book, pamphlet,
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 53/366
binder, periodical, letter, memorandum, telegram, report, progress notes, interoffice or intraoffice communication, handwritten or other note, working
paper, transcription, draft, application, permit, photograph, data sheet, data processing sheet, computer printout, microfilm, microfiche,
correspondence, notebooks, diaries, desk calendars, charts, survey, plat, photographs and records of any kind, as well as all computer readable
data compilations, including, but not limited to, tapes, diskettes, cards, cassettes, CDs, and all other electronic or mechanical devices which contain
information, as well as all attachments, exhibits, enclosures, or documents affixed to or referred to in such documents.
INTERESTED PERSON: Any person participating in the public hearing, other than the petitioner, who has previously filed a written appearance or
has had an attorney file a written appearance on their behalf.
PARTY, PERSON OR PERSONS: Any natural person, proprietorship, private corporation, professional corporation, public corporation, municipal
corporation, partnership, association, state or local governmental entity, governmental agency, political subdivision, group, association, committee or
any other organization.
PETITIONER: The petitioner and/or applicant(s) or person(s) making a request of the public body for its consideration and decision or
recommendation.
PUBLIC HEARING: A formal proceeding mandated by law for the purpose of taking public comments and/or evidence with a view to formulating a
decision or recommendation on an issue within the jurisdiction of the public body. A "public hearing" is distinguished from a "meeting" in that all
hearings are meetings, but not all meetings are hearings.
RELATED TO, RELATING TO, OR RELATIVE TO: Directly or indirectly mentioning or describing, pertaining to, being directly or indirectly connected
with, or reflecting upon a stated subject matter.
USABLE: Legible, audible, or visible, depending on the nature of the document. (Ord. 2005-796, 3-8-2005)
1-10-2: RULES:
The following rules shall be applicable to all public hearings required by law to be held by the board of trustees, or by any commission or board,
committee, subcommittee, or other public bodies of the village of Inverness:
A. All hearings of the public body shall be held in compliance with the Illinois open meetings act.
B. The chair may impose reasonable limitations on evidence or testimony presented by persons and parties, such as time limits and barring
repetitious, irrelevant or immaterial testimony, which ruling may be overruled by a majority of at least a quorum of the public body. Time limits, if
imposed, shall be fair, generous and equally administered. The public body shall not be bound by strict rules of evidence; however, irrelevant,
immaterial, or unduly repetitious evidence shall not be admissible. The chair shall rule on all questions related to the admissibility of evidence,
which ruling may be overruled by a majority of at least a quorum of the public body. The chair may also impose reasonable conditions on the
hearing process after giving due consideration to factors present in particular proceedings, including, but not limited to, the following:
1. The complexity of the issue.
2. Whether the witness possesses special expertise.
3. Whether the testimony reflects a matter of taste or personal opinion or concerns a disputed issue of fact.
4. The degree to which the witness's testimony relates to the factors to be considered in approving or denying the proposal.
5. Such other factors appropriate for the hearing.
Again, any such rulings may be overruled by a majority of at least a quorum of the public body.
C. The chair may take such actions as are required to maintain an orderly and civil hearing.
D. Proof of lawful notice shall be introduced into evidence before the public body.
E. A record of proceedings at the public hearing shall be made as directed by the public body.
F. A petitioner may appear on his or her own behalf or may be represented by an attorney. Any attorney representing any party or objector(s) at
such public hearing shall file a written appearance and include thereon the names, addresses, and telephone numbers of all of his or her clients
as specified below.
G. The municipality shall be an interested party in every public hearing, but need not appear.
H. In addition to the petitioner, any person may appear and participate at the hearing.
I. Persons participating shall identify themselves for the record, either orally or in writing, and indicate if an attorney represents them.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 54/366
J. All persons in attendance shall have an opportunity to be heard. Any person who also wishes to appear as an "interested person" for himself or
herself or by an attorney with the right to cross examine others at the hearing must complete and file with the village clerk at the village of
Inverness village hall a written appearance form which shall be made available by the village clerk during her office's regular hours. Such
appearance form shall provide the following information relative to the interested party in legible form:
1. Subject matter;
2. Name, address, telephone number and fax number of interested party;
3. E-mail address, if any, of interested party;
4. Name, address, telephone number and fax number of interested party's attorney, if any;
5. If the appearance is by an attorney, the name(s), address(es), and telephone number(s) of all such attorney's clients shall be provided in
legible form.
K. After such a written appearance has been filed by any interested person and/or their attorney, the petitioner(s) and/or applicant(s), or their
attorney(s), shall send to such interested person, or to their attorney, if one has filed an appearance on behalf of such interested person, usable
copies of any documents of any nature thereafter filed with the village by the petitioner(s) and/or the applicant(s) or by their attorney(s), and such
copies shall be sent to such interested person(s) by facsimile, overnight courier, or regular mail within seven (7) business days after the originals
of such documents are filed with the village.
L. The examination of a witness shall not be used by the questioner to offer testimony or evidence of the questioner.
M. All persons offering testimony at a hearing shall testify under oath. An attorney shall be sworn if he or she offers testimony but not if he or she is
questioning witnesses, summarizing testimony of witnesses, or addressing the public body.
N. The order of presentation at a public hearing shall generally be as specified in section 1-10-3 of this chapter, but may be modified as determined
appropriate by the chair.
O. At the conclusion of an evidentiary portion of the public hearing, the public body may, among other actions, move to close the evidentiary portion
of the public hearing and then deliberate its decision on the matter under consideration, on the evidence presented, or continue the hearing to a
date, time and location certain.
P. A member who is not present at a public hearing may vote on a matter, provided such member has heard an audiotape or read the transcript of
the public hearing, reviewed the evidence presented at the hearing, and otherwise thoroughly familiarized himself or herself with the matter
under consideration.
Q. A written decision shall be prepared which shall include findings of fact and the public body's recommendation or decision based upon the
record. (Ord. 2005-796, 3-8-2005)
1-10-3: ORDER OF PRESENTATION:
The order of presentation of evidence at a public hearing shall generally be as follows, but may be modified as determined appropriate by the chair:
A. Identification of petitioner, if any, and interested persons.
B. Submittal of proof of notice.
C. Testimony and other evidence by petitioner, if any.
D. Public body examination of petitioner's witnesses, if any, and other evidence.
E. Cross examination of petitioner's witnesses, if any, and other evidence by interested persons.
F. Testimony and other evidence by interested persons, if any.
G. Public body examination of interested persons' witnesses, if any, and other evidence.
H. Cross examination of interested persons' witnesses, if any, and other evidence by petitioner or applicant, if any.
I. In some cases reexamination may be allowed.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 55/366
J. Report by staff, if any.
K. Summary/closing by petitioner, if any.
L. Summary/closing by interested persons, if any.
M. Rebuttal/closing by petitioner, if any. (Ord. 2005-796, 3-8-2005)
1-10-4: PROCEDURES FOR CONTINUING PUBLIC HEARINGS:
When due notice has been published and/or mailed for a public hearing, in accordance with Illinois statutes and the applicable ordinances of this
village, or when such public hearing has previously been continued to a time, date and place by a motion of such hearing body duly approved at a
public meeting of such hearing body, or when such a public hearing has previously been continued in accordance with the provisions of this section,
but it appears that the hearing body does not or will not have the necessary quorum of its members to conduct business at the scheduled time, date
and place for such public hearing, the chairman or acting chairman of such hearing body, or any member of such hearing body present at the
appointed time, date and place of such hearing, shall have authority to and may enter a written order continuing such public hearing to a time, date
and place certain, and the posting of such order at, during, or before the original appointed time, date and place of such hearing shall constitute
sufficient notice to the public of such continued public hearing, and no further notice by mail or by publication shall be required. (Ord. 2005-796, 3-8-
2005)
Title 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Chapter 1
PLAN COMMISSION
2-1-1: APPOINTMENT, TERMS:
There shall be appointed by the Village President, with the advice and consent of the Village Trustees, a Plan Commission, which shall have all the
duties and powers hereinafter set forth. Said Plan Commission shall consist of a chairman and six (6) other members. Each member shall be
appointed for a term of two (2) years, in order that the plan of staggered expiration of terms which was initiated at the time of the original
appointments of members to the Plan Commission may be continued.
2-1-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
A. The Plan Commission shall have duties and powers conferred upon Plan Commissions by Statutes of Illinois as amended from time to time and
such additional duties and powers as may be conferred from time to time by corporate authorities of the Village. The Plan Commission shall be
authorized to consider and recommend approval or disapproval to the corporate authorities of amendments to the Zoning Ordinance and the
official Comprehensive Plan affecting land situated within the corporate limits and contiguous territory not more than one and one-half (11/2)
miles beyond the corporate limits and not included in any other municipality.
B. The powers of the Plan Commission shall be:
1. To prepare and recommend to the Village Board a comprehensive plan of public improvements looking to the present and future development
of the Village, and to provide reasonable requirements in reference to streets, alleys, public grounds and other improvements pursuant to law
in unsubdivided lands within the corporate limits and in contiguous territory outside and distant not more than one and one-half (11/2) miles
from the corporate limits of the Village, insofar as the same are not included in any city, village or incorporated towns. After its adoption by the
Village Board, this shall be known as the Official Comprehensive Plan.
2. To recommend from time to time changes in the Official Comprehensive Plan.
3. To prepare and recommend to the Village Board from time to time plans for specific improvements in pursuance of such Official
Comprehensive Plan.
4. To aid the Municipal officials charged with the direction of projects for improvements embraced within the Official Plan, to further these
projects, and generally, to promote the objectives of the Official Comprehensive Plan.
5. To exercise such other powers as may be provided by Statute or ordinance.
2-1-3: SECRETARY:
The Village President may, with the consent of the Board of Trustees, appoint a secretary to the Plan Commission who need not be a member of the
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 56/366
Commission.
2-1-4: QUORUM, VOTE REQUIRED, CHAIRMAN MAY VOTE:
A majority of the Plan Commission shall constitute a quorum, but no final action shall be taken on any measure before it except with the
concurrence of four (4) members. The chairman shall vote with the other members of the Commission.
2-1-5: MEETINGS OF COMMISSION:
The Plan Commission shall meet at such time as it may determine. Special meetings may be called by the Village President, the chairman, or by
any three (3) members of the Commission. Notice of a meeting may be waived by any member of the Plan Commission. (1983 Code)
2-1-6: RULES OF PLAN COMMISSION:
The Plan Commission may adopt rules regulating the procedure of all meetings of the Plan Commission. Such rules shall be filed in the office of the
Village Administrator and may be amended at any meeting, such rules to be effective upon filing in the office of the Administrator. (Ord. 92-468, 12-
8-92)
Chapter 2
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
2-2-1: APPOINTMENT:
The president of the village board shall appoint a zoning board of appeals consisting of seven (7) members, each of whom shall be a resident of the
village, designating one member as chairman. Said appointment shall be confirmed by the village board. The terms of office are as follows: one for
one year, one for two (2) years, one for three (3) years, one for four (4) years, one for five (5) years, one for six (6) years and one for seven (7)
years, and the successor to each member so appointed shall serve for a term of five (5) years' duty. (1983 Code)
2-2-2: DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the zoning board of appeals to hear and make a recommendation on any application for a variation from any petition for an
appeal or from any order, decision or interpretation of the zoning enforcement officer made pursuant to title 5 of this code (the "zoning regulations"),
and/or any order, decision, or interpretation of the building official made pursuant to title 4 of this code (the "Inverness building code") under the
zoning ordinance of the village, provided, however, no such appeal shall be granted, except by an ordinance approved by the board of trustees.
(Ord. 2007-846, 3-13-2007)
2-2-3: SECRETARY:
The village president may, with the consent of the board of trustees, appoint a secretary to the zoning board of appeals who need not be a member
of the zoning board of appeals. (1983 Code)
2-2-4: QUORUM, VOTE REQUIRED, CHAIRMAN MAY VOTE:
A majority of the zoning board of appeals shall constitute a quorum, but no final action shall be taken on any recommendation on any application for
variation or any petition for an appeal before it except with the concurrence of four (4) members. The chairman shall vote with the other members of
the zoning board of appeals. (Ord. 2007-846, 3-13-2007)
2-2-5: MEETINGS OF ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS:
The zoning board of appeals shall meet at such time as it may determine. Special meetings may be called by the village president, the chairman, or
by any three (3) members of the zoning board of appeals. Notice of a meeting may be waived by any member of the zoning board of appeals. (1983
Code)
2-2-6: RULES OF ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS:
The zoning board of appeals may adopt rules regulating the procedure of all meetings of the zoning board. Such rules shall be filed in the office of
the village administrator and may be amended at any meeting, such rules to be effective upon filing in the office of the administrator. (Ord. 92-468,
12-8-1992)
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 57/366
Chapter 3
INVERNESS EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY
2-3-1: ESTABLISHMENT:
There is hereby created the Village of Inverness Emergency Management Agency, hereinafter designated as Village EMA, established to prevent,
minimize, repair and alleviate injury or damage resulting from disaster caused by enemy attack, sabotage or other hostile actions or from natural or
man-made disaster, in accordance with "the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act", as amended. The Village EMA shall consist of the Village
Administrator, who shall serve as EMA Director, and the Coordinator, as designated by the Director. The Coordinator shall be under the authority,
command, and control of the EMA Director. (Ord. 17-989, 12-12-2017)
2-3-2: DIRECTOR:
Under the supervision of the Village President, the Director shall have the responsibility for the management of the Emergency Management
Agency, to include the Coordinator and support staff. (Ord. 17-989, 12-12-2017)
2-3-3: VACANCY IN OFFICE:
In the event of the absence, resignation, death, or inability to serve as the Director of Emergency Management, the Village President or individual
designated by the Village President, shall be and act as Director until a new appointment is made as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 17-989, 12-12-
2017)
2-3-4: COORDINATOR:
Under the supervision of the Director of Emergency Management, the Coordinator shall have direct responsibility for the planning, coordination, and
operation of the emergency management activity in the Village. The Coordinator shall maintain liaison with the State and Federal authorities and the
authorities of other nearby political subdivisions to ensure the most effective operation of the Emergency Operations Plan. The Coordinator's duties
shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
A. Coordinating the recruitment of volunteer personnel and agencies to augment the personnel and facilities of the Village for emergency
management purposes.
B. Development and coordination of plans for the immediate use of all Village facilities, equipment, manpower and other resources for the purposes
of minimizing or preventing damage to persons and property and protecting and restoring to usefulness governmental services and public
utilities necessary for the public health, safety and welfare.
C. Negotiating and concluding agreements with owners or persons in control of buildings or other property for the use of such buildings or other
property for emergency management purposes, and designating suitable buildings as public shelters.
D. Conducting public practice alerts to ensure the efficient operation of emergency management regulations, procedures, and operations.
E. Coordinating the activity of all other public and private agencies engaged in any emergency management activity.
F. Assuming such authority and conducting such activity as the Director may direct to promote and execute the Emergency Operations Plan.
In the event of the absence, resignation, death, or inability to serve as the Coordinator, the Director or any person designated by the Village
President, shall be and act as Coordinator until a new appointment is made as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 17-989, 12-12-2017)
2-3-5: MEMBERSHIP WITH THE JOINT EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT SYSTEM:
The Village of Inverness is a member of the Joint Emergency Management System, a regional agreement between neighboring municipalities for
emergency management support. The Joint Emergency Management System is overseen by a board which is composed of the Chief Administrative
Officer, or their designee, from each of the member communities. The board is led by a Chairman and Vice-Chairman, who are elected by the board
members. As a member of JEMS, the Village of Inverness coordinates their emergency management program activities with the JEMS Coordinator
in order to establish regional standardization. (Ord. 17-989, 12-12-2017)
2-3-6: JOINT EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT SYSTEM COORDINATOR:
In cooperation with the Director, the JEMS Coordinator will have the responsibility for planning, training and exercise coordinator of the emergency
management activity in the Village. The JEMS Coordinator's duties shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 58/366
A. Maintain, coordinate, and recommend for adoption or amendment, an Emergency Operation Plan (EOP).
B. Be on-call twenty four (24) hours a day.
C. Monitor news and severe weather.
D. Maintain, update and monitor the subscriber community Continuity of Operations Plan (COOP).
E. Serve as the liaison for subscribers to State Emergency Management Agencies and Emergency Service and Disaster Agencies.
F. Act as the NIMS Compliance Officer under the National Incident Management System.
G. Ensure that the subscribers' Emergency Operations Centers (EOCs) are maintained and ready.
H. Provide training on the use of EOC equipment and readiness including regional disaster exercises to measure the subscriber's preparedness to
respond to emergencies and to develop action plans to address any deficiencies identified during such exercises.
I. Oversee the maintenance and evaluation of the emergency warning systems including the outdoor warning sirens or additional warning systems
in place in each subscriber community.
J. Assist in the preparation and distribution of Incident Action Plans for planned special events. (Ord. 17-989, 12-12-2017)
2-3-7: FUNCTIONS:
The Village of Inverness EMA shall perform such EMA functions within the Village as shall be prescribed in and by the State of Illinois EMA plan and
program prepared by the Governor, and, in addition, shall perform such duties outside the corporate limits as may be required pursuant to any
mutual aid agreement with any other political subdivision, municipality, or quasi-municipality entered into as provided in "the Illinois Emergency
Management Agency Act", as amended. (Ord. 17-989, 12-12-2017)
2-3-8: SERVICE AS MOBILE SUPPORT TEAM:
All or any member of the Village of Inverness EMA organization may be designated as a member of a mobile support team created by the Director
of the State of Illinois Emergency Management Agency, as provided by law. The leader of the mobile support team shall be designated by the
Director of the EMA organization. Any member of a mobile support team who is a Village employee or officer while serving on call to duty by the
Governor, or the State Director, shall receive the compensation and have the powers, duties, rights and immunities incident to such employment or
office. Any such member who is not a paid officer or employee of the Village, while so serving, shall receive from the State of Illinois, reasonable
compensation as provided by law. (Ord. 17-989, 12-12-2017)
2-3-9: AGREEMENT WITH OTHER POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS:
The Director of the Village of Inverness EMA may negotiate mutual aid agreements with other cities or political subdivisions of the State of Illinois,
but no such agreement shall be effective until it has been approved by the Village President and the Board of Trustees. (Ord. 17-989, 12-12-2017)
2-3-10: EMERGENCY ACTION:
If the Governor proclaims that a disaster or state of emergency exists in the event of actual enemy attack upon the United States or the occurrence
within the State of Illinois of a major disaster resulting from enemy sabotage or other hostile action, or from man-made or natural disaster, it shall be
the duty of the Village of Inverness EMA to cooperate fully with the State of Illinois EMA and with the Governor in the exercise of emergency powers
as provided by law. (Ord. 17-989, 12-12-2017)
2-3-11: EMERGENCY POWERS AND DUTIES:
A. Village President; Board Of Trustees: The Village President may exercise the emergency power and authority necessary to fulfill his general
powers and duties as defined in ordinance. The judgment of the Village President shall be the sole criteria necessary to invoke emergency
powers provided by ordinance and other appropriate authorities. The Board of Trustees may convene to perform its legislative and administrative
powers as the situation demands and shall receive reports relative to emergency management activities. Nothing in this chapter shall be
construed as abridging or curtailing the powers or restrictions of the Board of Trustees.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 59/366
B. Regulations Promulgated: During any period when disaster threatens or when the Village has been struck by disaster, within the definition of this
chapter, the Village President or the Director of the Emergency Management Agency may promulgate such regulations as deemed necessary to
protect life and property and preserve critical resources. Such regulations may include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
1. Regulations prohibiting or restricting the movement of vehicles in order to facilitate the work of emergency management personnel or to
facilitate the mass movement of persons from critical areas within or without the Village.
2. Regulations pertaining to the movement of persons from areas deemed to be hazardous or vulnerable to disaster.
3. Such other regulations necessary to preserve public peace, health and safety.
Regulations promulgated in accordance with the authority above will be given widespread circulation by proclamations published and
expressed by newspaper, radio, televised media and social media.
C. Emergency Locations: Whenever, due to an emergency resulting from the effects of natural or manmade disaster or hostile act or the anticipated
effects thereof, it becomes imprudent, inexpedient or impossible to conduct the affairs of local government at the regular or usual place or
places, the Village Board of Trustees may meet at any place within or without the Village limits on the call of the presiding officer or any two (2)
members of such Governing Body and shall proceed to establish and designate by ordinance, resolution, or other manner alternate or substitute
sites or places as the emergency temporary location or locations of government where all, or any part of, the public business may be transacted
and conducted during the emergency situation. Such sites or places may be within or without the territorial limits of the Village.
D. Governmental Powers: During the period when the public business is being conducted at the emergency temporary location or locations, the
Governing Body and other officers of the Village shall have and possess and shall exercise, at such location or locations, all of the executive,
legislative, and judicial powers and functions conferred upon such body and officers by or under the laws of this State. Such powers and
functions may be exercised in light of the exigencies of the emergency situation without regard to or compliance with time-consuming procedures
and formalities prescribed by law and pertaining thereto, and all acts of such body and officers shall be valid and binding as if performed within
the territorial limits of their Village.
E. Continuity In Office: In the event that the Village President is unavailable, the powers of the office shall be exercised and duties shall be
discharged by the designated emergency interim successors in the order specified. The emergency interim successor shall exercise the powers
and discharge the duties of the office to which designated until such time as a vacancy which may exist shall be filled in accordance with the
Constitution or statutes; or until the officer, or their deputy or a preceding emergency interim successor, again becomes available to exercise the
powers and discharge the duties of the office. Based on the authority of 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 275/6 the line of succession for the
executive branch of government will be: Village President, most senior Trustee available, Village Administrator, the Chief of Police.
In the event that, at the time or as a consequence of any disaster or occurrence described in this chapter, the Village President and their three
(3) successors on file with the Village shall be absent, killed, or rendered incapable of performing the duties of such office, such office shall be
filled until such time as a successor can be selected in the manner prescribed by law, in the following line of succession: the remaining members
of the Village Board of Trustees based on tenure, the Village Administrator, the Chief of Police. In the event that, at the time or as a consequence
of any disaster or occurrence described in this chapter, the incumbent of any Municipal office or position shall be absent, killed, or rendered
incapable of performing the duties of such office or position, such office or position shall be filled, until such time as a successor can be selected
in the manner prescribed by law, by appointment by the Village President. The Village President shall give due consideration to the list of three
(3) successors on file with the Village but is not required to select from said list. (Ord. 17-989, 12-12-2017)
2-3-12: EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY AND EMERGENCY PLANS:
A. A comprehensive Emergency Operation Plan shall be adopted and maintained by resolution of the Corporate Authorities upon the
recommendations of the Village President. In the preparation of the plan as it pertains to the Village organization, it is the intent that the services,
equipment, facilities and personnel of all existing departments and agencies shall be utilized to the fullest extent. When approved, it shall be the
duty of the Director of the Emergency Management Agency, all departments, and all employees to perform the functions assigned by the plan
and to maintain their portion of the plan in a current state of readiness at all times. The Emergency Operation Plan shall be considered
supplementary to this chapter and have the effect of law whenever a disaster has been proclaimed.
B. Each department head assigned responsibility in the Emergency Operation Plan shall be responsible for carrying out all duties and functions
assigned therein. Duties will include the organization and training of assigned Village employees and volunteers.
C. The Village President shall prescribe in a Continuity of Operations and Continuity of Government Plan those positions within the disaster
organization, in addition to their own, for which lines of succession are necessary. In each instance, the responsible person will designate and
keep on file with the Village a current list of three (3) persons as successors to the position. The list will be in order of succession and will as
nearly as possible designate persons best capable of carrying out all assigned duties and functions.
D. When a required competency or skill for a disaster function is not available within the Village government, the Village President is authorized to
seek assistance from persons outside of government. The assignment of duties, when of a supervisory nature, shall also grant authority for the
persons so assigned to carry out such duties prior to, during, and after a disaster. The Village may accept such services from persons outside of
government on a volunteer basis. Such persons shall be enrolled as emergency management volunteers in cooperation with the heads of
departments affected.
E. Some of the duties ascribed to the Village President in this section will ordinarily be handled as a matter of routine by the Emergency
Management Agency's Director or Coordinator, but the responsibility and authority stem from and remain with the Village President. (Ord. 17-
989, 12-12-2017)
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 60/366
2-3-13: COMPENSATION:
Members of the Village EMA who are paid employees or officers of the Village, if called for training by the State of Illinois Director of EMA, shall
receive for the time spent in such training, the same rate of pay as is attached to the position held; members who are not such Village employees or
officers shall receive for such training time, such compensation as may be established by the Village President and Board of Trustees. (Ord. 17-989,
12-12-2017)
2-3-14: REIMBURSEMENT BY STATE:
The Treasurer may receive and allocate to the appropriate fund any reimbursement by the State of Illinois to the Village for expenses incident to
training members of the EMA as prescribed by the State Director of EMA, compensation for services and expenses of members of a mobile support
team while serving outside the Village in response to a call by the Governor or State Director of EMA, as provided by law, and any other
reimbursement made by the State incident to EMA activities as provided by law. (Ord. 17-989, 12-12-2017)
2-3-15: PURCHASES AND EXPENDITURES:
The Village Corporate Authorities, may, on recommendation of the Director of EMA, authorize any purchase or contracts necessary to place the
Village in a position to combat effectively any enemy attack upon the United States or the occurrence within the State of Illinois of a major disaster
resulting from enemy sabotage or other hostile action, or from man-made or natural disasters and to protect the public health and safety, protect
property, and provide emergency assistance to victims in the case of such disaster.
In the event of enemy caused or other disaster, the Director of the Village EMA is authorized, on behalf of the Village, to procure such services,
supplies, equipment or material as may be necessary for such purposes, in view of the emergency without regard to the statutory procedures or
formalities normally prescribed by law pertaining to Village contracts or obligations, as authorized by "the Illinois Emergency Management Agency
Act", as amended; provided, that if the Village President is available at such time, the Village Coordinator shall act subject to the direction and
restrictions imposed by the Village President. (Ord. 17-989, 12-12-2017)
2-3-16: OATH:
Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the EMA organization shall, before entering upon his or her duties, subscribe to the following
oath:
I (state your name) of the Emergency Management Agency of the Village of Inverness do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and defend
and bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of Illinois, and the territory, institutions
and facilities thereof, both public and private, against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I take this obligation freely, without any mental
reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and faithfully discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter, and I do further swear (or
affirm) that I do not advocate, nor am I nor have I been a member of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the
government of the United States or of this state by force or violence; and that during such time as I am affiliated with the Village of Inverness EMA
organization, I will not advocate nor become a member of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the
United States or of this state by force or violence.
(Ord. 17-989, 12-12-2017)
2-3-17: OFFICE:
The Village Administrator is authorized to designate space in any Village building or elsewhere, as may be provided for by the Village Corporate
Authorities for the Village of Inverness EMA Organization as its office. (Ord. 17-989, 12-12-2017)
2-3-18: LOCAL DISASTER EMERGENCIES:
A local disaster emergency may be proclaimed only by the Village President as provided by "the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act", as
amended. The local disaster emergency shall not be continued or renewed for a period in excess of seven (7) days except by or with the consent of
the Village Board of Trustees. Any order or proclamation declaring, continuing or terminating a local disaster shall be given prompt and general
publicity and shall be filed promptly with the Village Clerk. It shall be the duty of the Village EMA to cooperate fully with the Village President in the
exercise of emergency powers as provided by law during the time of a local disaster emergency. (Ord. 17-989, 12-12-2017)
Chapter 4
ELECTRICAL COMMISSION
2-4-1: COMMISSION ESTABLISHED, MEMBERSHIP:
There is hereby created an Electrical Commission consisting of six (6) members appointed by the Village President with the advice and consent of
the Board of Trustees. The Electrical Inspector shall be a member and ex-officio chairman of the Commission; of the other five (5) members, one
shall be a registered professional engineer, one an electrical contractor, one a journeyman electrician, one a representative of an inspection bureau
maintained by the fire underwriters if such a representative resides in the Village, and if no such representative resides in the Village, then the Chief
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 61/366
of the Fire Department serving the Village, and one representative of an electricity supply company. If there is no person residing in the Village who
is qualified and available under any one of these descriptions, the Village President may appoint some other person to fill that position.
2-4-2: COMMISSION TO MAKE RECOMMENDATIONS:
The Electrical Commission shall recommend safe and practical standards and specifications for the installation, alteration and use of electrical
equipment in the Village and shall recommend reasonable rules and regulations governing the issuance of permits, and fees to be paid. However,
such standards and specifications, rules and regulations, and fees shall not be effective until adopted as part of this Code.
Title 3
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
LIQUOR REGULATIONS
3-1-1: SALES RESTRICTED:
Except as permitted by this Chapter, no person shall engage in the business of or act as a liquor dealer selling, offering for sale or keeping with the
intention of selling for use or consumption and not for resale in any form, alcoholic liquor capable of being consumed as a beverage by a human
being in the Village.
3-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
All words and phrases used in this Chapter which are defined in "An Act Relating to Alcoholic Liquors", as amended, shall have the same meaning
accorded to such words and phrases in said Act.
3-1-3: LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER:
The Village President shall act as Liquor Control Commissioner for the Village. Said Liquor Control Commissioner may appoint a person or persons
to assist him in the exercise of the powers and performance of the duties herein provided. When the Liquor Control Commissioner shall be referred
to in this Chapter, it shall include any person, committee or other agency appointed by such Liquor Control Commissioner.
3-1-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
An applicant for a retail liquor license from the Village shall submit to the Liquor Control Commissioner an application in writing under oath stating:
A. The name, age and address of the applicant in the case of an individual; in the case of a copartnership, the persons entitled to share in the profits
thereof, and in the case of a corporation for profit, or club, the date of incorporation, the objects for which it was organized, the names and
addresses of the officers and directors and if a majority in interest of the stock of such corporation is owned by one person or his nominees, the
name and address of such person.
B. The citizenship of the applicant, his place of birth and if a naturalized citizen, the time and place of his naturalization.
C. The character of business of the applicant, and in case of a corporation, the objects for which it is formed.
D. The length of time that said applicant has been in business of that character, or in the case of a corporation, the date on which its charter was
issued.
E. The amount of goods, wares and merchandise on hand at the time application is made.
F. The location and description of the premises or place of business which is to be operated under such license.
G. A statement whether applicant has made similar application for a similar other license on premises other than described in the application, and
the disposition of such application.
H. A statement that applicant has never been convicted of a felony and is not disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter or thing
contained in this Chapter.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 62/366
I. Whether a previous license by any state or subdivision thereof, or by the Federal government has been revoked and the reasons therefor.
J. That he will not violate any of the ordinances of the Village or the laws of the State of Illinois, or of the United States, in the conduct of his place of
business.
K. A statement listing each and every occupation or business with which the applicant has been associated in any capacity for fifteen (15) years
prior to the filing of said application.
L. A statement listing each and every arrest of the applicant other than arrests for traffic offenses, giving the place and date of arrest, the charge,
and the final disposition of said charge.
M. Fingerprints of all the fingers of each hand of the applicant, taken by personnel of the Village.
N. A statement of whether the applicant has ever filed bankruptcy proceedings, and if so, the date and place of said filing.
O. A statement of whether there has ever been issued to the applicant a stamp relative to a Federal tax on wages, and if so, the date and places
where said stamp was held by the applicant and a statement of the purposes for which held.
3-1-5: REFERRAL OF APPLICATION, INVESTIGATION, RECOMMENDATION:
The Liquor Control Commissioner shall cause a copy of the license application to be forwarded promptly to each Village Trustee and to the Chief of
Police of the Municipality. The Chief of Police shall investigate the applicant to determine the accuracy of the information provided in the application
and shall provide to the President and Board of Trustees a report of such investigation, which shall include a recommendation of whether he finds
the applicant qualified to hold a license pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter.
3-1-6: PERSONS NOT ENTITLED TO LICENSE:
No licenses required by this Chapter shall be issued to:
A. A person who is not a resident of the Village or who does not reside within fifteen (15) miles from the corporate limits of the Village unless such
person shall appoint a registered agent for the purpose of receiving summons, mail and notices who is a resident of the Village or resides within
fifteen (15) miles from the corporate limits of the Village.
B. A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community in which he resides.
C. A person who is not a citizen of the United States.
D. A person who has been convicted of a felony under any Federal or State law.
E. A person who has been convicted of being the keeper or is keeping a house of ill-fame.
F. A person who has been convicted of pandering or crime or misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality.
G. A person whose license under this Chapter has been revoked for cause.
H. A person who at the time of application for renewal of any license issued hereunder would not be eligible for such license upon a first application.
I. A copartnership, unless all of the members of such copartnership shall be qualified to obtain a license.
J. A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than five percent (5%)
of the stock of such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason other than citizenship and residence within
the political subdivision.
K. A corporation, unless it is incorporated in Illinois, or unless it is a foreign corporation which is qualified under the Illinois Business Corporation Act
to transact business in Illinois.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 63/366
L. A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent unless said manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required
of the licensee.
M. A person who has been convicted of a violation of any State or Federal law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor, or
who shall have forfeited his bond to appear in court to answer to charges for such violation.
N. A person who does not beneficially own the premises for which a license is sought, or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for which
the license is issued.
O. Any law enforcing public official, and Village President, member of the Board of Trustees, and no such official shall be interested in any way,
either directly or indirectly in the manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic liquor.
P. A person not eligible for a state retail liquor dealer's license.
Q. Any person who has been convicted under any state or federal law concerning gambling or wagering or for failure to secure a stamp pursuant to
the federal tax on wagers, or has secured a stamp pursuant to the federal tax on wagers, unless such stamp is for an activity authorized by the
law for the place for which issued.
R. Any copartnership where at least one of the copartners does not reside in the village or within fifteen (15) miles of the corporate limits of the
village unless such copartnership shall appoint a registered agent for the purpose of receiving a summons, mail and notices who is a resident of
the village or resides within fifteen (15) miles from the corporate limits of the village.
S. A corporation which does not designate a registered agent for the purpose of receiving summons, mail and notices who is not a resident of the
village or does not live within fifteen (15) miles of the corporate limits of the village. (1983 Code)
3-1-7: LICENSE FEE, TERM, NUMBER OF LICENSES:
A. The license fee for any such retail liquor dealer shall be payable at the time application is made to the liquor control commissioner. The license
shall expire on April 30 following the date of issuance. Said licenses shall be a purely personal privilege, good for not to exceed one year after
issuance (except as otherwise provided in this chapter) and shall not constitute property, be subject to attachment, garnishment or execution, or
alienable or transferable, as provided under "an act relating to alcoholic liquors", as amended. Failure to renew a liquor license and pay for such
license during the first ten (10) days of the month in which such payment is due may be considered by the liquor control commissioner as an
abandonment by such licensee of such license.
B. Retail licenses for the sale of alcoholic liquor shall be issued only by the village president as the liquor control commissioner, subject to the
provision of an act entitled, "an act relating to alcoholic liquors", as amended, but not more than one class 1 license shall be issued within the
village pursuant to this section and not more than one class 2 license shall be issued within the village pursuant to this section.
C. Retail liquor licenses shall be classified as follows:
1. Class 1 License: A class 1 license shall authorize the sale at retail and serving of alcoholic liquor for a golf club only for consumption on the
premises of the sale, provided such sale and serving is secondary to the main purpose of operating a golf club on the premises. The annual
fee for a class 1 license shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00).
2. Class 2 License: A class 2 license shall authorize the sale at retail and serving and/or the serving without charge of alcoholic liquor at special
events as described below for consumption on the premises by a not for profit or religious corporation or association, which corporation or
association shall have been organized for objects and purposes other than the sale and/or consumption of alcoholic liquor, and shall have
been organized for at least two (2) years prior to the date of the application for a license.
A class 2 license shall authorize the retail sale and serving of, and/or serving without charge of, alcoholic liquor by such a qualifying
organization as described above, for special events, such as and including, but not limited to, picnics, outings, festivals, dances, parties or at
other similar special events for consumption on the premises specifically designated in such license but not more than twelve (12) such
special events, each not to exceed a period of four (4) calendar days, shall be authorized by such a license in any calendar year. It shall be a
condition precedent of such a class 2 license that the holder of such a license shall give the village president, as liquor control commissioner,
ten (10) calendar days' prior written notice of each such special event to be held pursuant to the authority of such license (including a
description of such special event in reasonable detail), and at that same time shall provide to the village a legible copy of the holder's then
current certificate of dramshop insurance, covering the entire period of such special event. A class 2 license may be suspended or revoked by
the liquor control commissioner for a failure by the holder to comply with said notice requirement and/or for a failure by the holder to keep in
effect and provide a current certificate of dramshop insurance for each such special event.
The annual fee for a class 2 license shall be ten dollars ($10.00).
D. Notwithstanding anything contained in this chapter to the contrary, the serving without charge of alcoholic liquor shall not require any license
pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 04-773, 3-9-2004)
3-1-8: TEMPORARY LICENSES:
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 64/366
A. A temporary license, for a period of not to exceed four (4) calendar days, may be issued by the liquor control commissioner only to a not for profit
or religious corporation or association whose purpose and function is providing benefit, assistance or support to charitable, athletic, religious,
youth service or community programs located within the village.
B. Each application for a not for profit corporation or association pursuant to this section shall contain a copy of the applicant's recorded articles of
incorporation and a copy of the applicant's most recent annual report filed with the secretary of state.
C. All such applications shall state the time period for which the temporary license shall be applicable and shall state whether the license is for
solely an outdoor or an indoor location.
D. Such a temporary license shall authorize the retail sale and serving of, and/or the serving without charge of alcoholic liquor by the specified
organization, at a special event, such as and including, but not limited to, a picnic, outing, festival or other such similar special occasion for
consumption on the premises or within the area specifically designated in such license. The fee for such a temporary license shall be twenty five
dollars ($25.00) per day but no separate application fee shall be charged. Not more than four (4) such temporary licenses may be issued in any
calendar year to any one applicant. No such temporary license may be issued until the village president as the liquor control commissioner has
received evidence that the applicant shall have satisfactory dramshop insurance in effect during the period for which each such temporary
license may be issued. (Ord. 04-773, 3-9-2004)
3-1-9: POWERS AND DUTIES OF LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER:
The liquor control commissioner shall also have the following powers, functions and duties with respect to retail licenses for the sale of alcoholic
liquors:
A. To grant or suspend for not more than thirty (30) days, or revoke for cause, all local licenses issued to persons for premises within the village.
B. To enter, or to authorize any law enforcing officer to enter, upon the premises licensed hereunder to determine whether any of the provisions of
this chapter or of "an act relating to alcoholic liquors", as amended, or any rules or regulations of this code or of the Illinois liquor control
commission have been or are being violated, and at such time to examine the premises of the licensee in connection therewith.
C. To receive complaint from any citizen within his jurisdiction that any of the provisions of "an act relating to alcoholic liquors", as amended, or any
rules or regulations of this code or of the Illinois liquor commission have been or are being violated and to act upon such complaints in the
manner hereinafter provided.
D. To receive local license fees and pay the same forthwith to the village treasurer.
E. The liquor control commissioner shall have the right to examine, or cause to be examined, under oath, any applicant for a local license or for a
renewal thereof, or any licensee upon whom notice of revocation or suspension has been served in the manner hereinafter provided; and to
examine, or cause to be examined the books and records of any such applicant or licensee; to hear testimony and take proof for his information
in the performance of his duties, and for such purpose to issue subpoenas which shall be effective in any part of this state. For the purpose of
obtaining any information desired by the local liquor control commissioner under this section, he may authorize his agent to act on his behalf.
(1983 Code)
3-1-10: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE:
The liquor control commissioner may revoke or suspend any license issued by him if he determines that the licensee has violated any of the
provisions of "an act relating to alcoholic liquors", as amended, or of any valid ordinance or resolution adopted by the board of trustees of the village
or any provisions of this code or applicable rules or regulations established by the liquor control commissioner which are not inconsistent with law.
However, no such license shall be so revoked or suspended except after a public hearing by the liquor control commissioner with a three (3) day
written notice to the licensee affording said licensee an opportunity to appear and defend; provided, however, that if the liquor control commissioner
has reason to believe that any continued operation of a particular licensed premises will immediately threaten the welfare of the community he may,
upon the issuance of a written order stating the reason for such conclusion and without notice or hearing, order the licensed premises closed for not
more than seven (7) days, giving the licensee an opportunity to be heard during that period, except that if such licensee shall also be engaged in the
conduct of another business or businesses on the licensed premises, such order shall not be applicable to such other business or businesses.
The liquor control commissioner shall, within ten (10) days after such hearing, if he determines after such hearing that the license should be revoked
or suspended, state the reason or reasons for such determination in a written order of revocation or suspension and shall serve a copy of such
order within the said ten (10) days upon said licensee.
The said licensee, after the receipt of such order of suspension or revocation, shall have the privilege, within a period of twenty (20) days after the
receipt of such order of suspension or revocation, of appealing said order to the Illinois liquor control commission, and upon the filing of such an
appeal by the licensee, he may resume his business until such time as said commission shall render a decision either sustaining the order of the
liquor control commissioner or reversing said order. (1983 Code)
3-1-11: HOURS OF SALE:
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 65/366
No person licensed hereunder as a retailer of alcoholic liquor shall sell, permit to be sold, or give away any alcoholic liquor between the hours of two
o'clock (2:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M., each day of the week, including Sunday. (1983 Code)
3-1-12: SALE ONLY AT LICENSED PREMISES:
No liquor shall be sold, offered for sale, kept for sale, displayed or advertised for sale at retail or delivered to any person purchasing the same at
retail, except at a location, place or premises described in a license duly issued by the liquor control commissioner. (1983 Code)
3-1-13: RESTRICTIONS AND PROHIBITIONS:
A. For purpose of this section, the term "underage person" is defined as a person under twenty one (21) years of age. (Ord. 95-553, 12-12-1995)
B. No underage person may purchase, receive, accept, have in his or her possession or control, or consume any alcoholic beverages, except as
provided in subsections J and K of this section. (Ord. 14-954, 10-14-2014)
C. It is unlawful for any person to knowingly suffer, permit, or allow the violation of the provisions of this section in any motor vehicle, conveyance,
vessel, house, apartment, room, shed, yard, premises, or other area of which such person is the owner, lessee, permittee, bailee, legal
possessor or occupier thereof.
D. No underage person shall misrepresent his or her age for the purposes of purchasing alcoholic liquor or present or offer to any liquor licensee,
his agent or employee, any written, printed or photostatic evidence of age and identity which is false, fraudulent or not actually his or her own for
the purpose of ordering, purchasing, attempting to purchase or otherwise procuring or attempting to procure the serving of any alcoholic
beverage, nor shall any such person possess any false or fraudulent written, printed, or photostatic evidence of age and identity.
E. It is unlawful for any parent or guardian to permit his or her residence to be used by an invitee of the parent's child or the guardian's ward, if the
invitee is an underage person, in a manner that constitutes a violation of this section. A parent or guardian is deemed to have permitted his or
her residence to be used in violation of this section if he or she knowingly authorizes, enables, or permits such use to occur by failing to control
access to either the residence or the alcoholic liquor maintained in the residence.
F. No person after purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic liquor shall sell, give or deliver such alcoholic liquor to an underage person, except as
provided in subsection K of this section.
G. Whenever a person is present within any motor vehicle, conveyance, vessel, house, apartment, room, shed, yard, premises, or other area of
which such person is the owner, lessee, permittee, bailee, legal possessor or occupier at the time that a violation of the provisions of this section
occurs therein, said presence shall be prima facie evidence that such person had knowledge of such violation.
H. It is unlawful for any underage person to remain in any motor vehicle, conveyance, vessel, house, apartment, room, shed, yard, premises, or
other area when said person knows, or reasonably should know, that one or more other underage persons located in such motor vehicle,
conveyance, vessel, house, apartment, room, shed, yard, premises, or other area are in possession of any alcoholic beverages, except as
provided in subsection K of this section.
I. It is unlawful for any person who has ownership or control of any premises to knowingly suffer, permit, or allow two (2) or more underage persons
to assemble or be assembled on such premises in possession of any alcoholic beverages, except as provided in subsection K of this section.
(Ord. 95-553, 12-12-1995)
J. It shall be unlawful for any holder of a retail liquor dealer's license, or his agent or employee, to employ or permit any person under the age of
twenty one (21) years to tend bar, draw, pour, or mix any alcoholic liquor in any licensed premises, except the provisions of this subsection and
this section shall not be construed to prevent a person under the age of twenty one (21) years, but at least nineteen (19) years of age, from
making a delivery of an alcoholic beverage as a waiter or waitress on licensed retail premises pursuant to the policy of his or her liquor licensee
employer. (Ord. 14-954, 10-14-2014)
K. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit or be applicable to the possession and/or consumption by an underage person
under the direct supervision and approval of the parents or parent of such underage person in the privacy of a home, and nothing contained in
this chapter shall be construed to prohibit or be applicable to underage persons who are either participating in a bona fide religious service or
ceremony, or acting at the direction of a law enforcement officer. (Ord. 95-553, 12-12-1995)
3-1-14: HAPPY HOURS PROHIBITED:
A. All retail licensees shall maintain a schedule of the prices charged for all drinks of alcoholic liquor to be served and consumed on the licensed
premises or in any room or part thereof. Whenever a hotel or multiuse establishment which holds a valid retailer's license operates on its
premises more than one establishment at which drinks of alcoholic liquor are sold at retail, the hotel or multiuse establishment shall maintain at
each such establishment a separate schedule of the prices charged for such drinks at that establishment.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 66/366
B. No retail licensee or employee or agent of such licensee shall:
1. Serve two (2) or more drinks of alcoholic liquor at one time to one person for consumption by that one person, except selling or delivering wine
by the bottle or carafe;
2. Sell, offer to sell or serve to any person an unlimited number of drinks of alcoholic liquor during any set period of time for a fixed price, except
at private functions not open to the general public;
3. Sell, offer to sell or serve any drink of alcoholic liquor to any person on any one date at a reduced price other than that charged other
purchasers of drinks on that day where such reduced price is a promotion to encourage consumption of alcoholic liquor, except as authorized
in subsection C7 of this section;
4. Increase the volume of alcoholic liquor contained in a drink, or the size of a drink of alcoholic liquor, without increasing proportionately the
price regularly charged for the drink on that day;
5. Encourage or permit, on the licensed premises, any game or contest which involves drinking alcoholic liquor or the awarding of drinks of
alcoholic liquor as prizes for such game or contest on the licensed premises; or
6. Advertise or promote in any way, whether on or off the licensed premises, any of the practices prohibited under subsections B1 through B5 of
this section.
C. Nothing in subsection B of this section shall be construed to prohibit a licensee from:
1. Offering free food or entertainment at any time;
2. Including drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a meal package;
3. Including drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a hotel package;
4. Negotiating drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a contract between a hotel or multiuse establishment and another group for the holding of any
function, meeting, convention or trade show;
5. Providing room service to persons renting rooms at a hotel;
6. Selling pitchers (or the equivalent, including, but not limited to, buckets), carafes or bottles of alcoholic liquor which are customarily sold in
such manner and delivered to two (2) or more persons at one time; or
7. Increasing prices of drinks of alcoholic liquor in lieu of, in whole or in part, a cover charge to offset the cost of special entertainment not
regularly scheduled.
D. A violation of this section shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of the retailer's license as provided by section 3-1-10 of this chapter.
(Ord. 89-365, 10-10-1989)
Chapter 2
PLACES OF AMUSEMENT
3-2-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or maintain a dance hall, roadhouse, public show, theater, circus, carnival or other place of amusement
within the village without first obtaining a license therefor from the corporate authorities in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (1983
Code)
3-2-2: ISSUANCE OF LICENSES; TERM:
Power to issue and revoke all licenses in accordance with this chapter is hereby vested in the corporate authorities. Each license shall expire at the
end of one year from the date of issuance but may be renewed from year to year by the corporate authorities. (1983 Code)
3-2-3: APPLICATIONS FOR LICENSES:
Any person desiring a license to operate or maintain any such place of amusement shall submit a written application for said license on a form
approved by the corporate authorities. (Ord. 92-468, 12-8-1992)
3-2-4: INVESTIGATE APPLICANT:
The corporate authorities or the representatives of the corporate authorities shall undertake such investigation of the fitness of any applicant for an
amusement license as required by this chapter and of the statements made in and accompanying the application as the corporate authorities shall
deem appropriate; provided, that a decision shall be rendered within sixty (60) days after the application for a license or its renewal is received. The
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 67/366
license fee required under the provisions of this chapter shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) and is to be tendered with the application for license
or its renewal. (Ord. 86-293, 12-9-1986)
3-2-5: GROUNDS FOR REVOCATION OF LICENSES:
The corporate authorities may revoke the license of any licensee when such place of amusement unreasonably disturbs the peace of the
neighborhood or constitutes a nuisance, or when the licensee violates any of the rules and regulations issued by the corporate authorities pursuant
to this chapter. (Ord. 86-293, 12-9-1986)
3-2-6: LOCATION IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS PROHIBITED:
No such place of amusement shall be located either temporarily or permanently in any residential zoning district as defined by the village zoning
ordinance (title 5 of this code) and map which is a part thereof. (Ord. 86-293, 12-9-1986)
Chapter 3
CANVASSERS, PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
3-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words as used herein shall be construed to have the meanings herein ascribed thereto:
CANVASSERS: Persons conducting any manner of door to door advocacy, including, but not limited to, those conducting any type of surveys and/or
the distribution of any literature, handbills or pamphlets, but excluding those present as a result of a prior invitation from an owner or occupant of the
premises, any persons employed and on official business for the United States census bureau, and also excluding those rendering assistance or
providing information of a bona fide emergency nature.
PEDDLING: Selling or offering for sale, barter or exchange at retail any goods, wares, merchandise or services of any kind whatsoever by traveling
from place to place along the streets of the village or from residence to residence therein, but shall not include solicitation or canvassing for orders
for future delivery.
RESIDENCE: Includes every separate living unit occupied for residential purposes by one or more persons, contained within any type of building or
structure.
SOLICITING: Includes any one or more of the following activities:
A. Seeking to obtain orders for the purchase of goods, wares, merchandise, foodstuffs, insurance, services of any kind, character or description
whatever, for any kind of consideration whatever, all for future delivery; or
B. Seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals, newspapers and every other type or kind of publication; or
C. Seeking to obtain gifts or contributions of money, clothing or any other valuable thing for the support or benefit of any charitable, religious, or
nonprofit association, organization, corporation, or project. (Ord. 02-732, 7-9-2002)
3-3-2: TRESPASSING BY CANVASSERS, SOLICITORS OR PEDDLERS AND OTHERS:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon any property of another in the village after receiving, immediately prior to such entry, notice from
the owner or occupant that such entry is forbidden, or to remain upon the property of another after receiving notice from the owner or occupant
to depart.
B. A person shall be deemed to have received notice from the owner or occupant within the meaning of this section if he has been notified
personally, either orally or in writing, or if a printed or written notice forbidding such entry has been conspicuously posted at the main entrance to
said property or the forbidden part thereof.
C. The owner or occupant of any residence who desired to forbid trespasses by canvassers, solicitors or peddlers may attach or exhibit upon or
near the main front door, and the main rear or side door (if any, and if to be protected), a card or plaque stating such of the following as may be
appropriate, in letters at least one-third inch (1/3") in height:
Canvassers, Solicitors and Peddlers Forbidden
D. The form of notice provided for in this section shall not be deemed to be an exclusive form of notice. (Ord. 02-732, 7-9-2002)
3-3-3: REMAINING ON PROPERTY PROHIBITED:
Any person soliciting or peddling who is forbidden entry by notice given in compliance with this chapter shall be deemed guilty of remaining on the
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 68/366
property after receiving notice to depart if he shall ring the doorbell or knock or create any sound calculated to attract the attention of the occupant.
(Ord. 02-732, 7-9-2002)
3-3-4: NOTICE NOT TO PREVENT ACCESS:
Notices exhibited pursuant to this chapter shall not be deemed applicable to and shall not prevent access to residential property by a canvasser,
solicitor or peddler who has received prior invitation, written or oral, from an owner or occupant thereof. (Ord. 02-732, 7-9-2002)
Chapter 4
MUNICIPAL WASTE SYSTEM
3-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
ADMINISTRATOR: The village president or his or her designee authorized to administer the franchise for the village.
AGENCY: The solid waste agency of northern Cook County.
APPROVED CONTAINERS: Approved containers to be used for the pick up of compostable materials shall be thirty (30) gallon kraft type
disposable bags, or bundles as hereinafter described, but each such bag and bundle in excess of two (2) per pick up day shall each have a prepaid
sticker attached. Approved thirty five (35) gallon, sixty five (65) gallon or ninety five (95) gallon toter recycling containers as designated by the
franchise agreement shall be used for the pick up of recyclable materials. Approved containers for garbage shall be a franchisee supplied sixty five
(65) gallon or ninety five (95) gallon toter for single-family and single-family detached condominium/townhomes. Multi-family homes shall use only a
central collection point authorized by the village administrator.
COMMODITY: A material that can be sold in a spot or future market for processing and use or reuse.
COMPOSTABLE MATERIAL, OR COMPOSTABLES: Grass, garden clippings, weeds, bushes and leaves, brush clippings, branch clippings, tree
limbs less than six inches (6") in diameter, and other materials accumulated as a result of the care of lawn, shrubbery, vines and trees, providing all
such materials are placed in prepaid bags as hereinafter described and not commingled with "garbage" or "recyclable materials" as herein defined,
provided, however, branches and sticks not exceeding one and one-half inches (11/2") in diameter shall be tied in bundles not exceeding four feet
(4') in any length and two feet (2') in diameter.
CONTRACTOR: Groot Recycling And Waste Services, Inc.
CURBSIDE: The approved point of collection which shall be within five feet (5') of the edge of the paved street.
DISPOSAL SITE: A refuse depository including, but not limited to, sanitary landfills, transfer stations, incinerators and waste processing/separation
centers licensed, permitted or approved by all governmental bodies and agencies having jurisdiction and requiring such licenses, permits or
approvals to receive garbage and refuse for processing or final disposal.
FRANCHISE AGREEMENT: That exclusive franchise agreement as defined in section 3-4-5 of this chapter.
FRANCHISEE: The village's exclusively franchised private contractor to provide waste disposal services to all occupied residential units within "the
village" (as defined in this section) authorized by the franchise agreement between the village of Inverness and Groot Recycling and Waste
Services, Inc., which became effective on October 1, 2006.
GARBAGE OR REFUSE: Shall include the accumulation of animal, fruit, fish, fowl, vegetable matter resulting from the preparation, use or cooking
of food for household consumption. Said residential garbage shall be wrapped in paper or equivalent. Refuse shall also include household rubbish
generally exclusive of dirt, and any refuse resulting from the commercial repair or remodeling of buildings. Excluded from the definition of "refuse"
are "white goods", as defined by the Illinois EPA, tires and batteries and such other items as may be identified by the village or SWANCC from time
to time.
HAZARDOUS WASTE: Waste, in any amount, which is defined, characterized or designated as hazardous by the United States environmental
protection agency or appropriate state agency by or pursuant to federal or state law, or waste, in any amount, which is regulated under federal or
state law. For purposes of this code, the term "hazardous waste" shall also include motor oil, gasoline, paint and paint cans.
LANDSCAPE WASTE: See definition of Compostable Material, Or Compostables.
MUNICIPAL WASTE SYSTEM: The waste collection, transportation and disposal system of the village operated under licenses issued pursuant to
section 3-4-4 of this chapter, including all physical assets of the village used for the collection, transportation and disposal of system waste, all
amounts on deposit in the municipal waste system fund and all amounts collected on account of rates and charges imposed under this code.
NONSYSTEM WASTE: Any waste, garbage, or refuse excluded from the waste system, including, but not limited to, hazardous waste, toxic waste,
medical waste, or refuse resulting from the commercial repair or remodeling of any buildings and debris removed from the site of new construction
prior to the issuance of any occupancy permit.
NONSYSTEM WASTE HAULER: Any carrier, hauler, scavenger of or dealer in nonsystem waste.
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint venture, or corporation, or a receiver, trustee,
conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court.
PRODUCER: An occupant of a residential unit who generates residential refuse and recyclable materials and places commodities at the curb
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 69/366
prepared for recycling.
PROJECT USE AGREEMENT: The 1992 project use agreement by and between the village and the agency, as amended from time to time.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS: Those commodities which are collected under the franchise agreement which shall include newspaper, mixed papers
(junk mail, chipboard, white and colored paper, brown kraft paper bags), corrugated cardboard, magazines, aluminum cans, tin, steel and/or bimetal
cans, clear, green and brown glass bottles and jars, #1 PETE plastic containers and #2 HPDE plastic containers, #3-#7 plastic containers and bags,
aseptic beverage containers, 6-pack rings, 12-pack bands, and any other material, items or commodities mutually agreed upon by the village and
the franchisee to be included as a "recyclable material" subsequent to the execution of the franchise agreement.
RECYCLING CONTAINERS: The container provided by the village or its franchisee to residents for the specific purpose of storing recyclable
materials on site and for placing those materials curbside for collection. Exact size, shape and color of said container may vary from time to time,
however, recycling containers will be clearly marked for use as a recycling container only. Effective October 1, 2006, the recycling container shall be
a thirty five (35) gallon, sixty five (65) gallon or ninety five (95) gallon toter container as designated by the franchise agreement and as provided by
the franchisee to each residential unit.
RECYCLING SERVICES: An organized program sponsored by the village resulting in residents within the corporate limits separating recyclable and
compostable materials and placing them curbside or at the designated trash collection point to be collected by the village or the village's exclusively
franchised private contractor (the franchisee).
RESIDENTIAL REFUSE: All garbage and rubbish generated by a producer at a residential unit.
RESIDENTIAL UNIT: A single-family unit within the corporate limits of the village. An existing residential unit shall be deemed occupied when either
water or domestic light and power service are being supplied thereto. For new construction, a residential unit shall be deemed occupied when an
occupancy permit, either temporary or final, has been issued for such unit. A condominium dwelling, whether of single- or multi-level construction,
shall also be treated as a residential unit, except that each single-family dwelling within any such residential unit shall be counted separately as a
residential unit. Payments by customers to the franchisee for service may be abated due to lack of occupancy only to the extent mutually agreed
upon by the village and the franchisee.
SWANCC: The solid waste agency of northern Cook County.
SYSTEM WASTE: Residential refuse discarded by persons within the corporate limits of the village. System waste does not include hazardous
waste, toxic waste or medical waste. System waste shall also not include recyclables or compostable materials, both of which shall be as
designated by the village from time to time.
THE VILLAGE: The village of Inverness. (Ord. 06-829, 7-11-2006, eff. 10-1-2006)
3-4-2: FINDINGS:
The village finds as follows:
A. It is necessary for and in the best interests of the village to regulate and control the collection, transportation and disposal of municipal waste in
the exercise of its police power in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of its residents; and
B. The village is authorized pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-19-1 of the Illinois municipal code, and section 3.2 of the
intergovernmental cooperation act, 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 220/3.2, to provide for the method or methods of collection, transportation and
disposal of municipal waste within its corporate limits and to provide that the method chosen may be the exclusive method to be used within its
corporate limits; and
C. The village acting pursuant to article VII, section 10 of the Illinois constitution and 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 220/3.2 of the intergovernmental
cooperation act has entered into an intergovernmental agreement with a number of other north and northwest suburban Cook County
municipalities, thereby creating the agency to provide an efficient and environmentally sound municipal waste disposal system; and
D. The village has entered into a project use agreement by which the agency has or will acquire, construct, operate, equip and improve a municipal
solid waste project to provide for the disposal of system waste of the village and other members of the agency; and
E. Under the project use agreement, the village is obligated to establish a municipal waste disposal system, to cause system waste collected within
its corporate limits to be delivered to the agency and to make certain payments to the agency, all as described in the project use agreement; and
F. It is necessary and in the best interests of the village to provide for the environmentally sound and efficient collection, transportation and disposal
of system waste by creating a municipal waste system, by providing for the disposal of system waste by delivery to the agency and to impose
the rates and charges provided for herein; and
G. It is necessary and in the best interests of the village to regulate and license the hauling and collection of nonsystem waste within the village.
(Ord. 06-829, 7-11-2006, eff. 10-1-2006)
3-4-3: REQUIRED USE OF MUNICIPAL WASTE SYSTEM:
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 70/366
A. Except as specifically permitted in this section and in section 3-4-4 of this chapter, all persons owning or occupying real estate occupied as a
"residential unit" as defined herein, within the corporate limits of the village shall dispose of system waste through the municipal waste system.
All system waste shall be collected by the franchisee authorized pursuant to the terms of this chapter beginning on that effective date or dates as
may be established by the village and the agency from time to time and shall be delivered to a transfer station or other destination as directed by
the agency and the village or as otherwise agreed to by the agency and the village under the project use agreement.
B. Hazardous waste, toxic waste, radioactive waste, and/or medical waste shall not be disposed of through the municipal waste system.
C. No person shall dispose of system waste through the municipal waste system unless the system waste complies with all rules and regulations
applicable thereto and established from time to time by the municipality and the agency.
D. Any person disposing of system waste through the municipal waste system shall pay the rates and charges established by the village under the
provisions of section 3-4-11 of this chapter. (Ord. 06-829, 7-11-2006, eff. 10-1-2006)
3-4-4: EXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE REQUIRED:
Effective October 1, 2006, no person shall engage in the enterprise of collection, transporting, processing, storing or disposing of garbage, rubbish,
trash, residential refuse, recyclables, compostables and/or system waste of any kind from any residence or dwelling, or multi-family residential
development within the corporate limits of the village, as said limits exist from time to time, without first having secured the exclusive franchise from
the village for such purposes, consistent with the provisions of this code, provided, however, landscape contractors providing service to any property
owner or occupant within the village shall be obligated to dispose of the landscape waste generated or collected by their own activities in such
development at an Illinois EPA approved site outside of the corporate limits of the village. (Ord. 06-829, 7-11-2006, eff. 10-1-2006)
3-4-5: EXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE AGREEMENT:
The exclusive residential solid waste services franchise agreement (the "franchise agreement") between the village of Inverness, Cook County,
Illinois, and Groot Recycling and Waste Services, Inc. ("the franchisee") which is or shall become effective on October 1, 2006, be and the same is
hereby approved and the village president and village clerk are hereby authorized to execute the same in their respective official capacities in two
(2) duplicate originals. Such franchise agreement shall include amendments as may be approved in writing from time to time by the parties thereto.
(Ord. 06-829, 7-11-2006, eff. 10-1-2006)
3-4-6: COMPLIANCE WITH EXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE AGREEMENT REQUIRED; REFUSE SERVICE REQUIRED:
A. All residents within the village shall comply with all applicable provisions of the franchise agreement, and any extensions or amendments thereto.
Said franchise agreement, as well as any extensions and amendments thereto, are on file with the village clerk and are hereby made part of this
chapter.
B. To the extent that said franchise agreement is inconsistent with this chapter, the franchise agreement shall govern. The occupants of each
dwelling unit within the village shall be required to keep in force and effect and utilize refuse service and recycling service from the franchisee
during the term of the franchise agreement.
C. No burning or accumulation of garbage on public or private property within the village shall be permitted. (Ord. 06-829, 7-11-2006, eff. 10-1-2006)
3-4-7: FRANCHISE APPLICANT QUALIFICATIONS:
A. Every franchise applicant must demonstrate that he has adequate and sufficient equipment, personnel and financial responsibility to render
service to any customer requesting it and in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Every franchise applicant must agree to provide any range of service options established from time to time by the village and to serve any
resident of the village requesting and paying for any of said service options.
C. Every franchise applicant must agree both to permit the village to review his rate structure and to provide the village financial records and
statements as may be required for the purpose of establishing and maintaining fair charges to the village or fair rates to each class of customer
and to provide for adequate and sanitary collection.
D. The board of trustees reserves the right to deny any franchise applicant a franchise if any reasonable doubt exists as to the applicant's
reasonable compliance with any of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 06-829, 7-11-2006, eff. 10-1-2006)
3-4-8: FRANCHISEE OBLIGATIONS:
Any person holding a franchise to collect, transport or dispose of system waste shall comply with the following obligations as a condition of that
franchise:
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 71/366
A. The franchisee shall comply with all the laws, ordinances, rules and regulations pertaining to the collection, transportation and disposal of system
waste as may be enacted from time to time by any lawful authority, including the state, the village and the agency.
B. The franchisee shall deliver all system waste to the transfer station or other destination designated by the agency and the village on that effective
date or dates as may be established by the village and the agency from time to time.
C. The franchisee shall maintain all equipment used to collect, transport and dispose of system waste in good repair and working order and operate
it efficiently and effectively.
D. The franchisee shall collect as agent for and promptly pay to the village all rates and charges imposed by the village on persons using the
municipal waste system when requested by the village to do so.
E. The franchisee shall maintain accurate books and records and make them available to the village upon demand.
F. Any vehicle used by any such franchisee in his business shall be watertight and equipped with airtight covers for such portions as are used for the
transportation of refuse. It shall be unlawful for any such vehicle to be driven over or through any street of the village during or on a Sunday.
Each licensee shall maintain its equipment used in licensed service in good repair and working order, shall perform its operations efficiently and
faithfully and shall punctually perform all obligations imposed on it pursuant to this code.
G. The franchisee shall submit annually complete audited financial statements for the preceding fiscal year. Such financial statements shall include
all information as may be necessary to ascertain the reasonableness of the franchisee's fee, charges and rates.
H. The franchisee shall carry public liability insurance in an amount not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00), a minimum of one million
dollars ($1,000,000.00) of property damage insurance, and four million dollars ($4,000,000.00) in umbrella coverage and workers' compensation
for his employees, naming the village, its officers, agents and employees as additional insured, evidence of which insurance shall be provided to
the village upon any request. Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the franchisee shall be required to provide such greater
coverage limits and such additional insurance coverage as specified in the franchise agreement.
I. The franchisee shall hold harmless the village, its officers and employees and agents for any costs, claims, or expenses, including reasonable
attorney fees and other costs of defense resulting from, arising out of, or relating to the collection, transportation, and disposal of system waste,
recyclables, compostables, and/or any other waste picked up by the franchisee within the village.
J. In the event the franchisee under this chapter violates any provisions of this chapter, the village shall have the right, in addition to enforcing
against such firm the penalties hereinafter provided, to revoke the franchise of such firm.
K. The franchisee under this chapter shall not dispose of or store any refuse in any place within the corporate limits of the village or within one mile
thereof, except with the permission of the board of trustees. (Ord. 06-829, 7-11-2006, eff. 10-1-2006)
3-4-9: RECYCLING PROGRAM ESTABLISHED:
A. Program Established: There is hereby established a villagewide residential recycling program to be operated by the franchisee and such
franchisee shall be and is hereby required to provide for recycling services for its residential units, including the residents' separation of certain
recyclable and compostable material (as designated by the village from time to time) from normal residential refuse for placement in specially
designated containers and for separate collection of such recyclable and compostable materials by such licensees. Such franchisee shall include
this recycling service in its billing to village residents for residential refuse collection services whether or not the particular customer's household
participates. Such franchisee shall provide each residential unit with approved containers for recyclables and compostables initially without
charge, which containers shall be and remain the property of the franchisee. Each household will be responsible for the normal and reasonable
care of the toter recycling container in its possession. Such approved toter recycling containers shall be used only for the purpose of storing such
recycling materials on site and for the placement of those materials curbside or at the designated trash collection pick up point on the designated
collection day. The recycling toters previously provided to each residential unit which have previously been the property of the village shall be
and are hereby declared to be surplus property, which are no longer required by the village, and such toters are declared to be the property of
each residential unit which has lawful possession of them.
B. Replacement Containers: The franchisee shall provide replacement recycling containers to any residential unit, at franchisee's expense,
whenever replacement is required due to damage, destruction, or theft. Abuse, theft and/or misuse of such recycling containers is prohibited and
shall constitute a violation of this chapter, subjecting the violator to the penalties as provided by this code.
C. Placement And Storage Of Recycling Containers: Recycling containers shall be stored on the respective premises of each customer's residential
unit in conformance with the provisions of this chapter and may be placed at the designated location for collection only during the times specified
in this chapter.
D. Unauthorized Removal Of Recyclable And Compostable Materials Prohibited: The basic recycling services which shall be provided by the
franchisee shall provide for the separation of recyclables and compostables from normal residential refuse and for placement of such recyclables
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 72/366
in their respective approved containers and collection from the normal collection point on the regular designated pick up day. The village may
from time to time alter the definition of recyclables and compostables to be separated from the household waste stream, and such franchisee
operating within the village shall promptly include those materials in its recycling services when requested to do so by the village. Once
recyclables and compostables have been placed in the approved container and set at the curbside or other designated collection location, such
materials shall become the property of the franchisee servicing the premises in question and it shall be unlawful for any other person, firm or
corporation to move, remove or tamper with such recyclables and/or compostables or the approved containers in which they have been placed,
and each such act of moving, removing and/or tampering in violation hereof from one or more locations shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense punishable as provided by this code.
E. Separation Of Recyclables And Compostables And Placement For Removal: Recyclables and compostables shall be prepared and separated
from garbage and such garbage, recyclables and compostables shall be placed in "approved containers" as defined by this chapter, and shall be
collected by the franchisee. Recyclables and compostables shall be placed at the curbside (or at the back door, if the household has subscribed
to back door service) for collection at times designated by the franchisee.
F. Restrictions: Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter:
1. Any person may donate recyclable and compostable materials to any other person whether operating for profit or not for profit; and
2. Any person may maintain his own compost pile or site so long as such site or pile complies with all the conditions set forth in section 9-1-4 of
this code.
3. Any person who is engaged to do landscape maintenance by a property owner within the village may remove compostable material or
compostables generated and collected from property within the village and shall not be required to dispose of same through collection by the
franchisee, but such compostables shall then be disposed of outside of the village in a lawful manner. (Ord. 06-829, 7-11-2006, eff. 10-1-2006)
3-4-10: PLACING RESIDENTIAL REFUSE, COMPOSTABLES AND RECYCLABLES FOR PICK UP; TIME LIMITATION;
SCREENING:
A. No residential refuse, recyclables, and/or compostables, or any refuse, whether or not in the proper container, shall be placed on any portion of
any public or private road, street, or alley, or within twenty five feet (25') thereof, earlier than twenty four (24) hours prior to the scheduled time
and date for the pick up of such residential refuse, recyclables, and/or compostables for said premises; and any garbage, recyclables, and/or
compostables placed earlier than as aforesaid are hereby declared to be a public nuisance. Such a nuisance may be abated at the direction of
the village president, and the removal of such nuisance shall be at the expense of the owners and residents of the premises in question, who
shall be jointly and severally liable for such cost.
B. Residential refuse, recyclables, and/or compostables, or any refuse (except during the times provided in subsection A of this section for road,
street, or alley placement) stored outside shall be located only in a side or rear yard and shall be totally shielded from view from any public or
private road, street, or alley by a building, solid structure, or other screening otherwise permitted by village ordinances and codes. (Ord. 16-973,
8-9-2016)
3-4-11: MUNICIPAL WASTE SYSTEM FUND; IMPOSITION OF RATES AND CHARGES:
A. There is hereby created and established an enterprise fund of the village known as the municipal waste system fund, which shall be separate and
apart from all other funds and accounts of the village as provided in subsection E of this section.
B. Before the beginning of each fiscal year, the village president shall recommend and the village shall adopt a budget for the municipal waste
system. The budget shall estimate the revenue required to: 1) pay all operating and maintenance expenses of the municipal waste system,
including all obligations to the agency under the project use agreement; 2) pay, as they become due, interest on and principal of any revenue
bonds or other obligations payable from the revenues of the municipal waste system; 3) provide for all unpaid claims; and 4) maintain
appropriate depreciation and reserve funds, including reserves for uncollected charges. The budget shall estimate the amounts available to pay
those obligations from: 1) taxes levied and anticipated to be collected pursuant to law; 2) other amounts deposited in the municipal waste system
fund; and 3) rates and charges to be imposed by the franchisee on persons disposing of system waste through the municipal waste system
pursuant to the authority of the franchise agreement and this code.
C. The rates and charges imposed for use of the municipal waste system shall be sufficient, after taking into account monies then on hand in the
municipal waste system fund and the proceeds of taxes levied and to be collected which have been assigned and pledged to the municipal
waste system fund: 1) to pay all operation and maintenance expenses of the municipal waste system, including all obligations to the agency
under the terms of the project use agreement, 2) to pay as they become due interest on and principal of any revenue bonds or other obligations
payable from revenues of the municipal waste system, 3) to provide for all unpaid claims, and 4) to provide adequate depreciation and reserve
funds for the municipal waste system, including reserves for uncollected charges.
D. The owners and occupants of real estate within the village served by the municipal waste system shall be jointly and severally liable to pay all
rates and charges imposed by the village pursuant to the provisions of this section at such due date or dates as established by the village from
time to time.
E. All amounts collected from rates and charges imposed under this section shall be deposited in the municipal waste system fund, and together
with all other amounts deposited in the municipal waste system fund, shall be separate and apart from all other monies of the village, except
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 73/366
amounts deposited in the municipal waste system fund may be invested together with other funds of the village. (Ord. 06-829, 7-11-2006, eff. 10-
1-2006)
3-4-12: NONSYSTEM WASTE HAULERS:
Each nonsystem waste hauler within the village shall make application, obtain and maintain a current annual nonsystem waste hauler license for a
license year beginning July 1, 1996, to operate within the village from the village of Inverness issued by the village administrator. No nonsystem
waste hauler shall operate within the village without such a current license or if such license has been suspended or revoked. All nonsystem waste
haulers shall not violate any of the provisions of this chapter and shall be specifically subject to the standards applicable to a franchisee related to
system waste set forth in subsections 3-4-8A, C, F, I, J and K of this chapter. All dumpsters, roll-offs and similar containers utilized for nonsystem
waste shall be readily identifiable by the legible display thereon of the name of the nonsystem waste hauler providing such services. The franchisee
may act as a nonsystem waste hauler within the village without a separate license but shall comply with the same standards as any licensed
nonsystem waste hauler. The license fee for each such nonsystem waste hauler license shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00) per license year,
except nonsystem waste haulers utilizing only vehicles of less than twenty thousand (20,000) pounds in gross weight, including any load, shall pay a
license fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) per license year. (Ord. 06-829, 7-11-2006, eff. 10-1-2006)
3-4-13: ENFORCEMENT:
A. Any person who shall be found guilty by a court of competent jurisdiction of violating any provision of this chapter or of failing to comply with any
approval or condition of approval, issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a petty offense, punishable by a fine of not less
than fifty dollars ($50.00) and of not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
B. The village may make application to the circuit court for an injunction requiring conformance with this chapter and/or make such other order as
the court deems necessary to secure compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 06-829, 7-11-2006, eff. 10-1-2006)
Chapter 5
MUNICIPAL OCCUPATION TAXES
3-5-1: MUNICIPAL RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX:
A. A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property at retail in the Village at the rate of one
percent (1%) of the gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such business while this Section is in effect, in accordance with the
provisions of 8-11-1 of the Illinois Municipal Code.
B. Every such person engaged in such business in the Village shall file, on or before the last day of each calendar month, the report to the State
Department of Revenue required by section three of "An Act in Relation to a Tax Upon Persons Engaged in the Business of Selling Tangible
Personal Property to Purchasers for Use or Consumption", approved June 28, 1933, or as such Statute may be amended from time to time.
C. At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the State Department of Revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account for the
receipts from sales of tangible personal property during the preceding month.
3-5-2: MUNICIPAL SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX:
A. A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the Village in the business of making sales of service at the rate of one percent (1%) of the
cost price of all tangible personal property transferred by said servicemen either in the form of tangible personal property or in the form of real
estate as an incident to a sale of service, in accordance with the provision of section 8-11-5 of the Illinois Municipal Code.
B. Every supplier or serviceman required to account for Municipal service occupation tax for the benefit of the Village shall file, on or before the last
day of each calendar month, the report to the State Department of Revenue required by section nine of the "Service Occupation Tax Act",
approved July 10, 1961, as amended.
C. At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the State Department of Revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed.
Chapter 6
LICENSES AND PERMITS
3-6-1: APPLICATIONS:
Applications for all licenses and permits required by this Code shall be made in writing to the Village President, or his or her designee, in the
absence of provisions to the contrary. Each application shall state the name of the applicant, the permit or license desired, the location to be used, if
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 74/366
any, the time covered and the fee to be paid; and each application shall contain such additional information as may be needed for the proper
guidance of the Village officials in the issuing of the permit or license applied for. (Ord. 92-468, 12-8-92)
3-6-2: PERSON SUBJECT TO LICENSE:
Whenever in this Code a license is required for the maintenance, operation or conduct of any business or establishment, or for doing business or
engaging in any activity or occupation, any person or corporation shall be subject to the requirement if by himself or through an agent, employee or
partner, he holds himself forth as being engaged in the business or occupation; or solicits patronage therefor, actively or passively; or performs or
attempts to perform any part of such business or occupation in the Village. (1983 Code)
3-6-3: FORMS:
Forms for all licenses and permits, and applications therefor, shall be prepared and kept on file by the Village Administrator. (Ord. 92-468, 12-8-92)
3-6-4: SIGNATURES:
Each license or permit issued shall be approved by and shall bear the signature of the Village President, or his or her designee, in the absence of
any provision to the contrary. (Ord. 92-468, 12-8-92)
3-6-5: LICENSE YEAR:
The license year for the Village shall begin on July 1 and end on June 30 of the following year, unless otherwise specifically provided. The Village
Administrator shall mail to all licensees of the Village a statement of the time of expiration of the license held by the licensee, if an annual one, three
(3) weeks prior to the date of such expiration. Provided, that a failure to send out such notice, or the failure of the licensee to receive it shall not
excuse the licensee from a failure to obtain a new license, or a renewal thereof, nor shall it be a defense in an action for operating without a license.
(Ord. 92-468, 12-8-92)
3-6-6: BUILDING AND PREMISES:
No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business, and no permit shall be issued for any thing or act, if the premises and building to be used
for the purpose do not fully comply with the requirements of this Code and all other applicable ordinances of the Village. No such license or permit
shall be issued for the conduct of any business or performance of any act which would involve a violation of the Zoning Ordinance of the Village.
(1983 Code)
3-6-7: CHANGES OF LOCATION:
The location of any licensed business or occupation, or of any permitted act, may be changed, provided ten (10) days' notice thereof is given to the
Village President, or his or her designee, in the absence of any provision to the contrary; provided, that the requirements of this Code and all other
applicable ordinances of the Village are complied with. (Ord. 92-468, 12-8-92)
3-6-8: NUISANCES:
No business, licensed or not, shall be so conducted or operated as to amount to a nuisance in fact.
3-6-9: INSPECTIONS:
Whenever inspections of the premises used for or in connection with the operation of a licensed business or occupation are provided for or required
by this Code, or are reasonably necessary to secure compliance with any ordinance provision or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty of
the licensee, or the person in charge of the premises to be inspected, to admit thereto for the purpose of making the inspection any officer or
employee of the Village who is authorized or directed to make such inspection at any reasonable time that admission is requested.
Whenever an analysis of any commodity or material is reasonable necessary to secure conformance with any ordinance provision or to detect
violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the licensee whose business is governed by such provision to give to any authorized officer or employee of
the Village requesting the same sufficient samples of such material or commodity for such analysis upon request.
In addition to any other penalty which may be provided, the Village President may revoke the license of any licensed proprietor of any licensed
business in the Village who refuses to permit any such officer or employee who is authorized to make such inspection or take such samples to make
the inspection, or take an adequate sample of the said commodity, or who interferes with such officer or employee while in the performance of his
duty in making such inspection. Provided, that no license shall be revoked for such cause unless written demand is made upon the licensee or
person in charge of the premises, in the name of the Village, stating that such inspection or sample is desired at the time it is sought to make the
inspection or obtain the sample.
3-6-10: REVOCATION:
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 75/366
Any license or permit for a limited time may be revoked by the Village President at any time during the life of such license or permit for any violation
by the licensee or permittee of the provisions of this Code or any applicable Village ordinance relating to the license permit, the subject matter of the
license or permit, or to the premises occupied; such revocation may be in addition to any fine imposed.
3-6-11: TERMINATION OF LICENSES:
All annual licenses shall be terminated on June 30 where no provision to the contrary is made. (1983 Code)
3-6-12: INVESTIGATIONS:
Upon the receipt of an application for a license or permit where ordinances of the Village necessitate inspection or investigation before the issuance
of such permit or license, the Village President, or his or her designee, shall refer such application to the officer for making such investigation within
forty eight (48) hours of the time of such receipt. The officer charged with the duty of making the investigation or inspection shall make a report
thereon, favorable or otherwise, within ten (10) days after receiving the application or a copy thereof. The Health Officer shall make or cause to be
made any inspection in regard to such licenses in the connection of the care and handling of food and the preventing of nuisances and the spread of
disease, for the protection of health. The Building Inspector shall make or cause to be made any such inspections relative to the construction of
buildings or other structures. All other investigations except where otherwise provided, shall be made by the Chief of Police or by some other officer
designated by the Village President. (Ord. 92-468, 12-8-92)
3-6-13: FEES:
In the absence of provision to the contrary all fees and charges for licenses or permits shall be paid in advance at the time application therefor is
made to the Village Collector. When an applicant has not engaged in the business until after the expiration of part of the current license year the
license fee shall be prorated by quarters and the fee paid for each quarter or fraction thereof except as otherwise provided by this Code during
which the business has been or will be conducted. Except as otherwise provided, all license fees shall become a part of the Corporate Fund. Where
no fee or charges for a license is specified by this Code, the annual license fee shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) per year. (Ord. 92-468, 12-8-
92)
3-6-14: POSTING LICENSE:
It shall be the duty of any person conducting any licensed business activity in the Village to keep his license posted in a prominent place on the
premises used for such business at all times. (1983 Code)
3-6-15: LICENSES REQUIRED FOR CERTAIN BUSINESSES AND OCCUPATIONS:
In addition to those licenses or permits required by this code, the following businesses and occupations shall require licenses: auctioneers;
moneychangers and bankers; brokers other than insurance brokers; barbers; keepers or owners of lumberyards and lumber storehouses; livery
stables; public scales; ice cream parlors and coffeehouses; florists; private detectives and detective agencies; sellers of tickets for theatricals,
shows, amusements, athletic events and other exhibitions at a place other than the theater or location where the theatricals, shows, amusements,
athletic events and other exhibitions are given or exhibited; dealers in junk, dismantled or wrecked motor vehicles or parts thereof, rags, and any
secondhand article whatsoever; taxicab drivers; and parking garages, lots and ramps. (Ord. 83-239, 5-10-1983)
Chapter 7
ALARMS
3-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
ALARM: As the term is used herein, shall be construed to include and mean any device known as a burglar, holdup, or panic alarm.
A. A "burglar alarm" is defined as a security system designed to protect a building or area.
B. A "holdup" or "panic alarm" is defined as a security system designed to allow notification to the police department during normal business
hours of occupancy by authorized persons.
FALSE ALARM: The transmission of any alarm signal caused by human error or mechanical malfunction, whether or not the exact cause of the
error or malfunction is identified, or any other activation of the signal when no actual emergency or threat to persons or property exists, other than
during testing and/or repair procedures if prior notice has been given to the police department.
TYPES OF ALARM SYSTEMS: A. Receiving Station Alarms: The system installed by a private contractor in the communications center of the police
department. The system constantly scans its customers' alarms and provides the police department with a coded tape if an alarm is triggered. The
tape states the type of alarm, location and alarm status.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 76/366
B. Direct Dial System: Customer's alarm system triggers a telephone call to the police department stating the type of alarm and the location.
C. Local Alarm System: The local alarm system has no direct connection to the police department. When triggered, the alarm activates visual
warning mechanism on the premises or an audible signal which can be heard by a person who is at least seventy five feet (75') from the
premises (the building or structure intended to be protected). The type of alarm is usually reported to the police by a passerby, neighbor or
person on the premises.
D. Monitoring Station Alarms: A system monitored by a private contractor wherein when the alarm is triggered it is received initially at the private
contractor's location and is then telephoned to the police department. (Ord. 90-388, 5-8-1990; amd. Ord. 94-512, 1-11-1994; Ord. 2009-899,
12-8-2009)
3-7-2: RECEIVING STATION ALARMS; PERMIT REQUIRED:
A. Any person having any interest in any building, place or premises protected by a direct burglar, holdup and/or panic alarm connection to the
police department for the purposes of a receiving station alarm from any building, place or premises within the village shall first obtain an alarm
permit from the village of Inverness village administrator before the connection, activation or continued maintenance of such alarm system as
hereinafter provided. (Ord. 92-468, 12-8-1992)
B. Permits shall be issued only after receipt of a written application by the village administrator and approval by the chief of police or his designee.
The application shall contain a provision that the village of Inverness shall not be liable for any failure of service or any damages that might result
from the installation or operation of the alarm system. All applicants must agree to indemnify the village of Inverness and its respective officers,
employees and agents for all claims, demands, judgments, liability, costs and expenses that may arise in any way as a result of the alarm
connection and service. All applicants must certify that alarm system maintenance will be provided twenty four (24) hours per day, seven (7)
days per week. The permits are not transferable, and a change of ownership or occupancy of the premises shall be cause for a new license
permit application to be filed with the village. (Ord. 2009-899, 12-8-2009)
C. Applicants asking to connect to the police alarm panel shall be required to furnish a suitable signal, as determined by the chief of police, to the
receiving station located in the communications center of the police department. (Ord. 90-388, 5-8-1990)
3-7-3: AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICES AND MONITORING ALARM SYSTEMS:
A. Special Trunk Line: Automatic dialing devices and monitoring alarm systems designed to transmit a prerecorded message directly to the police
department and any type of message or signal from a private monitoring location may be programmed to dial a special trunk line designed by the
chief of police only if those persons having an interest in the building, place or premises protected or to be protected by such system have first
obtained an alarm permit from the village of Inverness village administrator as hereinafter provided. No automatic dialing device or monitoring
alarm systems shall be programmed to dial a preliminary trunk line of the police department. Before such a device or system is programmed to
dial such a special trunk line, the person or company performing this operation shall first obtain instructions from the chief of police or his
designee concerning the procedure to be followed.
B. Application: Permits shall be issued by the village administrator only after receipt of a written application by the permittee and approval by the
chief of police. The application shall contain a provision that the village of Inverness shall not be liable for any failure of service or any damages
that might result from the installation or operation of the alarm system. All applicants must agree to indemnify the village of Inverness and its
respective officers, agents and employees for all claims, demands, judgments, liability, costs and expenses that may arise in any way as a result
of the alarm connection and service. All applicants must certify that alarm system maintenance will be provided twenty four (24) hours per day,
seven (7) days per week. The permits are not transferable, and a change of ownership or occupancy of the premises shall be cause for a new
license permit application to be filed with the village of Inverness. (Ord. 2009-899, 12-8-2009)
C. Current List: Every alarm business which has installed any automatic dialing device or monitoring alarm system in the village programmed to dial
special trunk lines in the communications center of the police department shall maintain a current list of such installations for inspection by the
chief of police during the course of his official duties and include in such lists:
1. The name, address and telephone number of the owner, occupant or lessor of the premises served by such device;
2. The address served by such device or system installed and the telephone number of that location.
D. Standards: Such automatic dialing devices and monitoring alarm systems installed on any premises within the village of Inverness shall meet the
following minimum standards:
1. The contents of any recorded message to be transmitted by such device or system must be intelligible and in a format approved by the chief
of police as appropriate for the type of emergency being reported.
2. Upon a single stimulus of the alarm device, any such device or system may place only two (2) separate calls for the same alarm to the police
department via the special trunk lines.
3. Sensory apparatus comprising such devices or systems shall be maintained by the owner, occupant or lessees in such physical condition that
false alarms will be minimized. (Ord. 90-388, 5-8-1990)
3-7-4: LOCAL ALARMS:
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 77/366
A. No person shall install, maintain or operate any local alarm with an audible signal device which can be heard by a person who is at least seventy
five feet (75') from the premises (the building or structure intended to be protected) which operates continuously for longer than a ten (10) minute
period (including the duration of any automatic reactivation).
B. No person shall maintain or operate a local alarm to protect any building, place or premises in which they have an interest within the village of
Inverness without first obtaining an alarm permit from the village of Inverness village administrator.
C. Local alarms may be an addition to a central receiving station alarm. Local alarms shall not make a sound similar to that of sirens or emergency
vehicles or civil defense warning systems. Owners of said local alarms will be responsible for maintenance of these alarms and for turning off or
causing to be turned off by a key holder the signals at the request of the police department or an officer. (Ord. 94-512, 1-11-1994)
D. Permits shall be issued by the village administrator only after receipt of a written application from the permittee and approval by the chief of
police. The application shall contain a provision that the village of Inverness shall not be liable for any failure of service or any damages that
might result from the installation or operation of the alarm system. All applicants must agree to indemnify the village of Inverness and its
respective officers, employees and agents for all claims, demands, judgments, liability, costs and expenses that may arise in any way as a result
of the alarm connection and service. All applicants must certify that alarm system maintenance will be provided twenty four (24) hours per day,
seven (7) days per week. The permits are not transferable, and a change of ownership or occupancy of the premises shall be cause for a new
license permit application to be filed with the village of Inverness. (Ord. 2009-899, 12-8-2009)
3-7-5: INSPECTION OF ALARM DEVICES:
A. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, the chief of police shall have the authority, at reasonable times and upon reasonable
oral notice, to enter any premises in the village in or upon which any alarm systems subject to this chapter are located, to inspect the operation
of such alarm systems.
B. If such inspection reveals any violations of provisions of this chapter, a written report detailing such violations shall be promptly sent to the village
president and to the owner, occupant or lessee responsible for the alarm system. Such report shall require the correction within thirty (30) days
after receipt of a notice of the violation discovered and shall state that a failure to comply may result in the revocation of the annual alarm permit
to operate. The responsible owner, occupant or lessee shall be granted a reasonable extension of time to correct such violations upon good
cause shown. (Ord. 90-388, 5-8-1990)
3-7-6: PERMIT REVOCATION OR SUSPENSIONS:
A. The chief of police shall have the authority to revoke or suspend the operation of an alarm system if its operation is in violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 2009-899, 12-8-2009)
B. The chief of police may also suspend the permit of any person whose system transmits more than four (4) false alarms within any twelve (12)
month period. (Ord. 90-388, 5-8-1990)
3-7-7: LIABILITY:
Any alarm permit application to be filed with the village administrator of the village of Inverness shall contain a provision that the village of Inverness
shall not be liable for any failure of service or damages, including damages resulting from breaking to gain entrance, that might result from the
installation or operation of any receiving station alarm, automatic dialing device or local alarm. All applicants must agree to indemnify the village and
its respective officers, employees and agents for all claims, demands, judgments, liability, costs and expenses that may arise in any way as a result
of the alarm systems. (Ord. 2009-899, 12-8-2009)
3-7-8: ALARM PERMIT FEES:
All alarm permits shall be issued annually without fee and shall be effective for a twelve (12) month period beginning on June 1 of each year;
provided, however, that:
A. Any permittee who is currently maintaining the alarm permit(s) required by the applicable provisions of this chapter, and any person who has first
established a residence within the preceding sixty (60) days whose alarm system has in excess of two (2) false alarms during the twelve (12)
month period beginning on the prior June 1 shall pay alarm permit fee surcharges as follows:
1. For the third through the tenth false alarms during any such twelve (12) month period, fifty dollars ($50.00) for each false alarm (base alarm
permit fee surcharge); and
2. For each false alarm during any such twelve (12) month period beginning with the eleventh false alarm, the alarm permit fee surcharge shall
increase by one hundred percent (100%) of the base permit fee surcharge for each false alarm thereafter.
B. Any person who is required to obtain an alarm permit under any section of this chapter and who has failed to do so at the time of a false alarm
whose system has one or more false alarms during any twelve (12) month period beginning on the prior June 1 shall pay alarm permit fee
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 78/366
surcharges as follows:
1. For the first through the tenth false alarms during any such twelve (12) month period, fifty dollars ($50.00) for each false alarm (base alarm
permit fee surcharge); and
2. For each false alarm during any such twelve (12) month period beginning with the eleventh false alarm, the alarm permit fee surcharge shall
increase by one hundred percent (100%) of the base permit fee surcharge for each false alarm thereafter.
Such permit fee surcharges shall be paid within thirty (30) days after billing. No permits shall be renewed or reissued unless and until all prior
permit fee surcharges have been paid. (Ord. 93-477, 3-9-1993)
Chapter 8
TELECOMMUNICATIONS
ARTICLE A. GENERAL
3-8A-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose and intent of this Chapter is to:
A. Establish a local policy concerning telecommunications providers and services;
B. Establish clear local guidelines, standards and time frames for the exercise of local authority with respect to the regulation of telecommunications
providers and services;
C. Promote competition in telecommunications;
D. Minimize unnecessary local regulation of telecommunications providers and services;
E. Encourage the provision of advanced and competitive telecommunications services on the widest possible basis to the businesses, institutions
and residents of the Village;
F. Permit and manage reasonable access to the public ways of the Village for telecommunications purposes on a competitively neutral basis;
G. Conserve the limited physical capacity of the public ways held in public trust by the Village;
H. Assure that the Village's current and ongoing costs of granting and regulating private access to and use of the public ways are fully paid by the
persons seeking such access and causing such costs;
I. Secure fair and reasonable compensation to the Village and the residents of the Village for permitting private use of the public ways;
J. Assure that all telecommunications carriers providing facilities or services within the Village comply with the ordinances, rules and regulations of
the Village;
K. Assure that the Village can continue to fairly and responsibly protect the public health, safety and welfare;
L. Enable the Village to discharge its public trust consistent with rapidly evolving Federal and State regulatory policies, industry competition and
technological development. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8A-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter, and the interpretation and enforcement thereof, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings,
unless the context of the sentence in which they are used shall indicate otherwise:
AFFILIATE: A person that (directly or indirectly) owns or controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership or control with another
person.
ANNUAL GROSS REVENUE: (Reserved)
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 79/366
CABLE ACT: The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended by the Cable Television Consumer protection and competition act of
1992, as amended by the telecommunication act of 1996 and as hereafter amended.
CABLE OPERATOR: A telecommunications carrier providing or offering to provide "cable service" within the village as that term is defined in the
cable act, provided, however, to the extent such company has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the Illinois
commerce commission pursuant to the Illinois cable and video competition law, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401, in which event, such
person, company or other entity shall then be subject to the provisions of chapter 9 of this title and of title 8, chapter 5 of this code.
CABLE SERVICE: Shall have the same meaning provided by the cable act.
CORPORATE AUTHORITIES: The president and board of trustees of the village.
EXCESS CAPACITY: The volume or capacity in any existing or future duct, conduit, manhole, handhole or other utility facility within the public way
that is or will be available for use for additional telecommunications facilities.
FCC OR FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION: The federal administrative agency, or lawful successor, authorized to regulate and
oversee telecommunications carriers, services and providers on a national level.
FRANCHISEE: Any person as holder of a telecommunications franchise as set forth in this chapter.
ICC OR ILLINOIS COMMERCE COMMISSION: The state administrative agency, or lawful successor, authorized to regulate and oversee
telecommunications carriers, services and providers in the state of Illinois.
LICENSEE: Any person as holder of a telecommunications license as set forth in this chapter.
OTHER WAYS: The highways, streets, alleys, utility easements or other rights of way within the village, but under the jurisdiction and control of a
governmental entity other than the village.
OVERHEAD FACILITIES: Utility poles, utility facilities and telecommunications facilities located above the surface of the ground, including the
underground supports and foundations for such facilities.
PERSON: Means and includes corporations, companies, associations, joint stock companies or associations, firms, partnerships, limited liability
companies and individuals and includes their lessors, trustees and receivers.
PUBLIC STREET: Any highway, street, alley or other public right of way for motor vehicle travel under the jurisdiction and control of the village which
has been acquired, established, dedicated or devoted to highway purposes not inconsistent with telecommunications facilities.
PUBLIC WAY: Means and includes all "public streets" and "utility easements", as those terms are defined herein, now or hereafter owned by the
village, but only to the extent of the village's right, title, interest or authority to grant a license or franchise to occupy and use such streets and
easements for telecommunications facilities.
STATE: The state of Illinois.
SURPLUS SPACE: That portion of the usable space on a utility pole which has the necessary clearance from other pole users, as required by the
orders and regulations of the Illinois commerce commission, to allow its use by a telecommunications carrier for a pole attachment.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIER: Means and includes every person that directly or indirectly owns, controls, operates or manages a plant,
equipment or property within the village, used or to be used for the purpose of offering telecommunications service, provided, however, to the extent
such company has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the Illinois commerce commission pursuant to the Illinois
cable and video competition law, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401, in which event, such person, company or other entity shall then be subject
to the provisions of chapter 9 of this title and of title 8, chapter 5 of this code.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES: The plant, equipment and property, including, but not limited to, cables, wires, conduits, ducts, pedestals,
antennas, electronics and other appurtenances used or to be used to transmit, receive, distribute, provide or offer telecommunications services.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISEE: See definition of Franchisee.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS LICENSEE: See definition of Licensee.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER: Means and includes every person who provides telecommunications service over telecommunications
facilities without any ownership or management control of the facilities.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: The providing or offering for rent, sale or lease, or in exchange for other value received, of the transmittal of
voice, data, image, graphic and/or video programming information between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio,
satellite or similar facilities, with or without benefit of any closed transmission medium.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM: See definition of Telecommunications Facilities.
UNDERGROUND FACILITIES: Utility and telecommunications facilities located under the surface of the ground, excluding the underground
foundations or supports for overhead facilities.
USABLE SPACE: The total distance between the top of a utility pole and the lowest possible attachment point that provides the minimum allowable
vertical clearance as specified in the orders and regulations of the Illinois commerce commission.
UTILITY EASEMENT: Any easement owned by the village and acquired, established, dedicated or devoted for public utility purposes not
inconsistent with telecommunications facilities.
UTILITY FACILITIES: The plant, equipment and property, including, but not limited to, the poles, pipes, mains, conduits, ducts, cables, wires, plant
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 80/366
and equipment located under, on or above the surface of the ground within the public ways of the village and used or to be used for the purpose of
providing utility or telecommunications services.
VILLAGE: The village of Inverness.
VILLAGE PROPERTY: Means and includes all real property owned by the village, other than "public streets" and "utility easements" as those terms
are defined herein, and all property held in a proprietary capacity by the village, which are not subject to right of way licensing and franchising as
provided in this chapter. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997; amd. Ord. 2007-855, 11-13-2007)
3-8A-3: REGISTRATION AND FEES:
Except as otherwise provided herein, all telecommunications carriers or providers engaged in the business of transmitting, supplying or furnishing of
telecommunications originating or terminating within the village shall register with and obtain a license from the village pursuant to article C of this
chapter and pay all the fees as provided therein. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8A-4: TELECOMMUNICATIONS LICENSE AND FEES:
Except as otherwise provided herein, any telecommunications carrier who desires to construct, install, operate, maintain or otherwise locate
telecommunications facilities in, under, over or across any public way of the village for the sole purpose of providing telecommunications service to
persons and areas outside the village shall first obtain a license granting the use of such public ways from the village pursuant to article C of this
chapter and pay all the fees as provided therein. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8A-5: TELECOMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISE AND FEES:
Except as otherwise provided herein, any telecommunications carrier who desires to construct, install, operate, maintain or otherwise locate
telecommunications facilities in, under, over or across any public way of the village, and to also provide telecommunications service to persons or
areas in the village, shall first obtain a franchise granting the use of such public ways from the village pursuant to article D of this chapter and pay all
the fees as provided therein. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8A-6: CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE:
Except as otherwise provided herein, any telecommunications carrier who desires to construct, install, operate, maintain or locate
telecommunications facilities in any public way of the village for the purpose of providing cable service to persons in the village shall first obtain a
cable franchise from the village as provided in article E of this chapter and pay all the fees as provided therein. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8A-7: APPLICATION TO EXISTING FRANCHISE ORDINANCES AND AGREEMENTS:
This chapter shall have no effect on any existing franchise ordinance or franchise agreement until:
A. The expiration of said franchise ordinance or agreement;
B. An amendment to an unexpired franchise ordinance or franchise agreement, unless both parties agree to defer full compliance to a specific date
not later than the present expiration date. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8A-8: PENALTIES:
Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not
less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. A separate and distinct offense shall
be deemed committed each day on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8A-9: OTHER REMEDIES:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any judicial remedies that the village may have, at law or in equity, for enforcement of this
chapter. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8A-10: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or other portion of this chapter, or its application to any person, is, for any reason, declared
invalid, in whole or in part by any court or agency of competent jurisdiction, said decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof.
(Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 81/366
ARTICLE B. REGISTRATION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIERS AND
PROVIDERS
3-8B-1: REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
All telecommunications carriers and providers that offer or provide any telecommunications service for a fee directly to the public, either within the
Village, or outside the corporate limits from telecommunications facilities within the Village, shall register with the Village pursuant to this Article on
forms to be provided by the Village Clerk, which shall include the following:
A. The identity and legal status of the registrant, including any affiliates.
B. The name, address and telephone number of the officer, agent or employee responsible for the accuracy of the registration statement.
C. A description of the registrant's existing or proposed telecommunications facilities within the Village.
D. A description of the telecommunications service that the registrant intends to offer or provide, or is currently offering or providing, to persons,
firms, businesses or institutions within the Village.
E. Information sufficient to determine whether the registrant is subject to public way licensing or franchising under this Chapter.
F. Information sufficient to determine whether the transmission, origination or receipt of the telecommunications services provided or to be provided
by the registrant constitutes an occupation or privilege subject to any Municipal telecommunications tax, utility message tax or other occupation
tax imposed by the Village.
G. Information sufficient to determine that the applicant has applied for and received any certificate of authority required by the Illinois Commerce
Commission to provide telecommunications services or facilities within the Village.
H. Information sufficient to determine that the applicant has applied for and received any construction permit, operating license or other approvals
required by the Federal Communications Commission to provide telecommunications services or facilities within the Village.
I. Such other information as the Village Clerk may reasonably require. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8B-2: REGISTRATION FEE:
Each application for registration as a telecommunications carrier or provider shall be accompanied by a fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00). (Ord. 97-
583, 3-11-1997)
3-8B-3: PURPOSE OF REGISTRATION:
The purpose of registration under this Article is to:
A. Provide the Village with accurate and current information concerning the telecommunications carriers and providers who offer or provide
telecommunications services within the Village, or that own or operate telecommunications facilities within the Village;
B. Assist the Village in enforcement of this Chapter;
C. Assist the Village in the collection and enforcement of any Municipal taxes, franchise fees, license fees or charges that may be due the Village;
D. Assist the Village in monitoring compliance with local, State and Federal laws. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8B-4: EXCEPTIONS TO REGISTRATION:
The following telecommunications carriers and providers are excepted from registration under this Chapter:
A. Telecommunications carriers that are owned and operated by any political subdivision of this State for its own use.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 82/366
B. A company or person which provides telecommunications services solely to itself, its affiliates or members between points in the same building,
or between closely located buildings under common ownership or control, provided that such company or person does not use or occupy any
public ways of the Village or other ways within the Village. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
ARTICLE C. TELECOMMUNICATIONS LICENSE
3-8C-1: TELECOMMUNICATIONS LICENSE:
A telecommunications license shall be required of any telecommunications carrier who desires to occupy specific public ways of the Village for the
sole purpose of providing telecommunications services to persons or areas outside the Village. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8C-2: LICENSE APPLICATION:
Any person that desires a telecommunications license pursuant to this Article shall file an application with the Village on a form which shall be
provided by the Village Administrator which shall include the following information:
A. The identity of the license applicant, including all affiliates of the applicant.
B. A description of the telecommunications services that are or will be offered or provided by the licensee over its telecommunications facilities.
C. A description of the transmission medium that will be used by the licensee to offer or provide such telecommunications services.
D. Preliminary engineering plans, specifications and a network map of the facilities to be located within the Village, all in sufficient detail to identify:
1. The location and route requested for applicant's proposed telecommunications facilities.
2. The location of all overhead and underground public utility, telecommunication, cable, water, sewer drainage and other facilities in the public
way along the proposed route.
3. The location(s), if any, for interconnection with the telecommunications facilities of other telecommunications carriers.
4. The specific trees, structures, improvements, facilities and obstructions, if any, that applicant proposes to temporarily or permanently remove
or relocate.
E. If applicant is proposing to install overhead facilities, evidence that surplus space is available for locating its telecommunications facilities on
existing utility poles along the proposed route.
F. If applicant is proposing an underground installation in existing ducts or conduits within the public ways, information in sufficient detail to identify:
1. The excess capacity currently available in such ducts or conduits before installation of applicant's telecommunications facilities;
2. The excess capacity, if any, that will exist in such ducts or conduits after installation of applicant's telecommunications facilities.
G. If applicant is proposing an underground installation within new ducts or conduits to be constructed within the public ways:
1. The location proposed for the new ducts or conduits;
2. The excess capacity that will exist in such ducts or conduits after installation of applicant's telecommunications facilities.
H. A preliminary construction schedule and completion date.
I. A preliminary traffic-control plan in accordance with the IDOT Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
J. Financial statements prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles demonstrating the applicant's financial ability to
construct, operate, maintain, relocate and remove the facilities.
K. Information in sufficient detail to establish the applicant's technical qualifications, experience and expertise regarding the telecommunications
facilities and services described in the application.
L. Information to establish that the applicant has obtained all other governmental approvals and permits to construct and operate the facilities and to
offer or provide the telecommunications services.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 83/366
M. All fees, deposits or charges required pursuant to Article F of this Chapter.
N. Such other and further information as may be required by the Village Administrator. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8C-3: DETERMINATION BY THE VILLAGE:
Within one hundred twenty (120) days after receiving a complete application under Section 3-8C-2 of this Article, the corporate authorities shall
issue a written determination granting or denying the application in whole or in part, applying the following standards. If the application is denied, the
written determination shall include the reasons for denial.
A. The financial and technical ability of the applicant.
B. The legal ability of the applicant.
C. The capacity of the public ways to accommodate the applicant's proposed facilities.
D. The capacity of the public ways to accommodate additional utility and telecommunications facilities if the license is granted.
E. The damage or disruption, if any, of public or private facilities, improvements, service, travel or landscaping if the license is granted.
F. The public interest in minimizing the cost and disruption of construction within the public ways.
G. The service that applicant will provide to the community and region.
H. The effect, if any, on public health, safety and welfare if the license is granted.
I. The availability of alternate routes and/or locations for the proposed facilities.
J. Applicable Federal and State telecommunications laws, regulations and policies.
K. Such other factors as may demonstrate that the grant to use the public ways will serve the community interest. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8C-4: AGREEMENT:
No license granted hereunder shall be effective until the applicant and the Village have executed a written agreement setting forth the particular
terms and provisions under which the license to occupy and use public ways of the Village will be granted. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8C-5: NONEXCLUSIVE GRANT:
No license granted under this Article shall confer any exclusive right, privilege, license or franchise to occupy or use the public ways of the Village
for delivery of telecommunications services or any other purposes. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8C-6: RIGHTS GRANTED:
No license granted under this Article shall convey any right, title or interest in the public ways, but shall be deemed a license only to use and occupy
the public ways for the limited purposes and term stated in the grant. Further, no license shall be construed as any warranty of title or shall authorize
or excuse a licensee from securing such further easements, leases, permits or other approvals as may be required to lawfully occupy and use
excess capacity in an underground facility or surplus space in an overhead facility. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8C-7: TERM OF GRANT:
Unless otherwise specified in a license agreement, a telecommunications license granted hereunder shall be in effect for a term of five (5) years.
(Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8C-8: LICENSE ROUTE:
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 84/366
A telecommunications license granted under this Article shall be limited to a grant of specific public ways and defined portions thereof. (Ord. 97-583,
3-11-1997)
3-8C-9: LOCATION OF FACILITIES:
Unless otherwise specified in a license agreement, all facilities shall be constructed, installed and located in accordance with the following terms
and conditions:
A. Telecommunications facilities shall be installed within an existing underground duct or conduit whenever excess capacity exists within such utility
facility.
B. A licensee with permission to install overhead facilities shall install its telecommunications facilities on pole attachments to existing utility poles
only, and then only if surplus space is available.
C. Whenever any existing electric utilities, cable facilities or telecommunications facilities are located underground within a public way of the Village,
a licensee with permission to occupy the same public way must also locate its telecommunications facilities underground.
D. Whenever any new or existing electric utilities, cable facilities or telecommunications facilities are located or relocated underground within a
public way of the Village, a grantee that currently occupies the same public way shall relocate its facilities underground within a reasonable
period of time, which shall not be later than the end of the grant term. Absent extraordinary circumstances or undue hardship as determined by
the Village Engineer, such relocation shall be made concurrently to minimize the disruption of the public ways.
E. Whenever new telecommunications facilities will exhaust the capacity of a public street or utility easement to reasonably accommodate future
telecommunications carriers or facilities, the grantee shall provide additional ducts, conduits, manholes and other facilities for nondiscriminatory
access to future telecommunications carriers. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8C-10: CONSTRUCTION PERMITS:
All licensees are required to obtain construction permits for telecommunications facilities as required in Article G of this Chapter provided, however,
that nothing in this Article shall prohibit the Village and a licensee from agreeing to alternative plan review, permit and construction procedures in a
license agreement, provided such alternative procedures provide substantially equivalent safeguards for responsible construction practices. (Ord.
97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8C-11: COMPENSATION TO VILLAGE:
Each license granted under this Article is subject to the Village's right, which is expressly reserved, to annually fix a fair and reasonable
compensation to be paid for the property rights granted to the licensee; provided, nothing in this Article shall prohibit the Village and a licensee from
agreeing to the compensation to be paid. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8C-12: SERVICE TO VILLAGE USERS:
A licensee may be permitted to offer or provide telecommunications services to persons or areas within the Village upon submitting an application
for approval pursuant to Article D of this Chapter. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8C-13: AMENDMENT OF GRANT:
A. A new license application and grant shall be required of any telecommunications carrier that desires to extend or locate its telecommunications
facilities in public ways of the Village which are not included in a license previously granted hereunder.
B. If ordered by the Village to locate or relocate its telecommunications facilities in public ways not included in a previously granted license, the
Village shall grant a license amendment without further application. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8C-14: RENEWAL APPLICATIONS:
A grantee that desires to renew its license under this Article shall, not more than one hundred eighty (180) days nor less than ninety (90) days
before expiration of the current license, file an application with the Village for renewal of its license which shall include the following information:
A. The information required pursuant to Section 3-8C-2 of this Article.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 85/366
B. Any information required pursuant to the license agreement between the Village and the grantee. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8C-15: RENEWAL DETERMINATIONS:
Within ninety (90) days after receiving a complete application under Section 3-8C-14 of this Article, the corporate authorities shall issue a written
determination granting or denying the renewal application in whole or in part, applying the following standards. If the renewal application is denied,
the written determination shall include the reasons for nonrenewal.
A. The financial and technical ability of the applicant.
B. The legal ability of the applicant.
C. The continuing capacity of the public ways to accommodate the applicant's existing facilities.
D. The applicant's compliance with the requirements of this Chapter and the license agreement.
E. Applicable Federal, State and local telecommunications laws, rules and policies.
F. Such other factors as may demonstrate that the continued grant to use the public ways will serve the community interest. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-
1997)
3-8C-16: OBLIGATION TO CURE AS A CONDITION OF RENEWAL:
No license shall be renewed until any ongoing violations or defaults in the licensee's performance of the license agreement, or of the requirements
of this Chapter, have been cured, or a plan detailing the corrective action to be taken by the grantee has been approved by the Village. (Ord. 97-
583, 3-11-1997)
ARTICLE D. TELECOMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISE
3-8D-1: TELECOMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISE:
A telecommunications franchise shall be required of any telecommunications carrier who desires to occupy public ways of the Village and to provide
telecommunications services to any person or area in the Village. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8D-2: FRANCHISE APPLICATION:
Any person that desires a telecommunications franchise pursuant to this Article shall file an application with the Village which shall include the
following information:
A. The identity of the franchise applicant, including all affiliates of the applicant.
B. A description of the telecommunications services that are or will be offered or provided by the franchise applicant over its existing or proposed
facilities.
C. A description of the transmission medium that will be used by the franchisee to offer or provide such telecommunications services.
D. Preliminary engineering plans, specifications and a network map of the facilities to be located within the Village, all in sufficient detail to identify:
1. The location and route requested for applicant's proposed telecommunications facilities.
2. The location of all overhead and underground public utility, telecommunication, cable, water, sewer drainage and other facilities in the public
way along the proposed route.
3. The location(s), if any, for interconnection with the telecommunications facilities of other telecommunications carriers.
4. The specific trees, structures, improvements, facilities and obstructions, if any, that applicant proposes to temporarily or permanently remove
or relocate.
E. If applicant is proposing to install overhead facilities, evidence that surplus space is available for locating its telecommunications facilities on
existing utility poles along the proposed route.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 86/366
F. If applicant is proposing an underground installation in existing ducts or conduits within the public ways, information in sufficient detail to identify:
1. The excess capacity currently available in such ducts or conduits before installation of applicant's telecommunications facilities;
2. The excess capacity, if any, that will exist in such ducts or conduits after installation of applicant's telecommunications facilities.
G. If applicant is proposing an underground installation within new ducts or conduits to be constructed within the public ways:
1. The location proposed for the new ducts or conduits;
2. The excess capacity that will exist in such ducts or conduits after installation of applicant's telecommunications facilities.
H. A preliminary construction schedule and completion dates.
I. A preliminary traffic-control plan in accordance with the IDOT Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
J. Financial statements prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles demonstrating the applicant's financial ability to
construct, operate, maintain, relocate and remove the facilities.
K. Information in sufficient detail to establish the applicant's technical qualifications, experience and expertise regarding the telecommunications
facilities and services described in the application.
L. Information to establish that the applicant has obtained all other governmental approvals and permits to construct and operate the facilities and to
offer or provide the telecommunications services.
M. Whether the applicant intends to provide cable service, video dial tone service or other video programming service, and sufficient information to
determine whether such service is subject to cable franchising.
N. An accurate map showing the location of any existing telecommunications facilities in the Village that applicant intends to use or lease.
O. A description of the services or facilities that the applicant will offer or make available to the Village and other public, educational and
governmental institutions.
P. A description of applicant's access and line extension policies.
Q. The area or areas of the Village the applicant desires to serve and a schedule for build-out to the entire franchise area.
R. All fees, deposits or charges required pursuant to Article F of this Chapter.
S. Such other and further information as may be requested by the Village Administrator. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8D-3: DETERMINATION BY THE VILLAGE:
Within one hundred fifty (150) days after receiving a complete application under Section 3-8C-2 of this Chapter, the corporate authorities shall issue
a written determination granting or denying the application in whole or in part, applying the following standards. If the application is denied, the
written determination shall include the reasons for denial.
A. The financial and technical ability of the applicant.
B. The legal ability of the applicant.
C. The capacity of the public ways to accommodate the applicant's proposed facilities.
D. The capacity of the public ways to accommodate additional utility and telecommunications facilities if the franchise is granted.
E. The damage or disruption, if any, of public or private facilities, improvements, service, travel or landscaping if the franchise is granted.
F. The public interest in minimizing the cost and disruption of construction within the public ways.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 87/366
G. The service that the applicant will provide to the community and region.
H. The effect, if any, on public health, safety and welfare if the franchise requested is granted.
I. The availability of alternate routes and/or locations for the proposed facilities.
J. Applicable Federal and State telecommunications laws, regulations and policies.
K. Such other factors as may demonstrate that the grant to use the public ways will serve the community interest. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8D-4: AGREEMENT:
No franchise shall be granted hereunder unless the applicant and the Village have executed a written agreement setting forth the particular terms
and provisions under which the franchise to occupy and use public ways of the Village will be granted. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8D-5: NONEXCLUSIVE GRANT:
No franchise granted under this Article shall confer any exclusive right, privilege, license or franchise to occupy or use the public ways of the Village
for delivery of telecommunications services or any other purposes. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8D-6: TERM OF GRANT:
Unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement, a telecommunications franchise granted hereunder shall be valid for a term of ten (10) years.
(Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8D-7: RIGHTS GRANTED:
No franchise granted under this Article shall convey any right, title or interest in the public ways, but shall be deemed a franchise only to use and
occupy the public ways for the limited purposes and term stated in the grant. Further, no franchise shall be construed as any warranty of title or shall
authorize or excuse a franchisee from securing such further easements, leases, permits or other approvals as may be required to lawfully occupy
and use excess capacity in an underground facility or surplus space in an overhead facility. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8D-8: FRANCHISE TERRITORY:
A telecommunications franchise granted under this Article shall be limited to the specific geographic area of the Village to be served by the franchise
grantee, and the specific public ways necessary to serve such areas. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8D-9: LOCATION OF FACILITIES:
Unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement, all facilities shall be constructed, installed and located in accordance with the following terms
and conditions:
A. Telecommunications facilities shall be installed within an existing underground duct or conduit whenever excess capacity exists within such utility
facility.
B. A franchisee with permission to install overhead facilities shall install its telecommunications facilities on pole attachments to existing utility poles
only, and then only if surplus space is available.
C. Whenever any existing electric utilities, cable facilities or telecommunications facilities are located underground within a public way of the Village,
a franchisee with permission to occupy the same public way must also locate its telecommunications facilities underground.
D. Whenever any new or existing electric utilities, cable facilities or telecommunications facilities are located or relocated underground within a
public way of the Village, a grantee that currently occupies the same public way shall relocate its facilities underground within a reasonable
period of time, which shall not be later than the end of the grant term. Absent extraordinary circumstances or undue hardship as determined by
the Village Engineer, such relocation shall be made concurrently to minimize the disruption of the public ways.
E. Whenever new telecommunications facilities will exhaust the capacity of a public street or utility easement to reasonably accommodate future
telecommunications carriers or facilities, the grantee shall provide additional ducts, conduits, manholes and other facilities for nondiscriminatory
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 88/366
access to future carriers. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8D-10: CONSTRUCTION PERMITS:
All franchisees are required to obtain construction permits for telecommunications facilities as required in Article G of this Chapter provided,
however, that nothing in this Article shall prohibit the Village and a franchisee from agreeing to alternative plan review, permit and construction
procedures in a franchise agreement, provided such alternative procedures provide substantially equivalent safeguards for responsible construction
practices. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8D-11: COMPENSATION TO VILLAGE:
Each franchise granted under this Article is subject to the Village's right, which is expressly reserved, to annually fix a fair and reasonable
compensation to be paid for the property rights granted to the franchisee; provided, nothing in this Article shall prohibit the Village and a franchisee
from agreeing to the compensation to be paid. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8D-12: NONDISCRIMINATION:
A franchisee shall make its telecommunications services available to any customer within its franchise area who shall request such service, without
discrimination as to the terms, conditions, rates or charges for grantee's services; provided, however, that nothing in this Article shall prohibit a
franchisee from making any reasonable classifications among differently situated customers. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8D-13: SERVICE TO THE VILLAGE:
A franchisee shall make its telecommunications services available to the Village at its most favorable rate for similarly situated users, unless
otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8D-14: AMENDMENT OF GRANT:
A. A new franchise application and grant shall be required of any telecommunications carrier that desires to extend its franchise territory or to locate
its telecommunications facilities in public ways of the Village which are not included in a franchise previously granted under this Chapter.
B. If ordered by the Village to locate or relocate its telecommunications facilities in public ways not included in a previously granted franchise, the
Village shall grant a franchise amendment without further application. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8D-15: RENEWAL APPLICATIONS:
A grantee that desires to renew its franchise under this Article shall, not more than two hundred forty (240) days nor less than one hundred fifty
(150) days before expiration of the current franchise, file an application with the Village for renewal of its franchise which shall include the following
information:
A. The information required pursuant to Section 3-8D-2 of this Article.
B. Any information required pursuant to the franchise agreement between the Village and the grantee. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8D-16: RENEWAL DETERMINATIONS:
Within one hundred fifty (150) days after receiving a complete application under Section 3-8D-15 of this Article, the corporate authorities shall issue
a written determination granting or denying the renewal application in whole or in part, applying the following standards. If the renewal application is
denied, the written determination shall include the reasons for nonrenewal.
A. The financial and technical ability of the applicant.
B. The legal ability of the applicant.
C. The continuing capacity of the public ways to accommodate the applicant's existing facilities.
D. The applicant's compliance with the requirements of this Chapter and the franchise agreement.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 89/366
E. Applicable Federal, State and local telecommunications laws, rules and policies.
F. Such other factors as may demonstrate that the continued grant to use the public ways will serve the community interest. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-
1997)
3-8D-17: OBLIGATION TO CURE AS A CONDITION OF RENEWAL:
No franchise shall be renewed until any ongoing violations or defaults in the grantee's performance of the franchise agreement, or of the
requirements of this Chapter, have been cured, or a plan detailing the corrective action to be taken by the grantee has been approved by the
Village. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
ARTICLE E. CABLE COMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISE
3-8E-1: SHORT TITLE:
In addition to the provisions outlined in this Chapter, grantees are subject to the provisions and requirements outlined in this Article.
A. Grantees are subject to this Chapter in its entirety and the Cable Act.
B. If a conflict arises between the language in this Article and the rest of this Chapter, this Article shall prevail. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8E-2: PURPOSES:
The purposes of this Article are to:
A. Provide for the franchising and regulation of cable television systems within the Village; and
B. Provide for the payment of a fee and other valuable consideration to the Village for the use of Village streets and other public ways in the
construction and operation of cable television systems, and to compensate the Village for costs associated therewith; and
C. Provide for the regulation by the Village of the rates and fees to be charged by franchisees under this Article to the extent permitted by law; and
D. Provide for the development of cable television as a means to improve communication between and among the citizens and public institutions of
the Village; and
E. Provide remedies and prescribe penalties for violation of this Article and the franchises granted hereunder. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8E-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein, unless the context
clearly indicates that another meaning is intended. To the extent that the definitions contained in this Article are inconsistent with the definitions
contained in Article A of this Chapter, the definitions contained in this Article shall govern. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the
present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural
number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
AGENCY: The person, department or agency designated by the Village to act in specified matters related to cable television, or in the absence of
such designation, the President and Board of Trustees of the Village.
AUXILIARY SERVICES: Any communication service in addition to "regular subscriber services" including, but not limited to, services for which a
per-program or per-channel charge is made, pay TV, burglar alarm services, data or other electronic transmission services, facsimile reproduction
services, meter reading services and home shopping services, interactive two-way services and any other service utilizing any facility or equipment
of a cable television system operating pursuant to a franchise granted under this Article.
BOARD: The President and Board of Trustees of the Village.
CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM OR CATV SYSTEM: Any facility which is constructed in whole or in part in, on, under or over any highway or other
public place (whether or not said highways or other public place are within the Village of Inverness) and which is operated to perform for hire the
service of receiving and amplifying the signals broadcast by one or more television stations and redistributing such signals by wire, cable or other
means to members of the public residing or located within the Village of Inverness who subscribe to such service; except that such definition shall
not include: a) any system which serves fewer than fifty (50) subscribers, or b) any system which serves only the residents of one or more
apartment dwellings under common ownership, control or management, and commercial establishments located on the premises of such dwellings.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 90/366
CHANNEL: A band of frequencies, six (6) megahertz wide in the electromagnetic spectrum capable of carrying either one audio-visual television
signal and a few nonvideo signals, or a large number of nonvideo signals.
CONVERTER: An electronic device which converts signals to a frequency not susceptible to interference within the television receiver of a
subscriber, and by an appropriate channel selector also permits a subscriber to view all signals delivered at designated dial locations.
DEPRECIATED VALUE: The value as shown on the grantee's books and records of all the cable television system's tangible assets after
depreciation which shall be calculated to the end of the grantee's last fiscal year and which shall be based on a straight line depreciation method
over the term of the franchise with no salvage remaining at the end of the term. Said value shall not include "good will" or any value that grantee's
books and records attribute to the franchise.
FAIR MARKET VALUE: The price that a willing buyer would pay to a willing seller for a going business based on the system valuation and sale
multiples prevailing in the industry.
FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION OR FCC: The present Federal agency of that name as constituted by the Communication Act of
1934, or any successor agency created by the United States Congress.
FRANCHISE: The nonexclusive rights granted pursuant to this Article and pursuant to a franchise ordinance to construct and operate a cable
television system along the public ways in the Village, and is not intended to include any license or permit required for the privilege of transacting
and carrying on a business within the Village as may be required by other ordinances and laws of the Village.
FRANCHISE AREA: That area within the corporate limits of the Village of Inverness as designated by the grantee's respective franchise ordinance,
which area the grantee shall be obligated to serve pursuant to said franchise.
GRANTEE: Any natural person, partnership, domestic and foreign corporation, association, joint venture, or organization of any kind granted a
franchise by the Village pursuant to this Article and pursuant to a franchise ordinance and its lawful successor, transferee or assignee.
GROSS REVENUES: All revenue derived directly or indirectly from the operation or use of all or part of a cable television system franchised
pursuant to this Article by the grantee, its affiliates, subsidiaries, parents, and any person in which the grantee has a financial interest including, but
not limited to, revenue from regular subscriber service fees, auxiliary service fees, installation and reconnection fees, leased channel fees, converter
rentals, studio rental, production equipment and personnel fees, and advertising revenues; provided, however, that this shall not include any taxes
on services furnished by the grantee herein imposed directly upon any subscriber or user by the State, local or other governmental unit and
collected by the grantee on behalf of said governmental unit.
NET PROFIT: The amount remaining after deducting from gross revenues all of the actual, direct and indirect, expenses associated with operating
the cable television system including the franchise fee, interest, depreciation and Federal or State income taxes, to be determined in accordance
with generally accepted accounting principles consistently applied.
PERSONS: Any people, firms, corporations, associations or other legally recognized entities.
PUBLIC WAY: The surface, the air space above the surface, and the area below the surface of any public street, highway, lane, path, alley,
sidewalk, boulevard, drive, bridge, tunnel, park, parkways, waterways, utility easements or other public right of way hereafter held by the Village
which shall entitle the Village and the grantee to the use thereof for the purpose of installing and maintaining the grantee's cable television system.
No reference herein, or in any franchise, to the "public way" shall be deemed to be a representation or guarantee by the Village that its title to any
property is sufficient to permit its use for such purpose, and the grantee shall, by its use of such terms, be deemed to gain only such rights to use
property in the Village as the Village may have the undisputed right and power to give.
REGULAR SUBSCRIBER SERVICE: The distribution to subscribers of signals over the cable television system on all channels except those for
which a per-program or per-channel charge is made, two-way services, and those intended for reception by equipment other than a television
broadcast receiver.
SCHOOLS: All public, and private, elementary and secondary schools, junior colleges, colleges and universities which have been granted a
certificate of recognition by the Illinois State Board of Education, pursuant to section 2-3.25 of the Illinois School Code.
SUBSCRIBER: Any person who receives the regular subscriber service and/or any one or more of such other services as may be provided by the
grantee's cable television system, and does not further distribute such service(s).
TWO-WAY SERVICE: The subscriber or any other location shall have the capability to choose whether or not to respond immediately or by
sequential delay by utilizing any type of terminal equipment whatever, by pushbutton code, dial code, meter, voice, video including, but not limited
to, audio and video, electrical or mechanically produced signal, display and/or interrogation.
USER: A person or organization utilizing a system channel or system equipment and facilities for purposes of production and/or transmission of
material, as contrasted with receipt thereof in a subscriber capacity. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8E-4: REQUIREMENT OF A FRANCHISE:
No person, firm, company, corporation or association shall construct, install, maintain or operate a cable television system within the Village, or
within any other public property of the Village, unless a franchise has first been obtained pursuant to the provisions of this Article, and unless such
franchise is in full force and effect. Such franchise shall not take the place of any other license or permit which may legally be required of the
grantee in order to conduct such a business. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8E-5: FRANCHISE APPLICATIONS:
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 91/366
A. After receiving applications for a franchise, the Board, after considering financial, technical, programming and rate proposals, and the legal and
character qualifications of the applicants, may, by ordinance, grant one or more nonexclusive franchises creating a right to construct and operate
a cable television system within the public ways of the Village. Franchise(s) will be granted to the applicant(s) which in the Board's judgment may
best serve the public interest; provided, however, no provision of this Article shall be deemed or construed as to require the Board to grant a
franchise.
B. The application for a cable television franchise shall be submitted to the Village in such written form as may be required by the Village. The
Village may request facts and information the Village deems appropriate in the application form or at any time subsequent to the submission of
such application. The Board, by motion, may provide for a nonrefundable application fee in an amount determined by the Board, which amount
shall be used by the Village to offset direct expenses incurred in the franchising and evaluation procedures, including, but not limited to, staff
time and consulting assistance.
C. An applicant (grantee) to whom the Board grants a nonexclusive franchise shall, in addition to the nonrefundable fee specified hereinabove, pay
to the Village at the time the grantee files the written instrument specified in Section 3-8E-41 of this Article, an amount to be determined by the
Board to be used to offset all direct reasonable expenses actually incurred by the Village in granting the franchise, including, but not limited to, all
reasonable attorney fees incurred in the drafting and negotiating of this franchise. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8E-6: FRANCHISE TERM AND NONEXCLUSIVITY:
The term of an original franchise shall be fifteen (15) years from the date the franchise is accepted by the grantee. The term of a renewed franchise
shall be no more than fifteen (15) years, and may be less, in the discretion of the Village. No franchise granted pursuant to this Article shall give any
exclusive right to a grantee and every such franchise shall be deemed to reserve the right to grant other franchises to use and occupy the public
ways of the Village for cable television or any other purpose on such terms as the Village may then deem appropriate. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8E-7: NOTICE TO THE GRANTEE:
Except as provided in Section 3-8E-9 of this Article, the Village shall not take any final action involving the modification, renewal, revocation or
termination of the grantee's franchise unless the Village has: a) advised the grantee in writing, at least thirty (30) days prior to a meeting where such
action is contemplated, as to its time, place and purpose and b) published a notice, at least once, ten (10) days before the meeting in a newspaper
of general circulation within the Village; provided such notice need not be given of any adjourned or continued meeting where notice was given of
the original meeting. The grantee and any interested person shall be entitled to be heard at such meeting. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8E-8: FRANCHISE REVIEW AND MODIFICATION:
It shall be the policy of the Village to amend a franchise, upon application of the grantee, when necessary to enable the grantee to take advantage
of significant operational or technological advancements which will afford it an opportunity to more effectively, efficiently, or economically serve its
subscribers in the Village and the Village shall not unreasonably withhold such amendment. Further, within the term of the franchise, the Board may,
after notice and hearing as required in Section 3-8E-7 of this Article, adopt a resolution providing for reasonable and appropriate modifications in the
franchisee's franchise of a nature that would not result in effectively terminating same. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8E-9: PERFORMANCE EVALUATION SESSIONS:
A. The Village may hold performance evaluation meetings within thirty (30) days of each annual anniversary date of the grantee's award of the
franchise and, in addition, as may be required by Federal and State law. All such evaluation meetings shall be open to the public. Grantee shall
be solely responsible for notifying the Village, in writing, at least sixty (60) days in advance, of each of the specified performance evaluation
meetings, and no notice to the grantee pursuant to Section 3-8E-7 of this Article shall be required. The actual date of each such hearing shall be
established by the Village President. In the event that any such performance evaluation hearing is not held, for any reason, as scheduled, it shall
be held at such later date as the Village President shall select, after thirty (30) days' notice to grantee.
B. Special evaluation meetings may be held at any time during the term of the franchise at the request of the Agency, the Village or the grantee.
C. All evaluation meetings shall be open to the public and announced in a newspaper of general circulation in accordance with the notice
requirements of Section 3-8E-7 of this Article. Grantee shall notify subscribers of all evaluation meetings including any adjourned meetings by
announcement on the highest use origination channel on the system no less than three (3) times between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) P.M.
and nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. for five (5) consecutive days immediately preceding each meeting and in addition, on the Community Service
Channel at least once per hour for forty eight (48) hours before the meeting.
D. Topics which may be discussed at any scheduled or special evaluation session may include, but not be limited to, franchise fees, penalties,
applications of new technologies, system performance, services provided, programming offered, customer complaints, privacy, amendments to
this Article, modification to the franchise, judicial and FCC rulings, line extension policies and grantee or Village rules.
E. During a review and evaluation by the Village, the grantee shall fully cooperate with the Village and shall provide such information and
documents as the Village may need to reasonably perform its review.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 92/366
F. If at any time during its review, the Village determines that reasonable evidence exists of inadequate CATV system performance, including, but
not limited to, radio frequency interference from the CATV system to other electronic equipment in use in the Village, it may require the grantee
to perform tests and analyses directed toward the suspected inadequacies. The grantee shall fully cooperate with the Village in performing such
testing and shall prepare results and a report if requested within thirty (30) days after notice. Such report shall include the following information:
1. The nature of the complaint or problem which precipitated the special tests;
2. What system component was tested;
3. The equipment used and procedures employed in testing;
4. The method, if any, in which such complaint or problem was resolved;
5. Any other information pertinent to said tests and analyses which may be required;
6. The Village may require the test to be supervised at grantee's expense by a professional engineer to be approved by the Village not on the
permanent staff of the grantee. The engineer should sign all records of special tests and forward to the Village such records with a report
interpreting the results of the test and recommending actions to be taken.
G. The Village's right under this subsection shall be limited to requiring tests, analyses and reports covering specific subjects and characteristics
based on said complaints or other evidence when and under such circumstances as the Village has reasonable grounds to believe that the
complaints or other evidence require that tests be performed to protect the public against substandard CATV service system performance,
including, but not limited to, radio frequency interference. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8E-10: FRANCHISE RENEWAL:
To the extent applicable, cable television franchise renewal shall be governed by the Cable Act. Except to the extent specifically inconsistent with
the Cable Act, the following terms and provisions shall apply to any such franchise renewal:
A. The grantee shall be solely responsible for requesting the Village, in writing, to hold a special meeting of the Board or designated committee
thereof, the purpose of which will be to review the grantee's performance during the term of its franchise, to consider the adequacy of the
franchise from the standpoint of the Village, the grantee, and the Federal Communications Commission Rules for Cable Television, and to
determine the advisability of renewing the grantee's franchise. Unless the Board shall consent to some lesser notice, said request shall be made
not less than six (6) months prior to the franchise expiration date. Upon receipt of said request, the Village shall adopt a resolution setting forth
the time and place of the special meeting. If no request for renewal is made, the franchise shall expire according to its terms.
B. The Village shall hear any interested persons during said special meeting and shall determine whether or not the grantee did reasonably comply
with the terms and conditions imposed by this Article and the franchise. Notice of such meeting shall be given in accordance with Sections 3-8E-
7 and 3-8E-9 of this Article.
C. If the Village determines that the grantee has been in reasonable compliance with the terms and conditions imposed by this Article and the
franchise, the Village may renew the grantee's franchise by resolution, with any modifications it deems desirable, for a period of time not longer
than ten (10) years; provided renewal provisions and the renewal process shall be subject to the provisions of then applicable Federal rules and
statutes.
D. If the Village does not renew the franchise, the Village shall have an option, to the extent then permitted by existing law, to acquire the tangible
assets (plant, equipment and facilities) of the grantee's cable television system, or the option to require the sale of such assets to a succeeding
grantee on the terms hereinafter specified.
E. The Village shall have the right to recoup from the grantee all direct expenses incurred pursuant to consideration of renewal of the franchise to
the then existing grantee whether or not the franchise is renewed. The Village may require the grantee to remove or abandon all or a portion of
the tangible assets of the cable television system from the Village, it being recognized that it may be in the best interests of the Village and the
grantee to abandon certain facilities, such as underground cable, rather than removing the same. If the Village acquires the assets for Municipal
ownership, the amount paid for such assets shall be the replacement cost of the assets in place as adjusted for their remaining useful life. If the
Village requires sale of the assets to a succeeding grantee, the amount paid for such assets shall be in the fair market value of the assets, but
not including in such valuation the value as a going business and not including sales multiples, but not less than the replacement cost of the
assets in place as adjusted for their remaining useful life. Except as provided in Section 3-8E-13 of this Article, the Village's option to acquire the
assets of the grantee or to require the sale of such assets to a succeeding grantee or to require the removal of such assets from the Village must
be exercised within one year from the date of the franchise expiration, unless such period is extended with the consent of the grantee. (Ord. 97-
583, 3-11-1997)
3-8E-11: FRANCHISE REVOCATION PROCEDURE:
A. Whenever a grantee shall refuse, neglect or wilfully fail to construct, operate or maintain its cable television system or to provide service to its
subscribers in substantial accordance with the terms of this Article and the franchise or to comply with the conditions of occupancy of any public
way or to make required extensions of service, or to correct radio frequency interference, or shall in any other way substantially violate the terms
and conditions of this Article, the franchise, or any applicable rule or regulation, or practice any fraud or deceit upon the Village or its subscribers,
or fails to pay franchise fees when due, or if a grantee becomes insolvent, or unable to or unwilling to pay its debts, or is adjudged bankrupt, or
seeks relief under the bankruptcy laws, then the franchise may be revoked.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 93/366
B. In the event the Village or the Agency believes that grounds for revocation exist or have existed, the Village or Agency may notify a grantee, in
writing, setting forth the nature and facts of such noncompliance. If, within fifteen (15) days following delivery of such written notification, the
grantee has not furnished reasonably satisfactory evidence that corrective action has been taken or is being actively and expeditiously pursued,
or that the alleged violations did not occur, or that the alleged violations were beyond the grantee's control, the Agency shall thereupon refer the
matter to the Village.
C. Upon referral from the Agency or by its own motion, the Village may, following notice and hearing pursuant to Section 3-8E-7 of this Article,
revoke a franchise pursuant to this Section.
D. A grantee shall not be subject to revocation pursuant to this Section for any act or omission wherein such act or omission was beyond the
grantee's control, such as, but not limited to, strikes, war, acts of God, or governmental regulations. An act or omission shall not be deemed to
be beyond a grantee's control if committed, omitted, or caused by a corporation or other business entity which holds a controlling interest in the
grantee, whether held directly or indirectly. Further, the failure of a grantee to obtain financing, or to pay any money due from it to any person,
including the Village, for whatever reason, shall not be an act or omission which is beyond the grantee's control.
E. In the event that a franchise has been revoked by the Village, the Village shall have an option, to the extent then permitted by existing law, to
either purchase the tangible assets of the grantee's cable television system previously governed by the franchise at their "fair market value" as
defined herein, assign such rights to purchase to any person including a successor grantee, whether or not for consideration paid to the Village
and without consideration to the grantee, or to require the grantee to remove or abandon all or a portion of the tangible assets (plant, equipment
and facilities) of the cable television system from the Village, it being recognized that it may be in the best interests of the Village and the grantee
to abandon certain facilities, such as underground cable, rather than removing the same. Unless some later date is agreed to by the grantee and
except as provided in Section 3-8E-13 of this Article, such an option must be exercised within one year from the date of the revocation of the
franchise, or the entry of the final judgment by a court reviewing the question of the Village's revocation, or the entry of a final order upon appeal
of same, whichever is later.
F. The termination of a grantee's rights under a franchise shall in no way affect any other rights the Village may have under the franchise or under
any provision of law or ordinance. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8E-12: ARBITRARY AND CAPRICIOUS ACTION BY GRANTEE:
If a grantee arbitrarily and capriciously discontinues service to a substantial number of its subscribers, the grantee's franchise may be revoked by a
resolution of the Village following notice to the grantee and an opportunity to be heard. Notwithstanding the provision of Section 3-8E-7 of this
Article, notice to the grantee under this Section may be less than thirty (30) days. Provided further, the Village may seek appropriate judicial or other
relief, including specific performance, and/or may proceed to exercise its rights and powers as provided for herein. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8E-13: PROVISIONS FOR ARBITRATION:
In the event the Village pursues the option to purchase grantee's cable television system, or any of its assets, and the fair market value,
replacement cost or depreciated value cannot be agreed upon, said value shall be determined by a panel of arbitrators, which panel may be
requested by either the Board or the grantee no sooner than ninety (90) days after notice that the Village desires to purchase the system (unless
such 90 day provision is waived by both parties). The panel shall be composed of one arbitrator chosen by the Village, one arbitrator chosen by the
grantee, and a third arbitrator chosen by the first two (2). The expenses of the arbitration, including the fees of the arbitrators, shall be borne by the
parties in such manner as the arbitrators provide in their award, but in no event will the Village be obligated for more than one-half (1/2) the
expenses. The determination of a majority of the arbitrators shall be binding on the parties. The arbitrators shall follow the rules and procedures of
the American Arbitration Association except where in conflict with an express provision of this Article. The arbitration hearing shall take place at a
location to be determined by the Village, unless otherwise agreed to by the parties in writing. Notwithstanding any other timetable imposed by this
Article, the Village shall, within ninety (90) days following notice to it of the decision of the arbitrators, either withdraw any notice it may have given of
its intent or election to acquire the grantee's system or shall affirmatively accept the decision of the arbitrators and affirm its election to purchase the
system or assets. If the Village fails to accept the arbitrator's decision and affirm its election to purchase within the aforesaid ninety (90) day period,
the rights of the Village to purchase shall expire. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8E-14: TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP TO VILLAGE:
In those circumstances wherein the Village shall have elected to purchase ownership of a grantee's cable television system or any of its assets, the
Village shall, unless the grantee shall agree to some other terms, pay the price of such assets to the grantee within twelve (12) months following the
date upon which the election to purchase becomes irrevocable and title to the system or assets shall pass to the Village upon such payment. (Ord.
97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8E-15: GRANTEE'S OBLIGATION AS TRUSTEE:
A. At all times from the expiration or revocation of a franchise and until either: 1) a grantee transfers to the Village or other succeeding operator of
the system all of its rights, title and interest to all assets, real and personal, related to its cable television system or 2) the Village's right to either
acquire or assign its rights to acquire any of the grantee's assets expires without the Village having exercised such a right, whichever occurs
first, the grantee shall have a duty to such successor as a trustee holding such assets for the benefit of such successor and the grantee shall not
sell or otherwise dispose of any of the system assets nor shall the grantee make any physical, material or administrative operational changes
that would tend to: 3) degrade the quality of service to the subscribers, 4) decrease gross revenues, or 5) materially increase expenses, without
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 94/366
the expressed permission, in writing, of the Village or its assigns. The grantee, as such trustee, shall at all times operate the system in
accordance with terms of this Article and the terms of the franchise as if the franchise had not expired or had not been revoked. In the event the
grantee fails or refuses to operate the system as trustee, the Village shall have the option to name a successor trustee or operate the system
itself as a trustee in accordance with the terms of this Article and the terms of the franchise.
B. In the event of expiration or revocation of a franchise, this Section shall not be construed to give a grantee any vested or other franchise right, but
the right of the grantee in such circumstances shall exist only on a day-to-day basis until the transfer is effected.
C. As full compensation for its ownership interests and during this interim period, the grantee shall be entitled to receive a reasonable profit during
the period between the expiration or revocation of the franchise, as the case may be, and the transfer of the grantee's assets to the Village or a
successor.
D. Further, this Section shall in no way limit the power of the Village, upon expiration or revocation of a franchise, to require the grantee to cease all
operations whatsoever and/or remove its facilities, or otherwise exercise any rights the Village would otherwise have. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8E-16: FRANCHISE FEE:
A. The grantee, in consideration of the privilege granted under the franchise for the operation of a cable television system, and the expense of
regulation pursuant to the franchise incurred by the Village, shall pay to the Village five percent (5%) of its annual gross revenues during the
period of its operation under the franchise unless a lesser amount is specified in the franchise granted; or the maximum amount as may be set
from time to time by controlling Federal or State law, if such maximum is less than five percent (5%).
B. In addition to the payment of the franchise fee as provided in subsection A of this Section, the grantee shall pay, and by its acceptance of a
franchise shall be deemed to have specifically agreed that it will pay, all expenses reasonably incurred by the Village in providing consultation
and necessary approvals by the Village Engineer in connection with the construction of grantee's cable television system. Reimbursement to the
Village for said expenses shall be remitted by the grantee within thirty (30) days after grantee has been invoiced for such costs by the Village.
C. The grantee shall file with the Village, within thirty (30) days after the expiration of each of the grantee's fiscal quarters, a financial statement
clearly showing the gross revenues received by grantee during the preceding quarter, and shall simultaneously tender payment of the quarterly
portion of the franchise fee. The grantee shall also file, within one hundred twenty (120) days following the conclusion of the grantee's fiscal year,
a financial report prepared and audited annually by a certified public accountant acceptable to the Village, clearly showing the yearly total gross
revenues.
D. The Village shall have the right, consistent with the provisions of Section 3-8E-20 of this Article to inspect the grantee's income records, the right
of audit and the right to recompute any amounts determined to be payable under this Article. Any additional amount due the Village as a result of
the audit shall be paid within thirty (30) days following written notice to the grantee by the Village which notice shall include a copy of the audit
report. The cost of said audit shall be borne by the grantee if it is properly determined that the grantee's annual payment due to the Village for
the preceding year is increased thereby.
E. In the event that any franchise payment or computed amount is not made on or before the applicable dates heretofore specified, interest shall be
charged from such due date at the annual rate of twelve percent (12%) or two percent (2%) over the "Prime Rate" as published in the Wall Street
Journal (currently in the "Money Rates" column) as of the last day of each month, whichever is higher.
F. In the event the franchise is terminated for any reason, the grantee shall file with the Village, within thirty (30) days of the termination of service by
the grantee pursuant to the franchise of this Article, a financial statement clearly showing the gross revenues received by grantee since the end
of the previous fiscal quarter. The grantee shall pay the franchise fee due at the time such statement is filed or within thirty (30) days, whichever
is sooner. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8E-17: LIABILITY AND INDEMNIFICATION:
A. The grantee shall save and hold the Village, its corporate authorities, officers, boards, commission, employees and agents harmless from any
injury, claim, demand, suit, judgment, execution liability, debt damages or penalty (hereinafter referred to as "claims") arising out of, resulting
from, or alleged to arise out of or result from, the passage of this Article, the granting of a franchise, or the construction, erection, installation,
operation, maintenance of, or other activity connected with, the grantee's cable television system, whether such acts or omissions are those of
the grantee, the Village, or their officers, employees, agents or contractors and whether or not such act or omission is authorized, allowed or
prohibited by this Article or the grantee's franchise. These damages shall include, but not be limited to, penalties arising out of copyright
infringements and damages arising out of any failure by grantee to secure consents from the owners, authorized distributors or licensees of
programs to be delivered by the grantee's cable television system. These damages shall also include, but shall not be limited to, damages
arising out of any failure of grantee to obtain proper easements or consents across, over, upon, under or through private property for the purpose
of the construction of the grantee's cable television system or grantee's installation of individual service drops.
B. The grantee shall pay and by its acceptance of a franchise shall be deemed to have specifically agreed that it will pay all expenses incurred by
the Village in defending itself with regard to all claims mentioned in subsection A of this Section. These expenses shall include all out-of-pocket
expenses, such as attorney fees, and shall also include the reasonable value of any services rendered by any employees of the Village.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 95/366
C. The grantee shall maintain at its own expense, and by its acceptance of a franchise shall be deemed to have specifically agreed that it will
maintain throughout the term of such franchise, general comprehensive liability insurance insuring the Village, its officers, employees and
agents, and the grantee with regard to all claims mentioned in subsection A of this Section in the minimum amounts of:
1. One million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for bodily injuries or deaths resulting from any one accident;
2. One million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for property damage, including damage to Village property, resulting from any one accident;
3. Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) in excess liability umbrella coverage for all types of liability resulting from any one occurrence.
D. The grantee shall provide at its expenses, and by its acceptance of a franchise shall be deemed to have specifically agreed that it will maintain
throughout the term of such franchise, a letter of credit in favor of the Village, issued by a bank or savings and loan association which is
reasonably acceptable to the Village, in the amount of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00). When regular subscriber service is
available to all of the occupied dwelling units within the franchise area, as described in Section 3-8E-21 of this Article, the amount of the letter of
credit shall be reduced to a base amount of not less than thirty dollars ($30.00) per existing housing unit within the franchise area, but not more
than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). Said letter of credit shall be increased annually, beginning on December 1, 1989, to reflect the increase,
if any, on the preceding September 30, in the cost of living over that of September 30, 1988, based upon the Consumer Price Index for all Urban
Customers, Chicago, Illinois, All Items, as determined by the U.S. Department of Labor; provided that no such annual increase in the letter of
credit shall be required if the increase would be less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00); in the event that no increase is required in any year
or years by reason of the one thousand dollar ($1,000.00) minimum, any such increase which otherwise would have been required shall be
added to the required increase in the next subsequent year and such increased letter of credit shall be provided when the aggregate increases
are one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more. In addition, the Village reserves the right to review the sufficiency of the amount of the letter of
credit annually. Said letter of credit shall be conditioned that the grantee shall well and truly observe, fulfill and perform each term and condition
of this Article and its franchise and that in case of any breach of condition of the letter of credit, the full amount of the damages and costs thereof
shall be unilaterally recoverable from the bank issuing the same by the Village for all damages and costs, whether direct or indirect, resulting
from the failure of the grantee to well and faithfully observe and perform any provision of this Article or its franchise. Such damages and costs
shall be deemed to include, as a minimum and without limitation, the loss of expected payments of the franchise fee while the franchise is in
force and other valuable consideration given for the grant of the franchise, and such additional expenses as may be incurred by the Village as a
result of grantee's failure to comply with the obligations imposed by this Article and the franchise including, but not limited to, attorney fees and
costs if any action or proceeding, the cost of refranchising, and the cost of removal or abandonment of any property, or other costs which may be
in default, which costs shall be conclusively presumed to amount to a sum equal to at least the penal sum of such letter of credit. The Village
shall have no obligation to devote the proceeds of such letter of credit to the completion, connection, operation or removal of grantee's cable
television system, all of which shall remain the obligation of the grantee. The Village's right to recover under the letter of credit shall be in
addition to any other rights retained by the Village under this Article and other applicable law. The form of such letter of credit shall be approved
by the Village Attorney. Upon drawing on such letter of credit for any reason, the Village shall notify the grantee. The grantee shall, within ten
(10) days of the receipt of such notification, take all action required to restore or replace the letter of credit to the original full amount thereof prior
to being drawn upon. The rights reserved to the Village with respect to the letter of credit are in addition to all other rights of the Village, whether
reserved by this Article or the franchise or authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to such letter of credit
shall affect any other right the Village may have.
E. All insurance policies and letters of credit required by this Section shall contain a provision requiring at least thirty (30) days' written notice to both
the Village and the grantee of any cancellation, termination, or other expiration and shall provide that no such cancellation, termination or
expiration shall be effective prior to such notice. Each such policy and letter of credit must be approved by the Village President and Village
Attorney, and copies of such documents, along with written evidence of payment by the grantee of required premiums or fees shall be filed and
maintained with the Village Clerk, except such filing of insurance policies may be waived by the Village President and Village Attorney upon the
filing of certificates of insurance. Notices of renewal of any expiring policy or letter of credit shall be filed with the Village Clerk at least thirty (30)
days prior to the date of such expiration.
F. If the grantee proposes to secure a new insurance policy or letter of credit instead of renewing an existing policy or letter of credit, the grantee
shall, at least thirty (30) days prior to the expiration date of any such existing insurance policy or letter of credit, submit to the Village President
and Village Attorney a copy of the proposed new policy or letter of credit, and such proposed new policy or letter of credit shall become effective
only upon the expiration date of such expiring policy or letter of credit if the President and Board of Trustees have approved the terms and
coverage of the said proposed new policy or letter of credit. The grantee shall comply with all applicable provisions of this Section as to any such
new policy or letter of credit. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8E-18: TRANSFER OF FRANCHISE:
A. A franchise granted under this Article shall be a privilege to be held in personal trust by the grantee. It shall not be assigned, transferred, sold or
disposed of, transferred in trust, pledged, in whole or in part, by voluntary sale, merger, consolidation or otherwise or by forced or involuntary
sale, without prior consent of the Village expressed by resolution and then on only such conditions as may therein be prescribed. Any sale,
transfer or assignment not made according to the procedures set forth in this Article shall render the franchise void. The sale, transfer or
assignment in bulk of the major part of the tangible assets of the grantee shall be considered an assignment and shall be subject to the
provisions of this Section.
B. Any sale, transfer or assignment authorized by the Village shall be made by a bill of sale or similar document, an executed copy of which shall be
filed with the Village within thirty (30) days after any such sale, transfer or assignment. The Village shall not withhold its consent unreasonably;
provided, however, the proposed assignee agrees to comply with all the provisions of this Article and the franchise and reasonable amendments
thereto, and must, at a minimum, satisfy the legal, financial, technical and character qualifications required by this Article and have a net worth at
least equal to grantee and any guarantor of grantee's obligations.
C. Prior approval of the Village shall be required where ownership or control of more than twenty percent (20%) of the right of control of the grantee
is acquired during the term of the franchise in any transaction or series of transactions by a person or group of persons acting in concert, none of
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 96/366
whom owned or controlled twenty percent (20%) or more of such right of control, singularly or collectively on the effective date of the franchise.
By its acceptance of this franchise the grantee specifically grants and agrees that any such acquisition occurring without prior approval of the
Village shall render the franchise void.
D. The consent of the Village to any sale, transfer, lease, trust, mortgage or other instrument of hypothecation shall not constitute a waiver or
release of any of the rights of the Village under this Article and the franchise. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8E-19: SUBSCRIBER AND USER FEES:
A. By accepting a franchise granted pursuant to the terms and conditions imposed by this Article, and pursuant to the terms of such franchise, the
grantee agrees that the Village shall have the authority and right to establish, in a reasonable manner, the grantee's fees for regular subscriber
service, and all other subscriber and user services, if, and to the extent, permitted by law or FCC rules and regulations.
B. The grantee shall not, with regard to fees, discriminate or grant any preference or advantage to any person or group of persons within the Village.
C. The grantee shall be required to notify in writing each new subscriber of all applicable fees and charges for providing cable television service.
D. Grantee may, at its own discretion, in a nondiscriminatory manner, waive, reduce or suspend connection fees or monthly service fees for
promotional purposes.
E. Except as may be otherwise provided in a franchise ordinance, a subscriber shall have the right to have its service disconnected without charge,
which shall include the removal of any equipment owned by the grantee from the subscriber's residence. Such disconnection shall be made as
soon as practicable and in no case later than thirty (30) days following written notice to the grantee of same. No grantee shall enter into any
agreement with a subscriber which imposes any charge following disconnection of service, except for reconnection and subsequent monthly or
periodic charges, and those charges shall be no greater than charges for new customers. This Section shall not prevent a grantee from refusing
service to any person because the grantee's prior accounts with that person remain due and owing.
F. Except as may be otherwise provided in a franchise, a grantee may offer service which requires advance payment of periodic service charges for
no more than one year in advance subject to the conditions contained in this subsection. A subscriber shall have the right, at any time, to have
its service disconnected without charge and with a refund of unused service charges paid to the customer within thirty (30) days from the date of
service. Rate increases shall not be effective with respect to any subscriber until after the expiration of any period for which advance payment
has been accepted by the grantee. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8E-20: BOOKS AND RECORDS:
A. A grantee shall, 1) within thirty (30) days following the acceptance of a franchise, and 2) at least yearly thereafter, and 3) within thirty (30) days of
the change of ownership of three percent (3%) or more of any class or series of the outstanding voting stock or equivalent ownership interest of
a grantee, furnish the Village a list, showing the names and addresses of persons owning three percent (3%) or more of any class or series of
the outstanding voting stock or equivalent ownership interest of the grantee, together with a roster of the grantee's officers and directors (or
equivalent managerial personnel) and their addresses, and if fifty percent (50%) or more of grantee's voting stock is owned by another
corporation, such information as to such other corporation.
B. A grantee shall maintain books and records of its operations within the Village to show the following in sufficient detail, consistent with generally
accepted accounting principles:
1. Total revenues, by service category.
2. Operating expenses, categorized by general and administrative expenses, technical expenses, and programming expenses, and overhead
where applicable.
3. Capital expenditures, to include capitalized interest and overhead, if any.
4. Depreciation expenses, by category.
C. A grantee shall maintain such books and records for the franchise area specified in the franchise separately from any other operations; provided,
however, that any expenses or expenditures which apply to both the system in said franchise area and any other operations shall be reasonably
allocated between all such operations, consistent with generally accepted accounting principles. Such books and records shall be retained, in
any reasonable form, for a period of not less than seven (7) years, or as required for Internal Revenue Service audit requirements, whichever is
longer. The Village shall have the right to extend the retention period through the term of any renewed franchise.
D. The books and records of the grantee's operation within the Village shall be made available to the Village at a local office during normal business
hours, for inspection and audit by the Village within thirty (30) days after such request has been made.
E. Copies of the grantee's schedule of charges, contract or application forms for subscriber and user services, policy regarding the processing of
subscriber complaints, delinquent subscriber disconnect and reconnect procedures and any other terms and conditions adopted as the grantee's
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 97/366
policy in connection with its subscribers or users shall be filed with the Village and shall be made available for inspection by the public in the
grantee's local office.
F. Each grantee shall submit to the Village copies of all decisions, correspondence and actions by any Federal, State and local courts, regulatory
agencies and other governmental bodies relating to its telecommunications operations within the Village.
1. Copies of the grantee's schedule of charges, contract or application forms, subscriber user services, policies regarding the processing of
subscriber complaints, delinquent subscriber disconnect and reconnect procedures and any other terms and conditions adopted as the
grantee's policy in connection with subscriber or user services shall be filed with the Village and updated as necessary, and shall be made
available for public inspection in the grantee's local office.
2. Copies of all correspondence, petitions, reports, applications and other documents filed by the grantee with Federal or State agencies having
jurisdiction over telecommunications, or the same received from said agencies, shall be furnished simultaneously to the Village by the grantee.
3. Within ten (10) days of a written request from the Village, each grantee shall furnish the Village with information sufficient to demonstrate:
a. That the grantee has complied with all requirements of this Title.
b. That all Municipal sales, message and/or telecommunications taxes or applicable franchise fees due the Village in connection with the
telecommunications services and facilities provided by the grantee have been properly collected and paid by the grantee.
c. In addition to the annual filing required in this Title, all books, records, maps and other documents, maintained by the grantee with respect to
its facilities within the public ways, shall be made available for inspection by the Village at reasonable times and intervals. (Ord. 97-583, 3-
11-1997)
3-8E-21: FRANCHISE AREAS AND SCHEDULE:
Grantee shall provide service to every potential subscriber within the franchise area within twelve (12) months from the date of the acceptance by
grantee of a franchise, or as otherwise noted in the franchise ordinance. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8E-22: EXTENSION OF SERVICE TO NEWLY ANNEXED OR DEVELOPING AREAS:
Whenever the density of dwelling units in newly annexed areas of the franchise area, or in newly established subdivisions in the franchise area,
equals or exceeds twenty (20) dwelling units per cable route mile, service will be provided, at the same rates as other areas of the Village, within six
(6) months (weather permitting), provided that grantee will not be required to service a new subdivision until fifty percent (50%) of the homes in such
subdivision, or in any platted unit of the subdivision, have been occupied, whenever the density of dwelling units of such areas is less than twenty
(20) dwelling units per cable route mile, connection and service rates may be charged which reflect the additional costs of such service. (Ord. 97-
583, 3-11-1997)
3-8E-23: INDIVIDUAL SERVICE DROPS:
A. Grantee shall extend and make cable television service available to any potential subscriber within the franchise area at the standard connection
charge, if the connection to such subscriber would require no more than a standard two hundred fifty foot (250') aerial or buried drop line from
the closer of any public way, or any trunk or feeder cable.
B. With respect to requests for connection requiring an aerial or buried drop line in excess of such two hundred fifty feet (250'), grantee shall extend
and make available cable television service to such subscribers at a connection charge not to exceed the actual installation costs incurred by the
grantee for the distance exceeding two hundred fifty feet (250'), but not to exceed fifty cents ($0.50) per foot. However, there shall be no charge
for aerial or buried drop lines to the Village Hall or the Inverness Fieldhouse, regardless of the distance of such drop line, if same are within the
franchise area. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8E-24: SYSTEM DESCRIPTION AND SERVICE:
The minimum capacity for a cable system shall be 450 MHz with at least fifty (50) downstream channels. The grantee shall, as part of the
acceptance of a franchise, provide the Village with a written description of the cable system within the Village, including technical characteristics,
channel capacity, channel carriage, and a strand map. The grantee shall provide the Village with an updated description, upon request or whenever
substantial changes in the system are made. Grantees shall, to the maximum extent possible, assign as dial locations for local broadcast stations
carried on the system numbers available by either a cable-ready television or a converter, which correspond to their respective FCC-assigned TV
station call numbers unless the station has negotiated a more favorable position in the channel lineup.
A. The cable television system to be installed by grantees shall comply in all respects with the requirements set forth in the FCC's Rules for Cable
Television including applicable amendments thereto, provided, however, that nothing contained herein shall be construed to prohibit grantees
from proposing to comply with more rigid technical performance requirements, in which case the grantees' application shall be incorporated by
reference in the franchise, and will be binding on grantees. If the FCC should delete said requirements, the Village hereby reserves the right to
amend this Article and any franchise ordinance to incorporate similar standards and every franchise granted pursuant to this Article shall be
subject to such reserved power whether or not expressly so conditioned.
B. Public access, educational access, local government access and leased access (PEG) channels shall be provided as follows:
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 98/366
1. Use Of Channels: Grantee shall allow the use of its designated channels for such programming.
2. Access Channels: Grantees shall provide access channels on the subscriber network for the exclusive use of designated institutions.
a. The number and use of said channels will be prescribed in the franchise agreements.
b. The Village shall determine the channel allocations for such designated institutions.
c. Such channels shall be available on the lowest tier of basic service.
d. The grantees shall make every reasonable effort to assign PEG (Public, Educational, Government) channels to the same channels
assigned by other providers within each municipality, and in contiguous municipalities.
e. The grantees shall list the specific assigned user on each channel in every channel line-up. A new channel chart shall be issued to
subscribers by bill stuffer in the billing to be received prior to any changes.
f. PEG channels may not be reassigned without forty five (45) days' notice to the Village. The franchisee shall notify subscribers of any PEG
channel reassignments by bill messages or bill stuffer in the billing to be received prior to the change, and PEG channels may not be
reassigned more than once in any twelve (12) month period.
g. The grantees shall be responsible for any established costs incurred by the Village due to a change in channel assignment for any PEG
channel which was not requested by the user. These costs may include stationery, business cards and public notices. The grantees will
incur these costs for no more than a one month period. The grantees shall discuss reimbursement of special promotional items, such as Tshirts
or other special items, with the affected user on a case-by-case basis.
3. Compliance With Operating Rules: The grantee shall have control over the content of access cablecast programs and shall take appropriate
steps to ensure compliance with the operating rules described herein. Grantee's failure to comply with such operating rules shall constitute a
violation of this Article.
4. Public Access Channels: The public access channel(s) shall be made available to residents of the Village on a first-come, first-served,
nondiscriminatory basis, consistent with the goal of the maximum availability of access, free of charge. No charges shall be made for the
replay of user-supplied tapes which are not longer than fifteen (15) minutes in length and are in a form compatible with the grantee's playback
facilities. However, no one may use the public access channel free of charge more often than once each twenty four (24) hours. Grantee shall
promote public access channel programs on the community service channel. The grantee shall adopt operating rules for the public access
channel(s), to be filed with the Village prior to the activation of the channel(s), designed to prohibit the presentation of: any advertising material
designed to promote the sale of commercial products or services (including advertising by or on behalf of candidates for public office); lottery
information; and obscene or indecent matter, as well as rules requiring first-come nondiscriminatory access, and rules permitting public
inspection of a complete record of the names and addresses of all persons or groups requesting access time. Such a record shall be retained
for a period of two (2) years.
5. Education Access Channels: The education access channel(s) shall be made available for the use of schools free of charge. The grantee
shall adopt operating rules for the education access channel(s) to be filed with the Village prior to activation of the channel(s), designed to
prohibit the presentation of: any advertising material designed to promote the sale of commercial products or services (including advertising by
or on behalf of candidates for public office); lottery information; and obscene or indecent matter, as well as a rule permitting public inspection
of a complete record of the names and addresses of all persons or groups requesting access time. Such a record shall be retained for a period
of two (2) years.
6. Government Access Channels: The local government access channel(s) shall be made available for the use of the Village or such other unit
of local government as shall be designated by the Village free of charge.
7. Leased Access Channels: The leased access channel(s) as specified in the franchise application shall be made available to leased access
users. Priority shall be given part-time users on at least one channel. The grantee shall, to the extent permitted by law, adopt operating rules
for the channel(s), to be filed with the Village prior to activation of the channel(s), designed: to prohibit the presentation of lottery information,
to the extent such information is prohibited by State law; any obscene matter; to require nondiscriminatory access, sponsorship identification,
an appropriate rate schedule and public inspection of a complete record of the names and addresses of all persons or groups requesting time.
Such complete records shall be retained until the next scheduled performance evaluation session described in Section 3-8E-9 of this Article or
for a longer period as determined by the Village.
C. Within two (2) years of date of acceptance by grantee of the franchise ordinance, or within six (6) months after the establishment within the
franchise area of the public building as described herein, grantee will provide to the Village in the Village Hall, if same is located in grantee's
franchise area, without charge, modulators, a CRT with keyboard, and reasonable training and technical assistance in the use of such
equipment in order to enhance the usage thereof by the Village. Grantee shall maintain and repair said equipment without charge, and shall
replace such equipment without charge when it is not feasible to continue to maintain and repair the same. Grantee also shall provide, within two
(2) years from the date of acceptance by grantee of the franchise ordinance, one service outlet activated for regular subscriber service to the
Village Hall and one to the Inverness Fieldhouse.
D. The grantee shall not permit the transmission of any programming in violation of any Federal, State or local law. Except as specifically modified
by the franchise ordinance, to the extent not inconsistent with Federal law, grantee shall provide, without charge, each subscriber's television set
with a lockout capability to limit the programs available to viewers. Such lockout shall have the capability of being changed at no charge to the
subscriber.
E. All reasonable steps shall be taken by the grantee as necessary from time to time to minimize signal leakage and/or any adverse effects of such
leakage from the CATV system consistent with the then existing state of technology. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8E-25: OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS AND RECORDS:
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 99/366
A. 1. Grantee shall construct, operate, and maintain the cable television system in full compliance with the rules and regulations, including
applicable amendments, of the Federal Communications Commission and all other applicable Federal, State or local laws and regulations,
including the latest editions of the National Electrical Safety Code and the National Fire Protection Association National Electrical Code. The
cable television system and all its parts shall be subject to inspection by the Village, and the Village hereby reserves the right to review grantee's
construction plans prior to the commencement of construction. The Village shall not, however, be required to make inspections or approve the
grantee's system and plans, and specifically disclaims such obligation; the grantee shall be solely responsible for taking all steps necessary to
assure compliance with such laws and regulations and the safety of its system as installed.
2. The distribution of all signals throughout the system, including the combined degradation effects of both upstream and downstream carriage,
no matter where the signals originate or are terminated, shall meet the applicable industry standards set for the delivery method being used.
a. All applicable regulatory standards shall be observed as if each and every one were stated herein. In the event that enforcement of said
regulatory standards is discontinued or the regulatory agency charged with enforcement is dissolved, the standards shall remain in full force
and effect until the Village exercises its right hereunder to amend the franchise agreement to require such standards as it shall deem
necessary.
b. In the areas where standards have not been developed, the system shall operate at the equipment manufacturer's specifications until
measurable standards have been developed. The grantee shall be obligated to ensure that the signal quality is of the highest practicable
level achievable for the components in question. For the first year that newer equipment for which no standards have been developed is in
use, the grantee will report monthly on the reliability and performance of said equipment. Thereafter, if the equipment is functioning within
the levels anticipated, the grantee may test and report on the same schedule as the rest of the communications system.
B. Grantee shall maintain a location, within the Village or within ten (10) miles of the Village limits, which shall be open and accessible to the public
during normal business hours to allow payment of bills. Grantee shall employ an operator or maintain a telephone answering service twenty four
(24) hours per day, each day of the year with a toll free number, to receive subscriber complaints and to dispatch assistance in the case of any
emergency or major system malfunction affecting a number of subscribers.
C. Grantee shall design, construct, operate, and maintain the system at all times so that signals carried are delivered to subscribers without material
degradation in quality (within the limitations imposed by the technical state-of-the-art).
D. Copies of all correspondence, petitions, reports, applications and other documents filed by grantee with Federal or State agencies having
appropriate jurisdiction in matters affecting cable television operation within the Village or received from said agencies shall be furnished
simultaneously to the Village by grantee.
E. In the case of any emergency or disaster, the grantee shall, upon request of the Village President or his designee, make available its facilities to
the Village, without cost, for emergency use during the emergency or disaster period.
F. The grantee shall comply with the recommended Cable Industry Customer Service Standards dated February 14, 1990, as promulgated and
published by the National Cable Television Association, three (3) copies of which are on file with the Village Clerk and which standards are
hereby made a part hereof. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8E-26: TESTS AND PERFORMANCE MONITORING:
A. 1. The grantee shall conduct appropriate monitoring and measurements utilizing appropriate measuring devices, including devices capable of
measuring signal leakage in microvolts/meter, to ensure that the system is performing within the applicable standards. When such monitoring or
measurements indicate that performance has fallen below these standards, corrective action shall be taken to restore proper performance. All
channels on the system shall be monitored daily by a visual inspection of the picture and listening to the audio for general performance and
audio level balance.
a. At a minimum, measurements shall be made monthly at the headend, and quarterly at two (2) randomly selected, longest cascades in each
community to ensure that all channels on the system are operating properly. Measurement of all operational parameters shall be made
semi-annually at the headend and four (4) geographically divided locations, at the ends of the longest cascades in each community, on all
channels.
b. If the Village suspects an area is not performing in accordance with the applicable standards, they may order the grantee to test in that
location within forty eight (48) hours' notice from the Village.
c. Newly constructed sections shall be tested within one week of activation, and results reported to the Village.
d. Grantee shall submit copies of its federally required proof-of-performance testing within thirty (30) days of its completion.
2. Not later than ninety (90) days after any new or substantially rebuilt portion of the system is made available for service to subscribers,
technical performance tests shall be conducted by the grantee to demonstrate full compliance with the technical standards applicable pursuant
to subsections 3-8E-24A and 3-8E-25C of this Article. Such tests shall be performed by, or under the supervision of, a qualified registered
professional engineer or an engineer with proper training and experience. A copy of the report shall be submitted to the Village, describing test
results, instrumentation, calibration, and test procedures, and the qualifications of the engineer responsible for the tests. At the option of the
Village, additional tests may be required at the expense of the grantee conducted by an independent registered professional engineer.
B. System monitor test points shall be established at or near the output of the last amplifier in the longest feeder line, at or near trunk line
extremities, or at the locations to be specified in the franchise. Such periodic tests shall be made at the test points as shall be required by the
Village.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 100/366
C. At any time after commencement of service to subscribers, the Village may require additional reasonable tests, including full or partial repeat
tests, different test procedures, or tests involving a specific subscriber's terminal, at the grantee's expense to the extent such tests may be
performed by the grantee's employees utilizing its existing facilities and equipment; provided, however, that the Village reserves the right to
conduct its own tests upon reasonable notice to the grantee and if noncompliance is found, the expense thereof shall be borne by the grantee.
The Village will endeavor to arrange its request for such special tests so as to minimize hardship or inconvenience to grantee or to the
subscriber.
D. A copy of the annual performance tests report required by the Federal Communications Commission shall be submitted to the Village within thirty
(30) days of its completion.
E. The Village shall have the right to employ, at grantee's expense, qualified consultants if reasonably necessary to assist in the administration of
this or any other section of this Article. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8E-27: SERVICE, ADJUSTMENT AND COMPLAINT PROCEDURE:
A. 1. The grantee shall employ a professional engineer or equivalent, and a service and repair force of competent technicians, capable of
maintaining the system in accordance with the technical performance and service requirements in the franchise agreement.
2. Grantee shall establish a maintenance service capable of locating and correcting major system malfunctions promptly except for
circumstances beyond the grantee's control such as strikes, acts of God, wars, riots and civil disturbances. Said maintenance service shall be
available at all hours, to correct such major system malfunctions affecting a number of subscribers.
B. A listed local telephone number or toll free number shall be made available to subscribers for service calls at any time of the day or night.
Whenever service to more than four (4) subscribers is unintentionally interrupted, grantee shall fully restore such service to all the affected
subscribers within six (6) hours of the first report of the service interruption and whenever unintentional service interruptions affect four (4) or less
subscribers, service to such subscribers shall be fully restored within forty eight (48) hours of the first report of the service interruption. In the
event that service is not restored within said times, upon request the subscriber or subscribers affected will be given credit on the next regular bill
for one full day for each day or part day when service is not so restored. Appropriate records shall be made of service calls showing when and
what corrective action was completed. Such records shall be available to the Village during normal business hours and retained in grantee's files
until the next scheduled performance evaluation session described in Section 3-8E-9 of this Article or for a longer period as directed by the
Village. A summary of such calls shall be prepared by the grantee and submitted to the Village annually, beginning twelve (12) months after
service is provided to the first subscriber.
C. The grantee shall furnish each subscriber at the time service is installed written instructions that clearly set forth procedures for placing a service
call, or requesting an adjustment. Said instructions shall also include the name, address and telephone number of the Agency or other
designated employee of the Village and a reminder that the subscriber can call or write the Agency or other designated employee for information
regarding terms and conditions of the grantee's franchise if the grantee fails to respond to the subscriber's request for installation, service or
adjustment within a reasonable period of time.
D. In the event a subscriber does not obtain a satisfactory response or resolution to his request for service or an adjustment within a reasonable
period of time, he may advise the Agency or other designated employee in writing of his dissatisfaction. The Agency or other designated
employee shall have authority to investigate any subscriber or user complaint or request for adjustment and to order corrective action as shall be
appropriate. The Village may require grantee to establish rules and procedures regulating complaint resolution in the franchise agreement.
Nothing herein shall limit the rights of any subscriber or other person to bring an action against grantee in a court of law.
E. The grantee shall interrupt system service after seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and before one o'clock (1:00) A.M. only with good cause and for the
shortest time possible and, except in emergency situations, only after cablecasting notice of service interruption at least twenty four (24) hours in
advance of the service interruption. Service may be interrupted between one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. for routine
testing, maintenance, and repair, with notification, on any day except Saturday or Sunday, or the day following a legal holiday. (Ord. 97-583, 3-
11-1997)
3-8E-28: STREET OCCUPANCY:
A. Grantee shall not construct or install any new, different, or additional poles, conduits, or other facilities whether on the public way or on privately
owned property within the Village until the written approval of the Village, and, if necessary, of the property owner is obtained. Such approval
shall not be unreasonably withheld by the Village. No location of any pole, wire-holding structure or other facility of the grantee shall be a vested
interest and such poles, structures and facilities shall be removed, relocated or modified by the grantee at its own expense whenever the Village
or other governmental authority determines that the public convenience would be enhanced thereby. Nothing herein or in any franchise shall be
construed to entitle grantee to the use of any property other than the public way.
B. The Village shall be entitled to make use of the grantee's poles and other wire-holding structures so long as such use does not unreasonably
interfere with grantee's operations.
C. Where a public utility serving the Village desires to make use of the poles or other wire-holding structures of the grantee but agreement therefor
with the grantee cannot be reached, the Village may require the grantee to permit such use for such consideration and upon such terms as the
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 101/366
Village shall determine to be just and reasonable, if the Village determines that the use would enhance the public convenience and would not
unduly interfere with the grantee's operations.
D. All transmission lines, equipment and structures shall be installed and located in compliance with all applicable local ordinances and so as to
cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any public way and at all times shall be
kept and maintained in a safe, adequate, and substantial condition, and in good order and repair, consistent with the provisions of subsection F
of this Section. The grantee shall at all times employ reasonable care and shall install and maintain in use commonly accepted methods and
devices for preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries, or nuisances to the public. Suitable barricades, flags,
lights, flares, or other devices shall be used at such times and places as are required by applicable Village ordinances and at such additional
times and places as are reasonably required for the safety of all members of the public. Any poles or other fixtures shall be maintained in such a
manner as not to interfere with the usual travel or other existing or projected uses of such public way. The grantee shall at all times comply with
any and all rules and regulations enacted or to be enacted by the Village with reference to construction activity in public ways.
E. Grantee shall remove, replace, or modify at its own expense, the installation of any of its facilities when directed to do so by the Village.
F. All installations of grantee's facilities within public ways and on private property in the Village shall be underground except where aboveground
installations have been specifically approved in advance by the Village President.
G. In the event of disturbance of any public way, private property or improvement on either of them by the grantee, it shall, at its own expense and in
a manner approved by the Village or other appropriate governmental authority and the owner, replace and restore such public way, private
property or improvement in as good a condition as before the work causing such disturbance was done. In the event the grantee fails to perform
such replacement or restoration the Village or the owner shall have the right to do so at the sole expense of the grantee. Demand for payment to
the Village or owner for such replacement or restoration shall be submitted to the grantee in writing. Whenever it is necessary for grantee to
install its facilities under a public way or private driveway, this shall be done by boring under the public way or private driveway except with
approval of the Village President or his designee.
H. Whenever, in case of emergency, it becomes necessary in the judgment of the Village to remove or damage any of the grantee's facilities, no
charge shall be made by the grantee against the Village for restoration and repair.
I. At the request of any person holding a valid building moving permit issued by the Village or other appropriate governmental authority and upon at
least forty eight (48) hours' notice, grantee shall temporarily raise, lower, or cut its wires as may be necessary to facilitate such move. The direct
expense of such temporary changes, including standby time, shall be paid by the permit holder, and grantee shall have the authority to require
payment in advance.
J. Grantee shall not cut or trim any tree, shrub or vegetation on any public property or within any public way without first obtaining specific written
authorization from the Village. Any such work shall be done at grantee's expense and shall be subject to the supervision and direction of the
Village. Grantee shall not cut or trim any tree or shrub on private property without first obtaining specific written authorization from the owner.
(Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8E-29: CONSTRUCTION SCHEDULE AND REPORTS:
A. Upon accepting the franchise, grantee shall, within sixty (60) days, file the documents required to obtain all necessary Federal, State and local
licenses, permits and authorizations required for the conduct of its business, and shall submit monthly reports to the Village on progress in this
respect until all such documents are in hand. Failure of the grantee to pursue all necessary steps to secure the aforementioned authorizations
with due diligence shall constitute a substantial violation of this Article.
B. Franchise applications shall include a schedule for construction of the cable television system, including a timetable for commencement of cable
television service to subscribers. Said schedule shall be incorporated into the franchise ordinance and shall be enforceable as to the grantee
under the provisions of this Article.
C. Each grantee shall fill all requests for CATV service, once facilities are in place consistent with the proposed schedule for service, within thirty
(30) days after the date of each request. A record of all service requests shall be kept until the next scheduled performance evaluation session
described in Section 3-8E-9 of this Article or for a longer period as determined by the Board and shall be available for public inspection at the
local office of the grantee during regular office hours.
D. Within sixty (60) days after accepting the franchise, grantee shall furnish the Village a detailed construction schedule and map setting forth target
dates by areas for commencement of service to subscribers. The schedule and map shall be updated whenever substantial changes become
necessary.
E. Every three (3) months after the start of a construction, grantee shall furnish the Village a report on progress of construction until complete. The
report shall include a map that clearly defines the areas wherein regular subscriber service is available. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8E-30: PROTECTION OF PRIVACY:
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 102/366
A. Grantee shall not permit the transmission of any signal, aural, visual or digital, including "polling" the channel selection, from any subscriber's
premises without first obtaining informed consent of the subscriber which shall not have been obtained from the subscriber as a condition of any
service for which transmission is not an essential element. The request for such consent shall be contained in a separate document, which
specially enumerates and describes the transmissions being authorized and includes a prominent statement that the subscriber is authorizing
the permission in full knowledge of its provision and shall be revocable at any time by the subscriber without penalty of any kind whatsoever.
This provision is not intended to prohibit the use or transmission of signals useful only for the control or measurement of system performance or
used for billing subscribers.
B. Grantee shall not permit the installation of any special termination equipment in any subscriber's premises that will permit transmission from
subscriber's premises of two-way services utilizing aural, visual or digital signals without first obtaining written permission of the subscriber and
the Village as provided in subsection A of this Section.
C. Grantee, or any of its agents or employees, shall not, without the specific written authorization of the subscriber involved, as provided in
subsection A of this Section, sell or otherwise make available to any party any information which identifies the viewing habits or responses of
individual subscribers. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8E-31: PROHIBITION FROM ENGAGING IN RADIO AND TELEVISION SALES OR SERVICE:
The grantee, its subsidiaries and affiliates are specifically prohibited from engaging directly or indirectly in the sale or leasing of television receivers,
radio receivers, or television or radio parts, except such parts and accessories required for any type of cable connections, such as converters and
connection plugs and accessories, individually or with any person, anywhere in the Village, whether or not for a fee or charge, and is further
prohibited from engaging in any type of repair service to television receivers or radio receivers. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8E-32: AREAWIDE INTERCONNECTION OF CATV SYSTEMS:
A. Grantee shall interconnect access channels and/or local origination channels of its CATV system with all other CATV systems in adjacent areas
as provided in the franchise ordinance.
B. Grantee shall cooperate with any entity established for the purpose of regulating, financing or otherwise providing for the interconnection of CATV
systems.
C. The Village may require a grantee to provide local origination equipment that is compatible with that used by other CATV systems within the
adjacent areas, provided that if so required to provide such compatible equipment, the grantee may increase rates for subscriber service to
reflect any substantial additional cost to the grantee.
D. Grantee shall make every reasonable effort to cooperate with cable television franchise holders in contiguous communities in order to provide
cable service in areas outside the grantee's franchise area. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8E-33: LIMITS ON GRANTEE'S RECOURSE:
A. Grantee shall have no recourse against the Village for any loss, expense or damage resulting from the terms and conditions of this Article or the
franchise or because of the Village's granting or enforcement thereof nor for the Village's failure to have the authority to grant the franchise. The
grantee expressly agrees that upon its acceptance of the franchise it does so relying upon its own investigation and understanding of the power
and authority of the Village to grant said franchise.
B. The grantee, by accepting the franchise, acknowledges that it has not been induced to accept same by any promise, verbal or written, by or on
behalf of the Village or by any third person regarding any term or condition of this Article or the franchise not expressed therein. The grantee
further pledges that no promise or inducement, oral or written, has been made to any Village employee or official regarding receipt of the cable
television franchise other than as contained in the franchise agreement.
C. The grantee further acknowledges by acceptance of the franchise that it has carefully read the terms and conditions of this Article and the
franchise and accepts without reservation the obligations imposed by the terms and conditions thereof.
D. The decision of the Board concerning grantee selection and awarding of the franchise shall be final.
E. The grantee shall not apply for any waivers, exceptions, or declaratory rulings from the Federal Communications Commission or any other
Federal or State regulatory agency relative to the service provided to the Village without prior written notice to the Village. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-
1997)
3-8E-34: COMPLIANCE WITH STATE AND FEDERAL LAW:
The grantee shall, at all times, comply with all laws of the State and Federal government and the rules and regulations of any Federal or State
administrative agency. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 103/366
3-8E-35: SPECIAL LICENSE:
Upon such conditions as the Village may deem necessary, and notwithstanding the provision of Article C of this Chapter, the Village may issue a
license, easement or other permit to anyone other than a grantee to permit that person to traverse any portion of the Village in order to provide
service outside the Village. Such license or easement, absent a grant or a franchise in accordance with this Article, shall not authorize nor permit
said person to provide a cable television service of any nature to any home or place of business within the Village, nor to render any service or
connect any subscriber within the Village to a grantee's cable television system. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8E-36: FRANCHISE VALIDITY:
A. The grantee agrees, by the acceptance of the franchise, to accept the validity of the terms and conditions of this Article and the franchise in their
entirety and that it will not, at any time, proceed against the Village in any claim or proceeding challenging any term or provision of this Article or
the franchise as unreasonable, arbitrary or void, or that the Village did not have the authority to impose such term or condition.
B. In case of conflict or ambiguity between this Article, the franchise or the grantee's franchise application, the grantee agrees that the provisions
which provide the greatest benefit to the Village in the sole discretion of the Village shall prevail. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8E-37: FAILURE TO ENFORCE FRANCHISE:
The grantee shall not be excused from complying with any of the terms and conditions of this Article or the franchise by any failure of the Village
upon any one or more occasions, to insist upon the grantee's performance or to seek grantee's compliance with any one or more of such terms or
conditions. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8E-38: RIGHTS RESERVED TO THE GRANTOR:
The Village hereby expressly reserves the following rights, which shall not be deemed to be waived or abrogated by any franchise granted pursuant
to this Article:
A. To exercise its governmental powers, now or hereafter, to the full extent that such powers may be vested in or granted to the Village.
B. To adopt, in addition to the provisions contained herein and in the franchise and in any existing applicable ordinances, such additional regulations
as it shall find necessary in the exercise of its police power.
C. To renegotiate any franchise granted pursuant to this Article should substantial section(s) of the ordinance or franchise be rendered void by the
Federal Communications Commission, or by subsequent changes in applicable Federal or State laws, rendered void by the Federal
Communications Commission, or by subsequent changes in applicable Federal or State laws. (Ord. 583, 3-11-1997)
3-8E-39: EMPLOYMENT REQUIREMENT:
The grantee shall not refuse to hire, nor discharge from employment, nor discriminate against any person regarding compensation, terms,
conditions, or privileges of employment because of age, sex, race, color, creed, or national origin. The grantee shall take affirmative action to ensure
that employees are treated fairly and equally during employment, without regard to their age, sex, race, color, creed or national origin. The condition
includes, but is not limited to, the following: recruitment advertising, employment interviews, employment, rates of pay, upgrading, transfer,
demotion, layoff and termination. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8E-40: TIME ESSENCE OF AGREEMENT:
Whenever this Article or the franchise sets forth any time for any act to be performed by the grantee, such time shall be deemed of the essence and
the grantee's failure to perform within the time allotted shall, in all cases, be sufficient grounds for the Village to invoke the remedies available under
the terms and conditions of this Article and the franchise. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8E-41: ACCEPTANCE:
This Article and the franchise and their terms and conditions shall be accepted by the grantee by written instrument filed with the Village within thirty
(30) days after the granting of the franchise, unless said period is extended by the Village at its sole discretion. In its acceptance, the grantee shall
declare that it has carefully read the terms and conditions of this Article and the franchise and accepts all of the terms and conditions imposed by
this Article and the franchise and agrees to abide by same. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8E-42: PUBLICATION COSTS:
The grantee shall assume the cost of publication and copying of this Article and franchise and such is payable upon the grantee's filing of
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 104/366
acceptance as in Section 3-8E-41 of this Article. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8E-43: RESELLING SERVICE PROHIBITED:
No person receiving within the Village any cable service, program or signal transmitted by a cable television company operating under a franchise
issued by the Village, shall resell such service, program or signal without the express, written consent of both the grantee and the Board. (Ord. 97-
583, 3-11-1997)
3-8E-44: PENALTIES:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to attach or affix or to cause to be attached or affixed any equipment or device which allows access to or use of
any cable television service without payment to the grantee for same.
B. Persons, whether natural or artificial, or commercial entities who violate any of the following provisions of this Article shall be subject to a fine not
to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense: wilful action or inaction by grantee as described in subsection 3-8E-11A;
noncompliance by a grantee as described in subsection 3-8E-11A; arbitrary or capricious action by a grantee as described in Section 3-8E-12;
wilful failure by a grantee to comply with the laws, rules or regulations described in subsection 3-8E-9A; transmission by a grantee of a signal
from a subscriber's premises in violation of Section 3-8E-30, and any person attaching or affixing or causing to be attached or affixed any
equipment or device as described in this Section, and each such equipment or device shall be deemed a separate offense. Each day of said
violations shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8E-45: GRANTEE MAY PROMULGATE RULES:
Grantee shall have the authority to promulgate such rules, regulations, terms and conditions of its business as shall be reasonably necessary to
enable it to exercise its rights and perform its services under this Article and the rules of the FCC, and to assure uninterrupted service to each and
all of its subscribers. Such rules and regulations shall not be deemed to have the force of law. Such rules and regulations shall be filed with the
Village and shall not, unless the Village consents in writing to an earlier effective date, take effect until thirty (30) days after such filing. (Ord. 97-583,
3-11-1997)
3-8E-46: DELEGATION OF POWERS:
Any right, power or duty of the Village, the Agency, or any official of the Village under this Article may be transferred or delegated by ordinance,
resolution, or other appropriate action of the Village Board to an appropriate officer, employee, or department of the Village, or any other legal
authority, including any intergovernmental agency created for the purpose of regulating the operation and development of the cable television
system. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8E-47: TOXIC WASTE:
Grantee shall be responsible for any damages resulting from any toxic wastes or hazardous substances resulting from grantee's installations or
grantee's use of the franchise and shall be responsible for the removal of the same. Such responsibility shall survive the termination of the
franchise. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8E-48: CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS:
Relative to any cable television franchise hereafter granted by the Village, and relative to the renewal hereafter of any now existing cable television
franchise, the following customer service standards shall apply:
A. General:
1. The grantee shall initiate prompt corrective action to satisfy unresolved complaints. If a customer is not satisfied with the resolution of a
complaint, that customer shall be automatically referred to a management person. Local management will work with the person to resolve the
problem within forty eight (48) hours. In the event that local management does not satisfy the customer complaint, the complaint shall be
referred to the district manager.
2. Customer service representatives and service technicians, including contracted help, shall identify themselves by name. When performing
work in the field, a company identification badge shall be displayed on the outer clothing of the technician or contractor.
3. Any vehicle used for the installation, construction, maintenance or repair of the telecommunications system shall bear the identification of the
contractor or the grantee in a conspicuous place and manner.
4. Customers shall receive a copy of the service report and a phone number to call to resolve any additional problems, at the time service is
completed.
5. The grantee shall make available to every subscriber the equipment or devices necessary for the receipt of all services for which they wish to
subscribe. The lowest tier of basic service which includes all off-air and PEG channels shall be available without a converter.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 105/366
6. Upon request from the subscriber, the grantee shall provide "parental control" mechanism or device that permits the subscriber to "lock out"
audible and visual reception of certain programming.
7. All installations shall comply with chapter 8 of the National Electrical Code, 1990 Edition or its successor. When an installation is proposed in
any structure, other than a single-family dwelling, notification shall be made to the Village. The Village reserves the right to inspect the property
to ensure that the installation will not compromise fire safety measures required in the Life Safety Code, the Building Code, or the Fire
Prevention Code.
B. Telephone Response:
1. The grantee shall maintain a local, toll-free or collect call telephone access line which will be available to its subscribers twenty four (24) hours
per day, seven (7) days per week. Trained representatives of grantee will be available to respond to customer telephone inquiries, twenty four
(24) hours per day, seven (7) days per week.
2. Calls must be answered within four (4) rings by a representative or mechanical device. Under normal operating conditions, the customer will
receive a busy signal less than three percent (3%) of the time.
3. Telephone answer time by a customer service representative, including wait time, shall not exceed thirty (30) seconds when the connection is
made. If the call needs to be transferred, transfer time shall not exceed thirty (30) seconds.
4. The abandonment rate for calls shall be no more than ten percent (10%) of the calls reported incoming during any monthly reporting period.
5. The above standards shall be met nine percent (9%) of the time under normal operating conditions, measured on a monthly basis. The Village
shall consider unique or one time occurrences in the evaluation of the average standards in any one monthly reporting period. The grantee
shall submit a monthly report accurately showing the telephone response performance covering all areas listed in this subsection.
C. Outage Response:
1. The grantee shall submit a monthly report accurately showing the time, the duration, probable cause, number of homes affected, and action
taken on all failures or outages on the main distribution system.
2. An outage affecting three (3) customers in the same geographic area, off the same line or feeder, shall be corrected within twenty four (24)
hours.
3. In the event of extensive system failure of any trunk or feeder cable causing a service outage to ten (10) or more customers in any geographic
area, or the failure of modulator equipment, satellite reception equipment, or other system functions that result in the interruption of service
throughout the franchise area, corrective action shall be taken immediately.
4. Total outages, with the exception of those caused by the cutting of properly buried and marked cables or the accidental downing of an aerial
cable, throughout the Village shall not exceed ten (10) hours in any one month.
5. The grantee shall notify the Village of all major outages, locations of the outage, and the homes affected at the time of occurrence to aid the
Village in handling phone calls regarding the problem.
6. The grantee shall install and maintain a standby power system that provides a minimum of three (3) hours' duration throughout the distribution
networks.
7. System headends and distribution system as well as standby power will have remote status monitoring.
D. Service Call Response:
1. All requests for installation, change of service or disconnection shall be completed within seven (7) days.
2. All customer service calls regarding repairs and/or service problems which are not outage related shall be completed within twenty four (24)
hours unless grantee can sufficiently document why said repairs will take longer as in the case of equipment or cable replacement. At no time
should repairs take longer than one week to complete.
3. The appointment window alternatives for any call requiring the subscriber to be at the premises shall be either a specific time, or at a
maximum, a four (4) hour block within extended business hours, including weekends.
4. Grantee will not cancel an appointment with a subscriber after the close of business on the business day prior to the scheduled appointment.
5. If the grantee's representative is running late for an appointment with a subscriber and will not be able to keep the appointment as scheduled,
the subscriber will be contacted. The appointment will be rescheduled as necessary, at a time which is convenient for the customer.
E. Billing:
1. All charges to subscribers and users shall be consistent throughout the franchise area with a written schedule of fees for all services offered
available upon request. The grantee shall apprise each new subscriber of all applicable fees and charges for providing any cable
communications services, in writing.
2. The grantee shall not, in regard to fees, discriminate or grant any preference or advantage to any person; provided, however, that the grantee
may establish different rates for different classes of subscribers or users, provided that the grantee not discriminate between any subscribers
or users of the same class.
3. Except as may be otherwise provided in the franchise agreement, the grantee may offer service which requires advance payment of periodic
service charges for no more than one year in advance subject to the conditions contained in this Section.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 106/366
4. Subscribers shall receive a monthly statement with a payment due date to arrive not less than ten (10) days prior to the due date.
5. Bills will be clear, concise and understandable. Bills must be fully itemized and clearly delineate all activity during the billing period, including
dates of service being billed, optional charges, rebates, and credits.
6. All statements shall clearly denote a postmark or initiated date of bill.
7. A phone number for bill adjustment shall be printed on the statement, along with instructions to call for any billing problems. Adjustments will
be made for any verifiable loss of service. Adjustments shall appear on the next available subscriber statement. Any adjustments requested by
the subscriber which are not automatic under the terms of the franchise agreement, must be requested within thirty (30) days.
8. No bill, or portion thereof, may be considered delinquent or be the basis for termination, if said amount is in dispute resolution.
9. Customer-requested disconnections shall be made as soon as practicable and in no case shall billing continue longer than five (5) days
following the request. The grantee shall not enter into any agreement with a subscriber which imposes any charge other than past due
balances and unreturned equipment charges following disconnection of service, except for the reconnection, applicable deposits, and
subsequent monthly or periodic charges, and those charges shall be no greater than charges for new subscribers. This Section shall not
prevent the grantee from refusing service to any person because the grantee's prior accounts with that person remain due and owing.
10. The subscriber shall have the right, at any time, to have their service, or any portion thereof, disconnected with a refund for unused service
charges.
11. Refund checks will be issued promptly, but no later than either the customer's next billing cycle following resolution of the request, or thirty
(30) days, whichever is earlier, or the return of the equipment supplied by the grantee.
12. The grantee may hold promotions or otherwise accept payments for up to one year in advance, provided, however, that the service for which
payment has been accepted is not subject to an increase in cost until such payment has been expended.
F. Rates: The Village reserves the right to regulate rates as permitted by State and Federal law.
G. Notifications: The grantee shall at the time service is initiated, either for the first time or by reconnection, and at least annually thereafter, provide
the customer with written information covering the following:
1. Instructions for using all equipment, including instructions for use in conjunction with customer-owned equipment.
2. The fact that A/B switches are available.
3. The procedures and charges to change service(s).
4. What to do in case of a problem, trouble shooting, and where to call for service.
5. A channel chart and price list.
6. Billing policy.
7. The fact that customers have the right to speak to a supervisor.
8. The appropriate regulatory authority with whom to register a complaint and a listed phone number. Members of the Cable Council shall have
the Cable Council listed as their representative.
9. A customer may request a copy of the above listed information at any time for no charge.
H. Agreements/Promotions: The Village shall be placed on the mailing list for all local, national and co-op promotions. All promotions must clearly
state the cost of service to the subscriber, restrictions of the promotion, and the date the promotion expires.
I. Compliance Reports: The grantee shall provide a monthly report outlining specific performance in the following areas:
1. Telephone Response: Telephone response performance in all areas listed in subsection 3-8E-48B of this Section.
2. Outage Report: An outage report shall include the number of outages, their location, duration, number of homes affected, and cause.
3. Service Call Report: A service call report listing the number of service calls by municipality and by category.
4. Construction Report: A construction report listing the progress made over the last month, and the status of pending projects.
5. Franchise Fee Report: Franchise fee report shall include a statement of revenues by category, including infomercial revenues, leased access,
advertising and production.
6. Resolution Of Complaints: The grantee shall notify the Village of the resolution of all complaints received by the Village within ten (10) days of
report of such complaint. This provision does not nullify other deadlines within the franchise agreement.
7. Emergency Override: The grantee shall provide the equipment required to automatically interrupt programming on all channels of the
subscriber network by means of an audio message to present emergency information by public and law enforcement officials of the Village.
Such equipment shall be accessible through any Municipal facility at no charge for the equipment, installation or maintenance. (Ord. 97-583,
3-11-1997)
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 107/366
ARTICLE F. FEES AND COMPENSATION
3-8F-1: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this Article to provide for the payment and recovery of all direct and indirect costs and expenses of the Village related to the
enforcement and administration of this Chapter. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8F-2: APPLICATION AND REVIEW FEE:
A. Any applicant for a license or franchise pursuant to Article C or D of this Chapter shall pay a fee of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00)
or one percent (1%) of the estimated cost of the applicant's proposed telecommunications facilities, as certified by the applicant's professional
engineer, whichever is greater.
B. The application and review fee shall be deposited with the Village as part of the application filed pursuant to Article C or Article D of this Chapter.
C. An applicant whose license or franchise application has been withdrawn, abandoned or denied shall, within sixty (60) days of its application and
review fee written request, be refunded the unused balance of its deposit under this Section, less all ascertainable costs and expenses incurred
by the Village in connection with the application. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8F-3: OTHER VILLAGE COSTS:
All license or franchise grantees shall, within thirty (30) days after written demand therefor, reimburse the Village for all direct and indirect costs and
expenses incurred by the Village in connection with any modification, amendment, renewal or transfer of the license or franchise or any license or
franchise agreement. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8F-4: RESERVED COMPENSATION FOR PUBLIC WAYS:
The Village reserves its right to annually fix a fair and reasonable compensation to be paid for the property rights granted to a telecommunications
license or franchise grantee. Nothing in this Article shall prohibit the Village and a grantee from agreeing to the compensation to be paid for the
granted property rights. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8F-5: COMPENSATION FOR VILLAGE PROPERTY:
If the right is granted, by lease, license, franchise or other manner, to use and occupy Village property for the installation of telecommunications
facilities, the compensation to be paid shall be fixed by the Village. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8F-6: CONSTRUCTION PERMIT FEE:
Prior to issuance of a construction permit, the permittee shall pay a permit fee equal to two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) and ten
dollars ($10.00) per lineal foot for augured cuts, whichever is greater, or one percent (1%) of the estimated cost of constructing the
telecommunications facilities, as certified by the applicant's engineer and approved by the Village Engineer, whichever is greater. (Ord. 97-583, 3-
11-1997)
3-8F-7: ANNUAL FEES:
A. Unless otherwise agreed in a license agreement, each licensee shall pay an annual license fee to the Village equal to the greater of five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00), or the total of the following: one dollar ($1.00) per lineal foot of overhead facilities of the licensee within the
corporate limits of the Village, one dollar fifty cents ($1.50) per lineal foot of underground facilities of the licensee within the corporate limits of the
Village requiring excavation of any right of way, and fifty cents ($0.50) per lineal foot of underground facilities of the licensee within the corporate
limits of the Village not requiring the excavation of any right of way as reimbursement for the Village's costs in connection with reviewing,
inspecting and supervising the use and occupancy of the public ways on behalf of the public and existing and/or future users. All such fees shall
be paid prior to the first day of the calendar year to which they apply.
B. Unless otherwise agreed in a franchise agreement, each franchisee shall pay an annual franchise fee of five percent (5.0%) of the gross revenue
derived from all services originating and terminating end-user to end-user within the Village and five percent (5.0%) of a prorated portion of the
gross revenue derived from services that either originate but do not terminate or terminate but do not originate within the corporate limits of the
Village, as reimbursement for the Village's costs in connection with reviewing, inspecting and supervising the use and occupancy of the public
ways on behalf of the public and existing and/or future users. However, such franchise fee shall be reduced by a credit for any utility taxes,
telecommunication taxes, or other locally imposed fees paid by the franchisee during the quarter in question. All such fees shall be paid
quarterly, and shall be due not less than thirty (30) days after the end of the calendar quarter to which such fees relate. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 108/366
3-8F-8: CABLE FEES:
Cable television franchisees shall be subject to the franchise fees, payments and costs provided in Article E of this Chapter. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-
1997)
3-8F-9: REGULATORY FEES AND COMPENSATION NOT A TAX:
The regulatory fees and costs provided for in this Article, and any compensation charged and paid for the public ways provided for in Section 3-8F-4
of this Article, are separate from, and additional to, any and all Federal, State, local and Village taxes as may be levied, imposed or due from a
telecommunications carrier or provider, its customers or subscribers, or on account of the lease, sale, delivery or transmission of
telecommunications services. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
ARTICLE G. CONDITIONS OF GRANT
3-8G-1: LOCATION OF FACILITIES:
All facilities shall be constructed, installed and located in accordance with the following terms and conditions, unless otherwise specified in a license
or franchise agreement:
A. A grantee shall install its telecommunications facilities within an existing underground duct or conduit whenever excess capacity exists within
such utility facility.
B. A grantee with permission to install overhead facilities shall install its telecommunications facilities on pole attachments to existing utility poles
only, and then only if surplus space is available.
C. Whenever any existing electric utilities, cable facilities or telecommunications facilities are located underground within a public way of the Village,
a grantee with permission to occupy the same public way must also locate its telecommunications facilities underground.
D. Whenever any new or existing electric utilities, cable facilities or telecommunications facilities are located or relocated underground within a
public way of the Village, a grantee that currently occupies the same public way shall relocate its facilities underground within a reasonable
period of time, which shall not be later than the end of the grant term. Absent extraordinary circumstances or undue hardship as determined by
the Village Engineer, such relocation shall be made concurrently to minimize the disruption of the public ways.
E. Whenever new telecommunications facilities will exhaust the capacity of a public street or utility easement to reasonably accommodate future
telecommunications carriers or facilities, the grantee shall provide additional ducts, conduits, manholes and other facilities for nondiscriminatory
access to future carriers. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8G-2: COMPLIANCE WITH JULIE:
All license or franchise grantees shall, before commencing any construction in the public ways, comply with all regulations of JULIE. (Ord. 97-583,
3-11-1997)
3-8G-3: CONSTRUCTION PERMITS:
All license or franchise grantees are required to obtain construction permits for telecommunications facilities as required in Article H of this Chapter.
However, nothing in this Article shall prohibit the Village and a grantee from agreeing to alternative plan review, permit and construction procedures
in a license or franchise agreement, provided such alternative procedures provide substantially equivalent safeguards for responsible construction
practices. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8G-4: INTERFERENCE WITH THE PUBLIC WAYS:
No license or franchise grantee may locate or maintain its telecommunications facilities so as to unreasonably interfere with the use of the public
ways by the Village, by the general public or by other persons authorized to use or be present in or upon the public ways. All such facilities shall be
moved by the grantee, temporarily or permanently, as determined by the Village Engineer. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8G-5: DAMAGE TO PROPERTY:
No license or franchise grantee nor any person acting on a grantee's behalf shall take any action or permit any action to be done which may impair
or damage any Village property, public ways of the Village, other ways or other property located in, on or adjacent thereto. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 109/366
3-8G-6: NOTICE OF WORK:
Unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement, no license or franchise grantee, nor any person acting on the grantee's behalf, shall
commence any nonemergency work in or about the public ways of the Village or other ways without ten (10) working days' advance notice to the
Village. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8G-7: REPAIR AND EMERGENCY WORK:
In the event of an unexpected repair or emergency, a grantee may commence such repair and emergency response work as required under the
circumstances, provided the grantee shall notify the Village as promptly as possible, before such repair or emergency work or as soon thereafter as
possible if advance notice is not practicable. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8G-8: MAINTENANCE OF FACILITIES:
Each license or franchise grantee shall maintain its facilities in good and safe condition and in a manner that complies with all applicable Federal,
State and local requirements. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8G-9: RELOCATION OR REMOVAL OF FACILITIES:
Within thirty (30) days following written notice from the Village, a license or franchise grantee shall, at its own expense, temporarily or permanently
remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any telecommunications facilities within the public ways whenever the corporate authorities shall
have determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary for:
A. The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any Village or other public improvement in or upon the public ways.
B. The operations of the Village or other governmental entity in or upon the public ways. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8G-10: REMOVAL OF UNAUTHORIZED FACILITIES:
Within thirty (30) days following written notice from the Village, any grantee, telecommunications carrier, or other person that owns, controls or
maintains any unauthorized telecommunications system, facility or related appurtenances within the public ways of the Village shall, at its own
expense, remove such facilities or appurtenances from the public ways of the Village. A telecommunications system or facility is unauthorized and
subject to removal in the following circumstances:
A. Upon expiration or termination of the grantee's telecommunications license or franchise.
B. Upon abandonment of a facility within the public ways of the Village.
C. If the system or facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant of a telecommunications license or franchise.
D. If the system or facility was constructed or installed without the prior issuance of a required construction permit.
E. If the system or facility was constructed or installed at a location not permitted by the grantee's telecommunications license or franchise. (Ord. 97-
583, 3-11-1997)
3-8G-11: EMERGENCY REMOVAL OR RELOCATION OF FACILITIES:
The Village retains the right and privilege to cut or move any telecommunications facilities located within the public ways of the Village, as the
Village may determine to be necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8G-12: DAMAGE TO GRANTEE'S FACILITIES:
Unless directly and proximately caused by the wilful, intentional or malicious acts by the Village, the Village shall not be liable for any damage to or
loss of any telecommunications facility within the public ways of the Village as a result of or in connection with any public works, public
improvements, construction, excavation, grading, filling, or work of any kind in the public ways by or on behalf of the Village. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-
1997)
3-8G-13: RESTORATION OF PUBLIC WAYS, OTHER WAYS AND VILLAGE PROPERTY:
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 110/366
A. When a licensee or franchisee, or any person acting on its behalf, does any work in or affecting any public ways, other ways or Village property, it
shall, at its own expense, promptly remove any obstructions therefrom and restore such ways or property to as good a condition as existed
before the work was undertaken, unless otherwise directed by the Village.
B. If weather or other conditions do not permit the complete restoration required by this Section, the grantee shall temporarily restore the affected
ways or property. Such temporary restoration shall be at the licensee's or franchisee's sole expense and the licensee or franchisee shall
promptly undertake and complete the required permanent restoration when the weather or other conditions no longer prevent such permanent
restoration, but in no event more than thirty (30) days after stated date of completion of the work in the permit. Failure to complete the work
within the time stated within the permit or on or before the completion date stipulated in the permit or within such extended time as may have
been allowed, the licensee or franchisee shall be liable to the Village in the amount shown in the following schedule of deductions, not as a
penalty but as liquidated damages, for each day of overrun in the time or such extended time as may have been allowed as follows:
SCHEDULE OF DEDUCTIONS FOR
EACH DAY OF OVERRUN IN PERMIT TIME
Original Permit Amount Daily Charge
From More Than To And Including Calendar Day
$ 0.00 $ 25,000.00 $ 235.00
25,000.00 100,000.00 325.00
100,000.00 500,000.00 410.00
500,000.00 1,000,000.00 575.00
1,000,000.00 2,000,000.00 735.00
2,000,000.00 3,000,000.00 895.00
3,000,000.00 5,000,000.00 1,075.00
5,000,000.00 7,500,000.00 1,285.00
7,500,000.00 10,000,000.00 1,500.00
10,000,000.00 15,000,000.00 1,925.00
15,000,000.00 20,000,000.00 2,425.00
20,000,000.00 25,000,000.00 2,925.00
25,000,000.00 30,000,000.00 3,425.00
30,000,000.00 35,000,000.00 3,925.00
35,000,000.00 and over 4,425.00
C. A grantee or other person acting in its behalf shall use suitable barricades, flags, flagmen, lights, flares and other measures as required for the
safety of all members of the general public and to prevent injury or damage to any person, vehicle or property by reason of such work in or
affecting such ways or property. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8G-14: FACILITIES MAPS:
Each license or franchise grantee shall provide the Village with an accurate map or maps certifying the location of all telecommunications facilities
within the public ways. Each grantee shall provide updated maps annually. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8G-15: DUTY TO PROVIDE INFORMATION:
Within ten (10) days of a written request from the Village Administrator each license or franchise grantee shall furnish the Village with information
sufficient to demonstrate:
A. That the grantee has complied with all requirements of this Chapter.
B. That all Municipal sales, message and/or telecommunications taxes due the Village in connection with the telecommunications services and
facilities provided by the grantee have been properly collected and paid by the grantee.
C. All books, records, maps and other documents, maintained by the grantee with respect to its facilities within the public ways, shall be made
available for inspection by the Village at reasonable times and intervals. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8G-16: LEASED CAPACITY:
A license or franchise grantee shall have the right, without prior Village approval, to offer or provide capacity or bandwidth to its customers;
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 111/366
provided:
A. Grantee shall furnish the Village with a copy of any such lease or agreement.
B. The customer or lessee has complied, to the extent applicable, with the requirements of this Chapter. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8G-17: GRANTEE INSURANCE:
Unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement, each grantee shall, as a condition of the grant, secure and maintain the following
liability insurance policies insuring both the grantee and the Village, and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents and employees as
coinsureds:
A. Comprehensive general liability insurance with limits not less than:
1. Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for bodily injury or death to each person;
2. Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for property damage resulting from any one accident; and,
3. Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for all other types of liability.
B. Automobile liability for owned, nonowned and hired vehicles with a limit of three million dollars ($3,000,000.00) for each person and three million
dollars ($3,000,000.00) for each accident.
C. Worker's compensation within statutory limits and employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00).
D. Comprehensive form premises-operations, explosions and collapse hazard, underground hazard and products completed hazard with limits of
not less than three million dollars ($3,000,000.00) and umbrella liability with limits of not less than ten million dollars ($10,000,000.00).
E. The liability insurance policies required by this Section shall be maintained by the grantee throughout the term of the telecommunications license
or franchise, and such other period of time during which the grantee is operating without a franchise or license hereunder, or is engaged in the
removal of its telecommunications facilities. Each such insurance policy shall contain the following endorsement:
It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be cancelled nor the intention not to renew be stated until 90 days after receipt by
the Village, by registered mail, of a written notice addressed to the Village Administrator of such intent to cancel or not to renew.
F. Within sixty (60) days after receipt by the Village of said notice, and in no event later than thirty (30) days prior to said cancellation, the grantee
shall obtain and furnish to the Village replacement insurance policies meeting the requirements of this Section. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8G-18: GENERAL INDEMNIFICATION:
Each license or franchise agreement shall include, to the extent permitted by law, the grantee's express undertaking to defend, indemnify and hold
the Village and its officers, employees, agents and representatives harmless from and against any and all damages, losses and expenses, including
reasonable attorney fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of or result from the negligent, careless or
wrongful acts, omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the grantee or its affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors in
the construction, operation, maintenance, repair or removal of its telecommunications facilities, and in providing or offering telecommunications
services over the facilities or network, whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this Chapter or by a grant agreement
made or entered into pursuant to this Chapter. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8G-19: PERFORMANCE AND CONSTRUCTION SURETY:
Before a license or franchise granted pursuant to this Chapter is effective, and as necessary thereafter, the grantee shall provide and deposit such
monies, bonds, letters of credit or other instruments in form and substance acceptable to the Village as may be required by this Chapter or by an
applicable license or franchise agreement. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8G-20: SECURITY FUND:
Each licensee or franchisee shall establish a permanent security fund with the Village by depositing an unconditional, irrevocable letter of credit in
the amount of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), which fund shall be maintained at the sole expense of grantee so long as any of grantee's
telecommunications facilities are located within the public ways of the Village.
A. The fund shall serve as security for the full and complete performance of this Chapter, including any costs, expenses, damages or loss the
Village pays or incurs because of any failure attributable to the grantee to comply with the codes, ordinances, rules, regulations or permits of the
Village.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 112/366
B. Before any sums are withdrawn from the security fund, the Village shall give written notice to the grantee:
1. Describing the act, default or failure to be remedied, or the damages, costs or expenses which the Village has incurred by reason of grantee's
act or default;
2. Providing a reasonable opportunity for grantee to first remedy the existing or ongoing default or failure, if applicable;
3. Providing a reasonable opportunity for grantee to pay any monies due the Village before the Village withdraws the amount thereof from the
security fund, if applicable;
4. That the grantee will be given an opportunity to review the act, default or failure described in the notice with the Village Administrator or his
designee.
C. Grantees shall replenish the security fund within fourteen (14) days after written notice from the Village that there is a deficiency in the amount of
the fund. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8G-21: CONSTRUCTION AND COMPLETION BOND:
Unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement, a performance bond written by a corporate surety acceptable to the Village equal to
at least one hundred percent (100%) of the estimated cost of constructing grantee's telecommunications facilities within the public ways of the
Village shall be deposited before construction is commenced.
A. The construction bond shall remain in force until sixty (60) days after substantial completion of the work, as determined by the Village Engineer,
including restoration of public ways and other property affected by the construction.
B. The construction bond shall guarantee, to the satisfaction of the Village:
1. Timely completion of construction;
2. Construction in compliance with applicable plans, permits, technical codes and standards;
3. Proper location of the facilities as specified by the Village;
4. Restoration of the public ways and other property affected by the construction;
5. The submission of "as-built" drawings after completion of the work as required by this Chapter;
6. Timely payment and satisfaction of all claims, demands or liens for labor, material or services provided in connection with the work. (Ord. 97-
583, 3-11-1997)
3-8G-22: COORDINATION OF CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES:
All grantees are required to cooperate with the Village and with each other.
A. By February 1 of each year, grantees shall provide the Village with a schedule of their proposed construction activities in, around or that may
affect the public ways.
B. Each grantee shall meet with the Village, other grantees and users of the public ways annually or as determined by the Village to schedule and
coordinate construction in the public ways.
C. All construction locations, activities and schedules shall be coordinated, as ordered by the Village Engineer, to minimize public inconvenience,
disruption or damages. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8G-23: ASSIGNMENTS OR TRANSFERS OF GRANT:
Ownership or control of a telecommunications system, license or franchise may not, directly or indirectly, be transferred, assigned or disposed of by
sale, lease, merger, consolidation or other act of the grantee, by operation of law or otherwise, without the prior consent of the Village, which
consent shall not be unreasonably withheld or delayed, as expressed by ordinance and then only on such reasonable conditions as may be
prescribed therein.
A. No grant shall be assigned or transferred in any manner within twelve (12) months after the initial grant of the license or franchise, unless
otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement.
B. Absent extraordinary and unforeseeable circumstances, no grant, system or integral part of a system shall be assigned or transferred before
construction of the telecommunications system has been completed.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 113/366
C. Grantee and the proposed assignee or transferee of the grant or system shall provide and certify the following information to the Village not less
than one hundred fifty (150) days prior to the proposed date of transfer:
1. Complete information setting forth the nature, terms and conditions of the proposed transfer or assignment;
2. All information required of a telecommunications license or franchise applicant pursuant to Article C or D of this Chapter with respect to the
proposed transferee or assignee;
3. Any other information reasonably required by the Village.
D. No transfer shall be approved unless the assignee or transferee has the legal, technical, financial and other requisite qualifications to own, hold
and operate the telecommunications system pursuant to this Chapter.
E. Unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement, the grantee shall reimburse the Village for all direct and indirect fees, costs, and
expenses reasonably incurred by the Village in considering a request to transfer or assign a telecommunications license or franchise.
F. Any transfer or assignment of a telecommunications grant, system or integral part of a system without prior approval of the Village under this
Section or pursuant to a license or franchise agreement shall be void and is cause for revocation of the grant. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8G-24: TRANSACTIONS AFFECTING CONTROL OF GRANT:
Any transactions which singularly or collectively result in a change of ten percent (10%) or more of the ownership or working control of the grantee,
of the ownership or working control of a telecommunications license or franchise, of the ownership or working control of affiliated entities having
ownership or working control of the grantee or of a telecommunications system, or of control of the capacity or bandwidth of grantee's
telecommunication system, facilities or substantial parts thereof, shall be considered an assignment or transfer requiring Village approval pursuant
to Section 3-8G-23 of this Article. Transactions between affiliated entities are not exempt from Village approval. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8G-25: REVOCATION OR TERMINATION OF GRANT:
A license or franchise granted by the Village to use or occupy public ways of the Village may be revoked for the following reasons:
A. Construction or operation in the Village or in the public ways of the Village without a license or franchise grant of authorization.
B. Construction or operation at an unauthorized location.
C. Unauthorized substantial transfer of control of the grantee.
D. Unauthorized assignment of a license or franchise.
E. Unauthorized sale, assignment or transfer of grantee's franchise or license assets, or a substantial interest therein.
F. Misrepresentation or lack of candor by or on behalf of a grantee in any application to the Village.
G. Abandonment of telecommunications facilities in the public ways.
H. Failure to relocate or remove facilities as required in this Chapter.
I. Failure to pay taxes, compensation, fees or costs when and as due the Village.
J. Insolvency or bankruptcy of the grantee.
K. Violation of material provisions of this Chapter.
L. Violation of the material terms of a license or franchise agreement. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8G-26: NOTICE AND DUTY TO CURE:
In the event that the Village Administrator believes that grounds exist for revocation of a license or franchise, he shall give the grantee written notice
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 114/366
of the apparent violation or noncompliance, providing a short and concise statement of the nature and general facts of the violation or
noncompliance, and providing the grantee a reasonable period of time not exceeding thirty (30) days to furnish evidence:
A. That corrective action has been, or is being actively and expeditiously pursued, to remedy the violation or noncompliance.
B. That rebuts the alleged violation or noncompliance.
C. That it would be in the public interest to impose some penalty or sanction less than revocation. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8G-27: HEARING:
In the event that a grantee fails to provide evidence reasonably satisfactory to the Village Administrator as provided in Section 3-8G-26 of this
Article, the Village Administrator shall refer the apparent violation or noncompliance to the corporate authorities. The corporate authorities shall
provide the grantee with notice and a reasonable opportunity to be heard concerning the matter. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8G-28: STANDARDS FOR REVOCATION OR LESSER SANCTIONS:
If persuaded by a preponderance of the evidence that the grantee has violated or failed to comply with material provisions of this Chapter, or of a
franchise or license agreement, the corporate authorities shall determine whether to revoke the license or franchise, or to establish some lesser
sanction and cure, considering the nature, circumstances, extent and gravity of the violation as reflected by one or more of the following factors:
A. Whether the misconduct was egregious.
B. Whether substantial harm resulted.
C. Whether the violation was intentional.
D. Whether there is a history of prior violations of the same or other requirements.
E. Whether there is a history of overall compliance.
F. Whether the violation was voluntarily disclosed, admitted or cured. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
ARTICLE H. CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
3-8H-1: GENERAL:
No person shall commence or continue with the construction, installation or operation of telecommunications facilities within the Village except as
provided in this Article. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8H-2: CONSTRUCTION CODES:
Telecommunications facilities shall be constructed, installed, operated and maintained in accordance with all applicable Federal, State and local
codes, rules and regulations including the National Electrical Safety Code. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8H-3: CONSTRUCTION PERMITS:
No person shall construct or install any telecommunications facilities within the Village without first obtaining a construction permit therefor, provided,
however:
A. No permit shall be issued for the construction or installation of telecommunications facilities within the Village unless the telecommunications
carrier has filed a registration statement with the Village pursuant to Article B of this Chapter.
B. No permit shall be issued for the construction or installation of telecommunications facilities in the public ways unless the telecommunications
carrier has applied for and received a license or franchise pursuant to Article C, D or E of this Chapter.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 115/366
C. No permit shall be issued for the construction or installation of telecommunications facilities without payment of the construction permit fee
established in Section 3-8F-6 of this Chapter. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8H-4: APPLICATIONS:
Applications for permits to construct telecommunications facilities shall be submitted upon forms to be provided by the Village and shall be
accompanied by drawings, plans and specifications in sufficient detail to demonstrate:
A. That the facilities will be constructed in accordance with all applicable codes, rules and regulations.
B. The location and route of all facilities to be installed on existing utility poles.
C. The location and route of all facilities to be located under the surface of the ground, including the line and grade proposed for the burial at all
points along the route which are within the public ways.
D. The location of all existing underground utilities, conduits, ducts, pipes, mains and installations which are within the public ways along the
underground route proposed by the applicant.
E. The location of all other facilities to be constructed within the Village, but not within the public ways.
F. The construction methods to be employed for protection of existing structures, fixtures, and facilities within or adjacent to the public ways.
G. The location, dimension and types of all trees within or adjacent to the public ways along the route proposed by the applicant, together with a
landscape plan for protecting, trimming, removing, replacing and restoring any trees or areas to be disturbed during construction. (Ord. 97-583,
3-11-1997)
3-8H-5: ENGINEER'S CERTIFICATION:
All permit applications shall be accompanied by the certification of a registered professional engineer that the drawings, plans and specifications
submitted with the application comply with applicable technical codes, rules and regulations. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8H-6: TRAFFIC-CONTROL PLAN:
All permit applications which involve work on, in, under, across or along any public ways shall be accompanied by a traffic-control plan
demonstrating the protective measures and devices that will be employed, consistent with the Uniform Manual of Traffic Control Devices, to prevent
injury or damage to persons or property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular traffic. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8H-7: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT:
Within forty five (45) days after submission of all plans and documents required of the applicant and payment of the permit fees required by this
Chapter, the Village Engineer, if satisfied that the applications, plans and documents comply with all requirements of this Chapter, shall issue a
permit authorizing construction of the facilities, subject to such further conditions, restrictions or regulations affecting the time, place and manner of
performing the work as he may deem necessary or appropriate. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8H-8: CONSTRUCTION SCHEDULE:
The permittee shall submit a written construction schedule to the Village Engineer ten (10) working days before commencing any work in or about
the public ways. The permittee shall further notify the Village Engineer not less than two (2) working days in advance of any excavation or work in
the public ways. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8H-9: COMPLIANCE WITH PERMIT:
All construction practices and activities shall be in accordance with the permit and approved final plans and specifications for the facilities. The
Village Engineer and his representatives shall be provided access to the work and such further information as he or she may require to ensure
compliance with such requirements. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8H-10: DISPLAY OF PERMIT:
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 116/366
The permittee shall maintain a copy of the construction permit and approved plans at the construction site, which shall be displayed and made
available for inspection by the Village Engineer or his representatives at all times when construction work is occurring. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8H-11: SURVEY OF UNDERGROUND FACILITIES:
If the construction permit specifies the location of facilities by depth, line, grade, proximity to other facilities or other standard, the permittee shall
cause the location of such facilities to be verified by a registered Illinois land surveyor. The permittee shall relocate any facilities which are not
located in compliance with permit requirements. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8H-12: NONCOMPLYING WORK:
Upon order of the Village Engineer, all work which does not comply with the permit, the approved plans and specifications for the work, or the
requirements of this Chapter, shall be removed. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8H-13: COMPLETION OF CONSTRUCTION:
The permittee shall promptly complete all construction activities so as to minimize disruption of the Village ways and other public and private
property. All construction work authorized by a permit within Village ways, including restoration, must be completed within one hundred twenty (120)
days of the date of issuance. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8H-14: AS-BUILT DRAWINGS:
Within sixty (60) days after completion of construction, the permittee shall furnish the Village with two (2) complete sets of plans, drawn to scale and
certified to the Village as accurately depicting the location of all telecommunications facilities constructed pursuant to the permit. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-
1997)
3-8H-15: RESTORATION OF IMPROVEMENTS:
Upon completion of any construction work, the permittee shall promptly repair any and all public ways and provide property improvements, fixtures,
structures and facilities in the public ways or property otherwise damaged during the course of construction, restoring the same as nearly as
practicable to its condition before the start of construction. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8H-16: LANDSCAPE RESTORATION:
A. All trees, landscaping and grounds removed, damaged or disturbed as a result of the construction, installation, maintenance, repair or
replacement of telecommunications facilities, whether such work is done pursuant to a franchise, license, or permit shall be replaced or restored
as nearly as may be practicable, to the condition existing prior to performance of work.
B. All restoration work within the public ways shall be done in accordance with landscape plans approved by the Village Engineer. (Ord. 97-583, 3-
11-1997)
3-8H-17: CONSTRUCTION SURETY:
Prior to issuance of a construction permit, the permittee shall provide a performance bond, as provided in Section 3-8G-21 of this Chapter. (Ord. 97-
583, 3-11-1997)
3-8H-18: EXCEPTIONS:
Unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement, all telecommunications carriers are subject to the requirements of this Article. (Ord.
97-583, 3-11-1997)
3-8H-19: RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNER:
The owner of the facilities to be constructed and, if different, the license or franchise grantee, are responsible for performance of and compliance
with all provisions of this Article. (Ord. 97-583, 3-11-1997)
Chapter 9
CABLE AND VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER AND PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEES AND
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 117/366
CONSUMER PROTECTION
3-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
CABLE SERVICE: That term as defined in 47 USC section 522(6).
COMMISSION: The Illinois commerce commission.
GROSS REVENUES: All consideration of any kind or nature, including, without limitation, cash, credits, property, and in-kind contributions received
by the holder for the operation of a cable or video system to provide cable service or video service within the holder's cable service or video service
area within the village.
A. Gross revenues shall include the following:
1. Recurring charges for cable or video service.
2. Event based charges for cable service or video service, including, but not limited to, pay per view and video on demand charges.
3. Rental of set top boxes and other cable service or video service equipment.
4. Service charges related to the provision of cable service or video service, including, but not limited to, activation, installation, and repair
charges.
5. Administrative charges related to the provision of cable service or video service, including, but not limited to, service order and service
termination charges.
6. Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds check charges, and other charges assessed to recover the costs of collecting delinquent
payments.
7. A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the holder or its affiliates pursuant to compensation arrangements for advertising or for
promotion or exhibition of any products or services derived from the operation of the holder's network to provide cable service or video
service within the village. The allocation shall be based on the number of subscribers in the village divided by the total number of
subscribers in relation to the relevant regional or national compensation arrangement.
8. Compensation received by the holder that is derived from the operation of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service
with respect to commissions that are received by the holder as compensation for promotion or exhibition of any products or services on the
holder's network, such as a "home shopping" or similar channel, subject to subsection A9 of this definition.
9. In the case of a cable service or video service that is bundled or integrated functionally with other services, capabilities, or applications,
the portion of the holder's revenue attributable to the other services, capabilities, or applications shall be included in the gross revenue
unless the holder can reasonably identify the division or exclusion of the revenue from its books and records that are kept in the regular
course of business.
10. The service provider fee permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b).
B. Gross revenues do not include any of the following:
1. Revenues not actually received, even if billed, such as bad debt, subject to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(c)(1)(vi).
2. Refunds, discounts, or other price adjustments that reduce the amount of gross revenues received by the holder of the state issued
authorization to the extent the refund, rebate, credit, or discount is attributable to cable service or video service.
3. Regardless of whether the services are bundled, packaged, or functionally integrated with cable service or video service, any revenues
received from services not classified as cable service or video service, including, without limitation, revenue received from
telecommunication services, information services, or the provision of directory or internet advertising, including yellow pages, white pages,
banner advertisement, and electronic publishing or any other revenues attributed by the holder to noncable service or nonvideo service in
accordance with the holder's books and records and records kept in the regular course of business and any applicable laws, rules,
regulations, standards, or orders.
4. The sale of cable services or video services for resale in which the purchaser is required to collect the service provider fee from the
purchaser's subscribers to the extent the purchaser certifies in writing that it will resell the service within the village and pay the fee
permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b) with respect to the service.
5. Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed upon the subscribers or the transaction by a city, state, federal, or any other governmental
entity and collected by the holder of the state issued authorization and required to be remitted to the taxing entity, including sales and use
taxes.
6. Security deposits collected from subscribers.
7. Amounts paid by subscribers to "home shopping" or similar vendors for merchandise sold through any home shopping channel offered as
part of the cable service or video service.
C. Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be included in the calculation of gross revenues to the extent the treatment of the revenue as revenue
of the affiliate rather than the holder has the effect of evading the payment of the fee permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b)
which would otherwise be paid by the cable service or video service.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 118/366
HOLDER: A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the commission pursuant to 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
PEG: Public, education and governmental.
PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE: The amount paid under this chapter and 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(d) by the holder to the village for
the service areas within its territorial jurisdiction.
SERVICE: The provision of "cable service" or "video service" to subscribers and the interaction of subscribers with the person or entity that has
received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the commission pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
SERVICE PROVIDER FEE: The amount paid under this chapter and 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801 by the holder to a village for the
service areas within its territorial jurisdiction.
VIDEO SERVICE: Video programming and subscriber interaction, if any, that is required for the selection or use of such video programming
services, and which is provided through wire line facilities located at least in part in the public right of way without regard to delivery technology,
including internet protocol technology. This definition does not include any video programming provided by a commercial mobile service provider
defined in 47 USC section 332(d) or any video programming provided solely as part of, and via, service that enables users to access content,
information, electronic mail, or other services offered over the public internet.
VILLAGE: The village of Inverness, Cook County, Illinois. (Ord. 2007-855, 11-13-2007)
3-9-2: CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE IMPOSED:
A. Fee Imposed: A fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable service or video service in the village.
B. Amount Of Fee: The amount of the fee imposed hereby shall be five percent (5%) of the holder's gross revenues.
C. Notice To The Village: The holder shall notify the village at least ten (10) days prior to the date on which the holder begins to offer cable service
or video service in the village.
D. Holder's Liability: The holder shall be liable for and pay the service provider fee to the village. The holder's liability for the fee shall commence on
the first day of the calendar month following thirty (30) days after receipt of the ordinance adopting this chapter by the holder. The ordinance
adopting this chapter shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the address listed on the holder's application notice sent pursuant to 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/21-401(b)(6) to the village.
E. Payment Date: The payment of the service provider fee shall be due on a quarterly basis, forty five (45) days after the close of the calendar
quarter. If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the
calculation of the fee.
F. Exemption: The fee hereby imposed does not apply to existing cable service or video service providers that have an existing franchise agreement
with the village in which a fee is paid.
G. Credit For Other Payments: An incumbent cable operator that elects to terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/21-301(c) with credit for prepaid franchise fees under that agreement may deduct the amount of such credit from the fees that
operator owes under subsection B of this section. (Ord. 2007-855, 11-13-2007)
3-9-3: PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE IMPOSED:
A. PEG Fee Imposed: A PEG access support fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable service or video service in the village in addition
to the fee imposed pursuant to section 3-9-2 of this chapter.
B. Amount Of Fee: The amount of the PEG access support fee imposed hereby shall be one percent (1%) of the holder's gross revenues or, if
greater, the percentage of gross revenues that incumbent cable operators pay to the village or its designee for PEG access support in the
village.
C. Payment: The holder shall pay the PEG access support fee to the village or to the entity designated by the village to manage PEG access. The
holder's liability for the PEG access support fee shall commence on the date set forth in subsection 3-9-2D of this chapter.
D. Payment Due: The payment of the PEG access support fee shall be due on a quarterly basis, forty five (45) days after the close of the calendar
quarter. If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the
calculation of the fee.
E. Credit For Other Payments: An incumbent cable operator that elects to terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/21-301(c) shall pay, at the time they would have been due, all monetary payments for PEG access that would have been due during
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 119/366
the remaining term of the agreement had it not been terminated pursuant to that section. All payments made by an incumbent cable operator
pursuant to the previous sentence may be credited against the fees that that operator owes under subsection B of this section. (Ord. 2007-855,
11-13-2007)
3-9-4: APPLICABLE PRINCIPLES:
All determinations and calculations under this chapter shall be made pursuant to generally accepted accounting principles. (Ord. 2007-855, 11-13-
2007)
3-9-5: NO IMPACT ON OTHER TAXES DUE FROM HOLDER:
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to exempt a holder from any tax that is or may later be imposed by the village, including any tax
that is or may later be required to be paid by or through the holder with respect to cable service or video service. A state issued authorization shall
not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the village's simplified municipal telecommunications tax or any other tax as it
applies to any telephone service provided by the holder. A state issued authorization shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to
payment of the local unit of government's 911 or E911 fees, taxes or charges. (Ord. 2007-855, 11-13-2007)
3-9-6: AUDITS OF CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER:
A. Audit Requirement: The village will notify the holder of the requirements it imposes on other cable service or video service providers to submit to
an audit of its books and records. The holder shall comply with the same requirements the village imposes on other cable service or video
service providers in its jurisdiction to audit the holder's books and records and to recompute any amounts determined to be payable under the
requirements of the village. If all local franchises between the village and cable operator terminate, the audit requirements shall be those
adopted by the village pursuant to the local government taxpayers' bill of rights act, 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 45/1 et seq. No acceptance of
amounts remitted should be construed as an accord that the amounts are correct.
B. Additional Payments: Any additional amount due after an audit shall be paid within thirty (30) days after the village's submission of an invoice for
the sum. (Ord. 2007-855, 11-13-2007)
3-9-7: LATE FEES/PAYMENTS:
All fees due and payments which are past due shall be governed by the provisions of this code adopted by this village pursuant to the local
government taxpayers' bill of rights act, 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 45/1 et seq. (see chapter 10 of this title). (Ord. 2007-855, 11-13-2007)
3-9-8: CABLE AND VIDEO CUSTOMER PROTECTION LAW:
A. Authority: This section is adopted pursuant to the cable and video customer protection law1 authorizing a village to enforce all of the customer
service and privacy protection standards of said section.
B. Purpose: The village desires to enforce the customer service and privacy protection standards with respect to complaints received from residents
as provided by the cable and video customer protection law.
C. Adoption: The regulations of 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/70-501 are hereby adopted by reference and made applicable to the cable or video
providers offering services within the village's boundaries.
D. Amendments: Any amendment to the cable and video customer protection law that becomes effective after the effective date of this chapter shall
be incorporated into this chapter by reference and shall be applicable to cable or video providers offering services within the municipality's
boundaries. However, any amendment that makes its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be incorporated into this chapter
by reference without formal action by the corporate authorities of the village.
E. Enforcement: The village does hereby pursuant to law declare its intent to enforce all of the customer service and privacy protection standards of
the cable and video protection law with respect to complaints received from residents within the village.
F. Penalties: The village, pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/70-501(r)(1), does hereby provide for a schedule of penalties for any material
breach of the cable and video protection law by cable or video providers in addition to the penalties provided in the law. The monetary penalties
shall apply on a competitively neutral basis and shall not exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each day of the material breach, and
shall not exceed twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for each occurrence of a material breach per customer.
1. "Material breach" means any substantial failure of a cable or video provider to comply with service quality and other standards specified in any
provision of the law.
2. The village shall give the cable or video provider written notice of any alleged material breaches of the law and allow such provider at least
thirty (30) days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 120/366
3. A material breach, for the purposes of assessing penalties, shall be deemed to occur for each day that a material breach has not been
remedied by the cable or video service provider after the notice in subsection F2 of this section.
G. Customer Credits: The village hereby adopts the schedule of customer credits for violations. Those credits shall be as provided for in the
provisions of 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/70-501(s) and applied on the statement issued to the customer for the next billing cycle following
the violation or following the discovery of the violation. The cable or video provider is responsible for providing the credits and the customer is
under no obligation to request the credit.
H. Effective Date: The provisions of this section shall not take effect until January 1, 2008, as to incumbent cable operators, but otherwise it shall be
in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval and publication as required by law. (Ord. 2007-855, 11-13-2007)
3-9-9: VIOLATION:
Except as specifically provided in this chapter, any violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of not less than two hundred dollars
($200.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per offense, and each day a violation has existed or continues to exist shall be a
separate offense. (Ord. 2007-855, 11-13-2007)
Chapter 10
LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
3-10-1: SHORT TITLE:
The title of this chapter shall be LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES. (Ord. 2007-855, 11-13-2007)
3-10-2: SCOPE:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the village's procedures in connection with all of the village's locally imposed and administered taxes.
(Ord. 2007-855, 11-13-2007)
3-10-3: DEFINITIONS:
Certain words or terms in this chapter shall have the meanings ascribed to them as follows:
ACT: The "local government taxpayers' bill of rights act".
CORPORATE AUTHORITIES: The village's president and board of trustees.
LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR: The village's administrator is charged with the administration and collection of the locally imposed and administered
taxes, including staff, employees or agents to the extent they are authorized by the local tax administrator to act in the local tax administrator's
stead. The local tax administrator shall have the authority to implement the terms of this chapter to give full effect to this chapter. The exercise of
such authority by the local tax administrator shall not be inconsistent with this chapter and the act.
LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX OR TAX: Each tax imposed by the village that is collected or administered by the village, not an
agency or department of the state. It does not include any taxes imposed upon real property under the property tax code or fees collected by the
village other than infrastructure maintenance fees.
NOTICE: Each audit notice, collection notice, or other similar notice or communication in connection with each of the village's locally imposed and
administered taxes.
TAX ORDINANCE: Each ordinance and/or any paragraph, section, chapter, or title of this code that imposes any locally imposed and administered
tax.
TAXPAYER: Any person required to pay any locally imposed and administered tax and generally includes the person upon whom the legal incidence
of such tax is placed and with respect to consumer taxes includes the business or entity required to collect and pay the locally imposed and
administered tax to the village.
VILLAGE: The village of Inverness, Illinois. (Ord. 2007-855, 11-13-2007)
3-10-4: NOTICES:
Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice is required to be given, the notice is to be in writing mailed not less than seven (7) calendar days prior
to the day fixed for any applicable hearing, audit or other scheduled act of the local tax administrator. The notice shall be sent by the local tax
administrator as follows:
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 121/366
A. First class or express mail, or overnight mail, addressed to the persons concerned at the persons' last known address, or
B. Personal service or delivery. (Ord. 2007-855, 11-13-2007)
3-10-5: LATE PAYMENT:
Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required to be made to the village pursuant to any tax ordinance shall be considered late unless it is:
a) physically received by the village on or before the due date, or b) received in an envelope or other container displaying a valid, readable U.S.
postmark dated on or before the due date, properly addressed to the village with adequate postage prepaid. (Ord. 2007-855, 11-13-2007)
3-10-6: PAYMENT:
Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall be applied in the following order: a) first to the tax due for the applicable period; b) second
to the interest due for the applicable period; and c) third to the penalty for the applicable period. (Ord. 2007-855, 11-13-2007)
3-10-7: CERTAIN CREDITS AND REFUNDS:
A. The village shall not refund or credit any taxes voluntarily paid without written protest at the time of payment in the event that a locally imposed
and administered tax is declared invalidly enacted or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction. However, a taxpayer shall not be
deemed to have paid the tax voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked knowledge of the facts upon which to protest the taxes at the time of payment or if
the taxpayer paid the taxes under duress.
B. The statute of limitations on a claim for credit or refund shall be four (4) or less years after the end of the calendar year in which payment in error
was made. The village shall not grant a credit or refund of locally imposed and administered taxes, interest, or penalties to a person who has not
paid the amounts directly to the village.
C. The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally imposed and administered taxes, interest or penalties paid in error shall be as follows:
1. The taxpayer shall submit to the local tax administrator in writing a claim for credit or refund together with a statement specifying:
a. The name of the locally imposed and administered tax subject to the claim;
b. The tax period for the locally imposed and administered tax subject to the claim;
c. The date of the tax payment subject to the claim and the canceled check or receipt for the payment;
d. The taxpayer's recalculation, accompanied by an amended or revised tax return, in connection with the claim; and
e. A request for either a refund or a credit in connection with the claim to be applied to the amount of tax, interest and penalties overpaid, and,
as applicable, related interest on the amount overpaid; provided, however, that there shall be no refund and only a credit given in the event
the taxpayer owes any monies to the village.
2. Within ten (10) days of the receipt by the local tax administrator of any claim for a refund or credit, the local tax administrator shall either:
a. Grant the claim; or
b. Deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with a statement as to the reason for the denial or the partial grant and denial.
3. In the event the local tax administrator grants, in whole or in part, a claim for refund or credit, the amount of the grant for refund or credit shall
bear interest at the rate of six percent (6%) per annum, based on a year of three hundred sixty five (365) days and the number of days
elapsed, from the date of the overpayment to the date of mailing of a refund check or the grant of a credit. (Ord. 2007-855, 11-13-2007)
3-10-8: AUDIT PROCEDURE:
Any requests for proposed audit pursuant to any local administered tax shall comply with the notice requirements of this chapter.
A. Each notice of audit shall contain the following information:
1. The tax;
2. The time period of the audit; and
3. A brief description of the books and records to be made available for the auditor.
B. Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours and if the date and time selected by the local tax administrator is not agreeable to the
taxpayer, another date and time may be requested by the taxpayer within thirty (30) days after the originally designated audit and during normal
business hours.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 122/366
C. The taxpayer may request an extension of time to have an audit conducted. The audit shall be conducted not less than seven (7) days, nor more
than thirty (30) days, from the date the notice is given, unless the taxpayer and the local tax administrator agreed to some other convenient time.
In the event the taxpayer is unable to comply with the audit on the date in question, the taxpayer may request another date within the thirty (30)
days, approved in writing, that is convenient to the taxpayer and the local tax administrator.
D. Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the taxpayer's business or activities, including original source documents and books of
entry denoting the transactions which had given rise or may have given rise to any tax liability, exemption or deduction. All books shall be kept in
the English language and shall be subject to and available for inspection by the village.
E. It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make available its books and records for inspection by the village. If the taxpayer, or tax
collector, fails to provide the documents necessary for audit within the time provided, the local tax administrator may issue a tax determination
and assessment based on the tax administrator's determination of the best estimate of the taxpayer's tax liability.
F. If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of a locally imposed and administered tax as a result of the audit, written notice of the
amount of overpayment shall be given to the taxpayer within thirty (30) days of the village's determination of the amount of overpayment.
G. In the event a tax payment was submitted to the incorrect local governmental entity, the local tax administrator shall notify the local governmental
entity imposing such tax. (Ord. 2007-855, 11-13-2007)
3-10-9: APPEAL:
A. The local tax administrator shall send written notice to a taxpayer upon the local tax administrator's issuance of a protestable notice of tax due, a
bill, a claim denial, or a notice of claim reduction regarding any tax. The notice shall include the following information:
1. The reason for the assessment;
2. The amount of the tax liability proposed;
3. The procedure for appealing the assessment; and
4. The obligations of the village during the audit, appeal, refund and collection process.
B. A taxpayer who receives written notice from the local tax administrator of a determination of tax due or assessment may file with the local tax
administrator a written protest and petition for hearing, setting forth the basis of the taxpayer's request for a hearing. The written protest and
petition for hearing must be filed with the local tax administrator within forty five (45) days of receipt of the written notice of the tax determination
and assessment.
C. If a timely written notice and petition for hearing is filed, the local tax administrator shall fix the time and place for hearing and shall give written
notice to the taxpayer. The hearing shall be scheduled for a date within fourteen (14) days of receipt of the written protest and petition for
hearing, unless the taxpayer requests a later date convenient to all parties.
D. If a written protest and petition for hearing is not filed within the forty five (45) day period, the tax determination, audit or assessment shall
become a final bill due and owing without further notice.
E. Upon the showing of reasonable cause by the taxpayer and the full payment of the contested tax liability along with interest accrued as of the due
date of the tax, the local tax administrator may reopen or extend the time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing. In no event shall the
time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing be reopened or extended for more than ninety (90) days after the expiration of the forty
five (45) day period. (Ord. 2007-855, 11-13-2007)
3-10-10: HEARING:
A. Whenever a taxpayer or a tax collector has filed a timely written protest and petition for hearing under section 3-10-9 of this chapter, the local tax
administrator shall conduct a hearing regarding any appeal.
B. No continuances shall be granted except in cases where a continuance is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the taxpayer. Lack of
preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance granted shall not exceed fourteen (14) days.
C. At the hearing the local tax administrator shall preside and shall hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the tax determination, audit
or assessment. The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings shall not apply.
D. At the conclusion of the hearing, the local tax administrator shall make a written determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the
hearing. The taxpayer or tax collector shall be provided with a copy of the written decision. (Ord. 2007-855, 11-13-2007)
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 123/366
3-10-11: INTEREST AND PENALTIES:
In the event a determination has been made that a tax is due and owing, through audit, assessment or other bill sent, the tax must be paid within the
time frame otherwise indicated.
A. Interest: The village hereby provides for the amount of interest to be assessed on a late payment, underpayment, or nonpayment of the tax, to be
six percent (6%) per annum, based on a year of three hundred sixty five (365) days and the number of days elapsed.
B. Late Filing And Payment Penalties: If a tax return is not filed within the time and manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance, a late filing
penalty of five percent (5%) of the amount of tax required to be shown as due on a return shall be imposed; and a late payment penalty of five
percent (5%) of the tax due shall be imposed. If no return is filed within the time or manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance and prior to
the village issuing a notice of tax delinquency or notice of tax liability, then a failure to file penalty shall be assessed equal to twenty five percent
(25%) of the total tax due for the applicable reporting period for which the return was required to be filed. A late filing or payment penalty shall
not apply if a failure to file penalty is imposed by the controlling ordinance. (Ord. 2007-855, 11-13-2007)
3-10-12: ABATEMENT:
The local tax administrator shall have the authority to waive or abate any late filing penalty, late payment penalty or failure to file penalty if the local
tax administrator shall determine reasonable cause exists for delay or failure to make a filing. (Ord. 2007-855, 11-13-2007)
3-10-13: INSTALLMENT CONTRACTS:
The village may enter into an installment contract with the taxpayer for the payment of taxes under the controlling tax ordinance. The local tax
administrator may not cancel any installment contract so entered unless the taxpayer fails to pay any amount due and owing. Upon written notice by
the local tax administrator that the payment is thirty (30) days delinquent, the taxpayer shall have fourteen (14) working days to cure any
delinquency. If the taxpayer fails to cure the delinquency within the fourteen (14) day period or fails to demonstrate good faith in restructuring the
installment contract with the local administrator, the installment contract shall be canceled without further notice to the taxpayer. (Ord. 2007-855, 11-
13-2007)
3-10-14: STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS:
The village, through the local tax administrator, shall review all tax returns in a prompt and timely manner and inform taxpayers of any amounts due
and owing. The taxpayer shall have forty five (45) days after receiving notice of the reviewed tax returns to make any request for refund or provide
any tax still due and owing.
A. No determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than four (4) years after the end of the calendar year for which the return for the
applicable period was filed or for the calendar year in which the return for the applicable period was due, whichever occurs later.
B. If any tax return is not filed or if during any four (4) year period for which a notice of tax determination or assessment may be issued by the
village, the tax paid was less than seventy five percent (75%) of the tax due, the statute of limitations shall be six (6) years maximum after the
end of the calendar year in which the return for the applicable period was due or end of the calendar year in which the return for the applicable
period was filed.
C. No statute of limitations shall apply if a fraudulent tax return was filed by the taxpayer. (Ord. 2007-855, 11-13-2007)
3-10-15: VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE:
For any locally imposed and administered tax for which a taxpayer has not received a written notice of an audit, investigation, or assessment from
the local tax administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file an application with the local tax administrator for a voluntary disclosure of the tax due. A
taxpayer filing a voluntary disclosure application must agree to pay the amount of tax due, along with interest of one percent (1%) per month, for all
periods prior to the filing of the application but not more than four (4) years before the date of filing the application. A taxpayer filing a valid voluntary
disclosure application may not be liable for any additional tax, interest, or penalty for any period before the date the application was filed. However, if
the taxpayer incorrectly determined and underpaid the amount of tax due, the taxpayer is liable for the underpaid tax along with applicable interest
on the underpaid tax, unless the underpayment was the result of fraud on the part of the taxpayer, in which case the application shall be deemed
invalid and void. The payment of tax and interest must be made by no later than ninety (90) days after the filing of the voluntary disclosure
application or the date agreed to by the local tax administrator. However, any additional amounts owed as a result of an underpayment of tax and
interest previously paid under this section must be paid within ninety (90) days after a final determination and the exhaustion of all appeals of the
additional amount owed or the date agreed to by the local tax administrator, whichever is longer. (Ord. 2007-855, 11-13-2007)
3-10-16: PUBLICATION OF TAX ORDINANCES:
Any locally administered tax ordinance shall be published via normal or standard publishing requirements. The posting of a tax ordinance on the
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 124/366
internet shall satisfy the publication requirements. Copies of all tax ordinances shall be made available to the public upon request at the village
clerk's office. (Ord. 2007-855, 11-13-2007)
3-10-17: INTERNAL REVIEW OF LIENS:
The local tax administrator shall establish an internal review procedure regarding any liens filed against any taxpayers for unpaid taxes. Upon a
determination by the local tax administrator that the lien is valid, the lien shall remain in full force and effect. If the lien is determined to be improper,
the local tax administrator shall:
A. Timely remove the lien at the village's expense;
B. Correct the taxpayer's credit record; and
C. Correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien. (Ord. 2007-855, 11-13-2007)
3-10-18: APPLICATION:
This chapter shall be liberally construed and administered to supplement all of the village's tax ordinances. To the extent that any tax ordinance or
any tax provision of this code is in conflict with or inconsistent with this chapter, this chapter shall be controlling. (Ord. 2007-855, 11-13-2007)
Chapter 11
RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT REGULATIONS
3-11-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
Effective May 1, 2010, it is unlawful to operate a retail food establishment in this village without first having obtained a license therefor or without full
compliance with the provisions of this chapter. A retail food establishment includes a food service establishment, a temporary food service
establishment, and a retail food store as defined in the food service sanitation code, 77 Illinois administrative code, part 750, and the retail food
store sanitation code, 77 Illinois administrative code, part 760. (Ord. 10-898, 3-9-2010)
3-11-2: ADOPTION OF REGULATIONS:
The latest edition of the retail food store sanitation code (part 760); the latest edition of the food service sanitation code (part 750); and the sanitary
vending of food and beverages (part 743) as they are published as part of 77 Illinois administrative code by the Illinois department of public health,
office of health protection, division of foods, drugs and dairies, both published in pamphlet form, are adopted as the regulations governing the
sanitation procedures and controls for the storage, preparation, serving and display of food sold within this village and as the regulations governing
the sanitation procedures in this chapter. Food service establishments, as defined in said code, shall also include nursing homes and retirement
centers. (Ord. 10-898, 3-9-2010)
3-11-3: UNWHOLESOME FOOD OR UNSANITARY CONDITIONS:
No retail food establishment shall offer for sale, or keep for the purpose of selling or offering for sale, any food of any kind intended for human
consumption which is spoiled, tainted or unwholesome and unfit for human consumption for any reason, or violate any rule or regulation as provided
in the retail food store sanitation code or the food service sanitation code as adopted in section 3-11-2 of this chapter. (Ord. 10-898, 3-9-2010)
3-11-4: LICENSE ISSUANCE:
Licenses shall be issued by the village administrator only after receipt of a written application from the licensee and approval by the health officer or
other local health department contracted to perform any or all of the inspection functions for the village. The licenses are not transferable, and a
change of ownership or occupancy of the premises shall be cause for a new license/permit application to be filed with the village of Inverness. Each
license shall expire at the end of one year from the date of issuance but may be renewed from year to year. (Ord. 10-898, 3-9-2010)
3-11-5: LICENSE FEE:
The fee for a retail food establishment license shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) plus the actual cost of inspection as determined by the village
administrator based on the expense of the health officer, contractor inspection services, and any recommended testing. (Ord. 10-898, 3-9-2010)
3-11-6: VIOLATIONS:
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 125/366
A. Notice Of Violation: The health officer or contracted inspector shall serve a notice of violation or order on the person responsible for the retail food
establishment which is determined to be in violation of the provisions of this title, or in violation of a detailed statement or plan approved
hereunder, or in violation of a license issued under the provisions of this chapter; and such order shall direct discontinuance of the illegal action
or condition and the abatement of the violation. The health officer or contracted inspector shall have authority, in the case of a health emergency,
to take all necessary steps to abate the emergency including ordering the cessation of operations of the retail food establishment.
B. Penalties: Any person who shall violate a provision of this chapter or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements hereof, who shall operate a
retail food establishment without a license or in violation of an approved plan or directive of the health official or contracted inspector, or of any
permit or license issued under the provisions of this chapter, shall be guilty of a petty offense, punishable by a fine of not less than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
C. Unlawful Continuance: Any person who shall continue to prepare, sell, or provide food for human consumption after having been served with an
order to cease operations, shall be liable to a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than two thousand five hundred
dollars ($2,500.00).
Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ord. 10-898, 3-9-2010)
Chapter 12
CONFLICTS WITH CERTAIN HOME RULE COUNTY ORDINANCES
3-12-1: COMPLIANCE; APPLICABILITY; DEFINITIONS:
A. Employers located within the Village shall comply with all applicable Federal and/or State laws and regulations as such laws and regulations may
exist from time to time with regard to both the payment of minimum hourly wages and paid sick leave. Employee eligibility for paid sick leave and
minimum hourly wages shall also be in compliance with all applicable Federal and/or State laws and regulations as such laws and regulations
may exist from time to time.
B. No additional obligations with regard to paid sick leave, or minimum hourly wages, including, without limitation, any additional obligations
imposed by any ordinance adopted by the County of Cook Board of Commissioners shall apply to employers located within the Village, except
those required by Federal and/or State laws and regulations as such laws and regulations may exist from time to time.
C. For the purposes of this section, the term "employee" means an individual permitted to work by an employer regardless of the number of persons
the employer employs, and the term "employer" means any person employing one (1) or more employees, or seeking to employ one (1) or more
employees, if the person has its principal place of business within the Village or does business within the Village.
D. For the purposes of this section, the term "employer" does not mean:
1. The government of the United States or a corporation wholly owned by the government of the United States;
2. An Indian tribe or a corporation wholly owned by an Indian tribe;
3. The government of the State or any agency or department thereof; or
4. Units of local government. (Ord. 17-979, 5-9-2017)
Chapter 13
GARAGE SALES
3-13-1: DEFINITION; RESTRICTIONS:
A. The term "garage sale" as used in this section of this chapter shall mean those usually occasional sales of used or surplus household goods,
wares and other items of personal property owned by the occupier of the residence premises where such sale is held and/or owned by other
persons, if a collective sale, which may include sales commonly known as basement sales, house sales, yard sales, attic sales, rummage sales,
estate sales or other similar occasional sales conducted from residentially zoned premises.
B. Garage sales shall be permitted for three (3) consecutive days between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. of each
day. Not more than three (3) garage sales shall be conducted on the same premises within any calendar year, and there shall be a minimum of
thirty (30) days between each such sale. (Ord. 18-990, 1-9-2018)
3-13-2: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of any section or subsection of this chapter shall be fined not less than one hundred
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 126/366
dollars ($100.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense. Each day a violation continues or is permitted to exist shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense. (Ord. 18-990, 1-9-2018)
Chapter 14
SHORT TERM RENTALS
3-14-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following phrases shall have the definitions as set forth below:
SHORT-TERM RENTAL: The use and/or occupancy for a period of three (3) months or less of a principal single family residence, multiple family
dwelling unit, single family detached dwelling, townhome, cluster house, or a unit in a two-family dwelling together with any accessory or any portion
of the foregoing, pursuant to a written or oral agreement which permits and/or provides for occupancy by any person other than the owner thereof,
or an immediate family member of the owner thereof, and whether or not the permission of such occupancy is in exchange for consideration therefor
or not. (Ord. 18-993, 5-8-2018)
3-14-2: SHORT-TERM RENTALS RESTRICTED:
A. Except as otherwise provided herein, leasing, renting, offering or inviting the leasing or renting, or otherwise permitting the short-term rental as
defined above located within the Village for three (3) consecutive months or less at a time shall be prohibited, with the exception of a hotel or
similar establishment duly licensed by the Village, and such conduct shall be prohibited, whether engaged in or participated in by the owner(s) of
the property, one or more agent(s) of the property owner(s), and/or by any person(s) leasing, or seeking to lease as a lessor(s), or renting or
seeking to rent as lessee(s) and/or otherwise occupy a premises as tenant(s) and/or temporary occupant(s) thereof.
B. The term of any lease or occupancy agreement which is not a short term rental may be extended on a month-to-month basis on the condition that
the tenant(s) remain(s) the same.
C. Dwellings shall not be leased, or otherwise permitted to be occupied by other than the same tenant, more than two (2) times during any
consecutive twelve (12) month period.
D. The restrictions of this chapter shall be applicable whether the rental premises comprise(s) all or a part of the principal dwelling, or all or part of
any accessory structure.
E. Whether or not consideration is exchanged for the lease and/or rental of a premises shall not affect the fact that the occupancy thereof is treated
as a short term rental for the purposes of this chapter if the definition thereof is otherwise applicable to such activity.
F. The property owner shall remain and also be vicariously liable for and responsible for compliance by said owner and compliance by the short term
renter with all applicable provisions of this Code and/or the Village zoning ordinance during the term of any rental and/or occupancy agreement
and/or during the term of any occupancy of the rental premises by persons other than the property owner. The short term renter shall also be
liable for and responsible for compliance with all applicable provisions of said Code and zoning ordinance.
G. No temporary structure shall be permitted to be used for a short-term rental.
H. The prohibition on short-term rentals as herein provided shall not apply when the immediately preceding owner of a property maintains
possession of the dwelling after closing on a real estate transaction for the sale thereof and leases said property back from the successor owner
for a period of time pursuant to a written agreement.
I. Each day a dwelling or any accessory structure in the Village is offered for rent as a short term rental, is leased or rented as a short-term rental,
and/or each day a principal structure or any accessory structure is occupied as a short-term rental, as that term is defined herein, shall constitute
a separate violation of this chapter. (Ord. 18-993, 5-8-2018)
3-14-3: PENALTIES:
Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a mandatory fine of not less than three hundred dollars
($300.00) per day, nor more than fifteen hundred dollars ($1,500.00) per day for each offense with each and every day that a violation has been
allowed to remain in effect being deemed a separate and distinct offense. In addition, the appropriate authorities of the Village may take such further
actions they deem proper to enforce the terms and conditions of this chapter, including without limitation, an action in equity to compel compliance
with its terms. (Ord. 18-993, 5-8-2018)
Chapter 15
RESIDENTIAL RENTAL HOUSING CODE
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 127/366
3-15-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the INVERNESS RENTAL RESIDENTIAL HOUSING CODE. (Ord. 18-994, 6-12-2018)
3-15-2: SCOPE:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply uniformly to the construction, maintenance, use, and occupancy of all rental residential property, where
applicable, and shall apply uniformly to the alteration, repair, equipment, use, occupancy, and maintenance of all existing rental residential dwelling
units irrespective of when or under what code or codes such dwelling units were originally constructed or rehabilitated. It shall be the duty of the
Village to enforce the provisions of this chapter as authorized by this Code as adopted and amended by the Village. (Ord. 18-994, 6-12-2018)
3-15-3: PURPOSE:
A. The purpose of this chapter is to provide for property maintenance standards, inspection and licensing of rental residential property so as to
protect the public health, safety and welfare of the residents and guests of rental residential dwelling units including:
1. To protect the public health and safety by obtaining compliance with the property maintenance standards of the Village.
2. To protect the character and stability of residential areas.
3. To correct and prevent housing conditions that adversely affect or are likely to adversely affect the life, safety, general welfare and health,
including the physical, mental and social well-being, of persons occupying rental residential dwelling units.
4. To prevent the overcrowding of dwellings by requiring compliance with minimum space standards per occupant for each dwelling unit as well
as the owners of owner occupied residential dwelling units in close proximity to rental units.
5. To facilitate the enforcement of property maintenance for the maintenance of existing residential buildings and thus to prevent blight. (Ord. 18-
994, 6-12-2018)
3-15-4: DEFINITIONS:
A. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall have the meaning hereafter described:
ADMINISTRATOR: Means the Village Administrator who is charged with the administration and enforcement of this chapter, or any duly
authorized representative.
AGENT: Means a person authorized to act for and under the direction of another person when dealing with third parties.
OWNER: Means any person, agent, operator, firm, or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official
records of the County or Municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the
estate of any such person and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court
having jurisdiction.
PROPERTY AGENT: Means a person, operator, firm, partnership, corporation, or other legal entity designated in writing by the property owner to
the Administrator to manage a rental residential property, including the authority to receive notices or citations.
RENTAL RESIDENTIAL DWELLING UNIT: Means a residential dwelling unit let or intended to be let for rent or lease. It does not include an
owner-occupied dwelling unit.
RENTAL RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY: Means the lot and rental residential dwelling unit or units on that lot.
TENANT: Means an occupant of a rental residential dwelling unit.
B. Words or phrases as used in this chapter and not herein defined shall be defined as provided by the Building Code of the Village as adopted and
amended in title 4, chapter 3 of this Code or the Village's Property Maintenance Code. (Ord. 18-994, 6-12-2018)
3-15-5: LICENSE REQUIRED; TRANSFER; TERM:
A. It is unlawful for any owner, person, firm, partnership, corporation, or other legal entity to operate, maintain, or offer to rent within the Village a
rental residential dwelling unit whether vacant or not without first obtaining a rental residential license as provided in this chapter.
B. It is unlawful for a person to occupy a rental residential dwelling unit, or for any owner or property agent to allow anyone to occupy a rental
residential dwelling unit, which is not within a licensed rental residential property.
C. It is unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other legal entity to offer for rent or to occupy any vacant dwelling unit or any
dwelling unit that becomes vacant in a rental residential building for which a license is under suspension.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 128/366
D. This chapter shall not apply to the following structures:
1. Hotels, motels, and other structures which rent rooms to occupants which are primarily transient in nature.
2. Dwellings, buildings, structures and uses licensed and inspected by Village, State or Federal government, including but not limited to nursing
homes, retirement centers, rest homes, etc.
3. Dwellings, buildings, structures and uses owned by governmental agencies and public housing authorities.
E. A license under this chapter cannot be transferred to another rental residential property or a succeeding owner. A purchaser of an existing
licensed rental residential building shall make application and obtain a new license in compliance with this chapter. An owner of licensed rental
residential property shall notify the Administrator in writing within two (2) days of the sale or transfer of said property. (Ord. 18-994, 6-12-2018)
3-15-6: LICENSE APPLICATION:
A. No license shall be issued except upon written application filed with the Village. A complete application for a license shall be filed not less than
thirty (30) days prior to the issuance thereof. Said application shall be signed by the legal title holder of the rental residential property. Any
person seeking to renew a license issued pursuant to this chapter shall file a completed application not less than thirty (30) days prior to the
expiration of the currently valid license. Application forms may be obtained from the Village and shall contain such information as the
Administrator may require, including but not limited to:
1. The address of the rental residential property.
2. The number of dwelling units within the rental property.
3. Name, address, work, and home telephone numbers of each owner. When the owner is a land trust, the application shall include the name
and address of each person(s) holding a beneficial interest and/or power of direction therein.
4. If the owner does not reside within fifty (50) miles of the Village, then either:
a. Name, address, work, and home telephone numbers of any person appointed as managing agent with authority to accept service or notice
of a violation. If the managing agent is other than a natural person, the above information shall also be provided for that employee of the
managing agent specifically assigned to the rental residential property; or
b. A statement by the owner that service by regular mail upon the owner at the address stated in the application will be considered sufficient
service for all purposes.
5. Name, address, work, and home telephone numbers of any person(s) (other than those listed pursuant to subsections A3 and A4 of this
section), if any, having authority to make any decision with respect to the management and/or maintenance of the rental residential property.
Attached to the application shall be a statement of such person's authority to manage, lease, and/or maintain the rental residential property.
6. The name, address, and telephone number of each company that services any alarm systems in the rental residential building.
B. Every owner shall notify the Administrator of any change in the above information within seven (7) days of any change by completing an updated
and new application otherwise required by this section. (Ord. 18-994, 6-12-2018)
3-15-7: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE; INSPECTION:
A. Upon receipt of a completed application for a license for a rental residential property, including the payment of all required fees, the Administrator
shall schedule an inspection. Pending the inspection and issuance or denial of the license, the Administrator shall allow the continued occupancy
of a rental residential dwelling unit that was previously licensed.
B. Licensing inspections shall include the building exterior, basement, rental residential property, and all rental residential dwelling unit except as
hereafter required. The Administrator shall determine the order and inspection process. The Administrator shall, prior to entering an occupied
dwelling unit, require the owner or agent to be present during the inspection. Unless otherwise specified in a court order or warrant, the
Administrator will not inspect or search personal property of the tenant. The Administrator, while performing his or her duties of office, will
otherwise fully consider the privacy and dignity of the tenant and will not enter or open closets, medicine cabinets, or the other closed cabinets or
lockers unless the Administrator has reasonable grounds to believe that to do so would establish evidence of code violations.
C. When a licensing inspection of a rental residential property reveals any violation of applicable codes, the Administrator shall give notice of the
compliance timeframe as provided in section 3-15-11 of this chapter.
D. A licensing re-inspection will be conducted at the end of the compliance timeframe. Upon completion of the licensing re-inspection of the rental
residential property, a license shall be issued if the property meets the requirements of this Code. If the Administrator finds the requirements of
applicable Village codes have not been met, a written notice of violation stating the defects shall be issued as provided in section 3-15-9 of this
chapter.
E. Subsequent inspections of the property required because of cited violations not being corrected at the time of that inspection shall be subject to
the re-inspection fees set forth in section 3-15-9 of this chapter. (Ord. 18-994, 6-12-2018)
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 129/366
3-15-8: PROPERTY MAINTENANCE REGULATIONS:
A. License Required: It is unlawful for any owner, person, firm, partnership, corporation, or other legal entity to operate, maintain, or offer to rent
within the Village a rental residential dwelling unit whether vacant or not without first obtaining a rental residential license for each building as
provided in this chapter.
B. Smoke And Carbon Monoxide Detection System: Each rental residential dwelling shall be equipped with smoke and carbon monoxide detection
systems which meet the regulations contained in this chapter.
C. Extermination Of Insect Infestations: If upon inspection there is an insect infestation, the owner shall be required to contract a licensed
extermination company to exterminate the infestation. (Ord. 18-994, 6-12-2018)
3-15-9: FEES:
A. License Fees: Each application for a license shall be accompanied by a license fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each single-unit
dwelling. The license fee shall be paid prior to the beginning of that rental residential property's license year.
1. If the license fee is not paid before the beginning of the license year, the fee is delinquent, and the delinquent license fee shall be increased by
an additional fifty dollars ($50.00) if paid within thirty (30) days from the beginning of the license year.
2. If the delinquent license fee is not paid within thirty (30) days of the beginning of the license year, then the delinquent license fee, a twenty five
dollar ($25.00) administrative fee, and interest at six percent (6%) per annum shall become a lien upon the property after notice as provided in
subsection D of this section.
B. Inspection Fees: No inspection fee other than the license fee provided in subsection A of this section shall be charged for the first inspection
made upon application for issuance or renewal of a license or one re-inspection to determine if violations cited in the first inspection have been
corrected if all units are in compliance at the time of the second inspection. If any rental residential dwelling unit fails at the second inspection,
then a re-inspection fee shall be charged. Every failed second inspection and every third or subsequent inspection required thereafter to
determine if a violation has been corrected, a re-inspection fee shall be charged of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per rental residential dwelling
unit. If any second inspection fee is not paid within thirty (30) days of the inspection or third or subsequent inspection fee not paid prior to the
inspection, then the inspection fee, a fifty dollar ($50.00) administrative fee, and interest at six percent (6%) shall become a lien upon the
property after notice as provided in subsection D of this section.
C. Inspection Cancellation Fees: An owner shall be permitted to reschedule one appointment per license year if notice is given to the Administrator
scheduled to conduct the inspection at least twenty four (24) hours before that inspection. If the owner fails to attend a scheduled inspection or
cancels a scheduled inspection with less than twenty four (24) hours' notice, a seventy five dollar ($75.00) rescheduling fee shall be paid prior to
the issuance of the license.
D. Notice: Notice shall be given to the owner of the property or taxpayer of record by personal service or certified mail advising of the delinquent
fees and penalties, and that if not paid within thirty (30) days they shall become a lien upon the property.
E. Lien: If the delinquent fees and penalties are not paid, that amount shall become a lien on the property upon the filing of a notice of lien in the
Office of the Recorder in the county in which the real estate is located. Such lien shall not be valid as to any purchaser whose rights in and to
such property have arisen prior to the filing of such notice of lien. (Ord. 18-994, 6-12-2018)
3-15-10: RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNER:
A. Managing Agent: In the event that the owner appoints a managing agent, that managing agent shall be authorized to receive notices and process
on behalf of the owner.
B. Record Of Tenants: The owner of a rental residential property shall maintain a record for each property with the full legal names and dates of birth
of every tenant. The owner of a rental residential property shall make available to the Administrator, upon request, the occupant records required
to be maintained under this section.
C. Emergency Contact Person: The owner or property agent of a rental residential property shall provide each tenant with the name and telephone
number of a responsible person who, in emergency situations, will be available on a 24-hour basis and who has the authority to make repairs as
needed.
D. Tenant Applications: All owners and managers are required to have all prospective tenants complete a written application that encourages selfscreening
and uncovers past behavior to determine if the applicant meets their written tenant criteria.
E. Leases: All owners and managers are required to lease rental residential dwelling units only pursuant to a written lease containing their rules and
regulations. (Ord. 18-994, 6-12-2018)
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 130/366
3-15-11: NOTICE OF VIOLATION; LICENSE SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION:
A. When a licensing or other inspection of a licensed rental residential property reveals any violations of applicable codes, a compliance timeframe
will be set by the Administrator. In establishing a compliance timeframe, the Administrator shall determine the reasonable minimal time
necessary to correct the violations based upon the number and severity of the violations. The Administrator shall serve or send notice to the
property owner or the listed property agent by personal service or regular U.S. mail at the last address provided on the most recent license
application. Said notice shall include the following:
1. Description of the property sufficient for identification;
2. A statement listing the violations of applicable codes;
3. A statement of the date upon which a re-inspection will occur; and
4. An explanation that if, upon completion of the re-inspection, the requirements of applicable Village codes have not been met, the license for
the rental residential property will be denied or suspended and/or a complaint filed against the owner in the Circuit Court.
B. A re-inspection will be conducted at the end of the compliance timeframe.
1. If any violation is not corrected, the Administrator may issue a written notice extending the time to correct the violations if there has been a
good faith effort to correct the violations and the failure to do so was due to factors beyond the control of the owner.
2. If the Administrator finds that the requirements of applicable Village codes have not been met upon the completion of such re-inspection, the
license for the rental residential property shall be suspended.
3. A license may also be suspended when any information provided in the license application is determined by the Administrator to be false or
when the licensee is convicted by a court of a violation of any property maintenance violation.
4. In the alternative, the Administrator may request the Village Prosecutor to file a complaint against the owner in the Circuit Court.
C. When a license is suspended, the Administrator shall personally serve or mail notice to the property or the listed property agent at the last
address provided on the most recent license application. Said mailed notice shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested. The notice
shall include the following:
1. Description of the property sufficient for identification.
2. A statement of the reasons for suspension.
3. An explanation of the property owner's right to re-inspection prior to revocation.
If the property owner changes his address or changes property agents and fails to notify the Administrator, such notice shall be sufficient if
sent by certified mail to the owner or his property agent's last address provided on the last license application.
D. A property owner whose license has been suspended may request a re-inspection prior to revocation. If, upon re-inspection, the Administrator
finds that the licensed property in connection with which the notice was issued is now in compliance with this chapter, including the payment of
all outstanding fees, the Administrator may reinstate the license. The request for a re-inspection shall not stay the revocation of the license
unless the Administrator grants such request pursuant to a showing of good cause by the property owner.
E. A license may also be revoked when in the opinion of the Administrator emergency conditions exist in a rental residential property that require the
immediate vacating of a structure as specified in the Village's Property Maintenance Code.
F. A license which has been properly revoked as herein provided shall not be reinstated. The property owner may, however, obtain a new license
after all violations have been corrected and by following the procedures for obtaining a new license as set forth in this chapter.
G. Whenever a license is revoked, the Administrator shall send notice to the property owner or the listed property agent at the last address provided
on the most recent license application. Said notice shall be sent by registered mail, return receipt requested. The Administrator shall also notify
all tenants of the rental residential property by posting a notice on all entrances to the rental residential structure. The notice to the tenants shall
include the following:
(1) You are hereby notified that the license for this structure has been revoked pursuant to Section 3-15-11 of the Inverness Municipal Code.
(2) You must vacate this structure within 45 days of the date of this notice.
(3) If you fail to vacate this structure, you will be in violation of Section 3-15-12A2 or Section 3-15-13A1 of the Inverness Municipal Code and
subject to penalties of fines with a minimum of $250.00 and a maximum of $1,500.00 for each day you are in violation.
H. Whenever an owner or property agent of a rental property fails to license said property, the Administrator shall notify all tenants of the rental
property by posting a notice on the primary entrance to the rental property indicating the following:
(1) You are hereby notified that the owner or agent of this rental structure has failed to license this rental property in violation of Section 3-15-5
of the Inverness Municipal Code.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 131/366
(2) You must vacate this structure within 45 days of this notice.
(3) If you fail to vacate this structure, you will be subject to the penalties and fines with a minimum of $250.00 and a maximum of $1,500.00 for
each day you are in violation.
(Ord. 18-994, 6-12-2018)
3-15-12: OWNER VIOLATIONS:
A. The following shall constitute violations of this chapter:
1. Failure of the owner of a rental residential building to license such rental residential property or building with the Administrator.
2. Failure of the owner of a rental residential building to vacate all tenants from said building within forty five (45) days after the license has been
revoked.
3. Failure of the owner of the rental property to maintain the structure and premises in compliance with applicable building, property maintenance
and zoning ordinances in this Code. (Ord. 18-994, 6-12-2018)
3-15-13: OTHER VIOLATIONS:
A. The following shall constitute violations of this chapter:
1. Failure of the occupants of the rental residential property to vacate such property within forty five (45) days after receiving notice from the
Administrator that such property is not properly licensed or that the license has been revoked.
2. Any person other than an inspector from the Village who removes or defaces any notices which have been posted pursuant to this chapter
without the approval of the Administrator shall be liable for the penalties provided for by this chapter. (Ord. 18-994, 6-12-2018)
3-15-14: ACCESS FOR INSPECTIONS:
If any owner, property agent, occupant or other person in control of a rental residential property or a dwelling unit contained therein fails or refuses
to consent to free access and entry to the property or dwelling unit under his control for any inspection pursuant to this chapter, the Administrator or
his designee shall apply to the Circuit Court for an administrative search warrant or other appropriate court order authorizing such inspections. (Ord.
18-994, 6-12-2018)
3-15-15: CHAPTER DOES NOT AFFECT LEASES:
This chapter is not intended to and does not affect the rights and obligations of the parties to a lease, oral or written, of a rental residential property.
(Ord. 18-994, 6-12-2018)
3-15-16: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision or part thereof of this chapter is declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid and of no further force and effect, such
invalidity shall not affect the remaining provisions of this chapter, which shall remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 18-994, 6-12-2018)
3-15-17: PENALTY:
A. Any owner, property agent, occupant or person who fails to comply with any section of this chapter applicable to him, and continues in this failure
after due notice and opportunity to correct, given pursuant to this chapter, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine of not less than two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) for each day each section of this chapter is violated
after expiration of the time for correction of the violations.
B. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the Village from taking any other legal or equitable remedies available to the Village, including any
emergency action permitted by law when any portion of the rental residential building is a danger to persons or property. (Ord. 18-994, 6-12-
2018)
Chapter 16
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES
3-16-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations, standards and procedures for the siting and collocation of small wireless facilities
on rights-of-way within the Village's jurisdiction, or outside the rights-of-way on property zoned by the Village exclusively for commercial or
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 132/366
industrial use, in a manner that is consistent with the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act (the Act).
B. Conflicts With Other Chapters: This chapter supersedes all chapters or parts of ordinances adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to
the extent of such conflict.
C. Conflicts With State And Federal Laws: In the event that applicable Federal or State laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this
chapter, the wireless provider shall comply with the requirements of this chapter to the maximum extent possible without violating Federal or
State laws or regulations. (Ord. 18-997, 7-10-2018)
3-16-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
ANTENNA: Communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless
services.
APPLICABLE CODES: Building, Fire, Electrical, Plumbing, or Mechanical Codes adopted by a recognized national code organization or local
amendments to those codes, including the National Electric Safety Code.
APPLICANT: Any person who submits an application and is a wireless provider.
APPLICATION: A request submitted by an applicant to the Village for a permit to collocate small wireless facilities, and a request that includes the
installation of a new utility pole for such collocation, as well as any applicable fee for the review of such application.
COLLOCATE OR COLLOCATION: To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or replace wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support
structure or utility pole.
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: Cable service, as defined in 47 USC 522(6), as amended; information service, as defined in 47 USC 153(24), as
amended; telecommunications service, as defined in 47 USC 153(53), as amended; mobile service, as defined in 47 USC 153(53), as amended; or
wireless service other than mobile service.
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDER: A cable operator, as defined in 47 USC 522(5), as amended; a provider of information service, as
defined in 47 USC 153(24), as amended; a telecommunications carrier, as defined in 47 USC 153(51), as amended; or a wireless provider.
FCC: The Federal Communications Commission of the United States.
FEE: A one-time charge.
HISTORIC DISTRICT OR HISTORIC LANDMARK: A building, property, or site, or group of buildings, properties, or sites that are either: a) listed in
the National Register of Historic Places or formally determined eligible for listing by the Keeper of the National Register, the individual who has been
delegated the authority by the Federal agency to list properties and determine their eligibility for the National Register, in accordance with section
VI.D.1.a.i through section VI.D.1.a.v of the Nationwide Programmatic Agreement codified at 47 CFR part 1, appendix C; or b) designated as a
locally landmarked building, property, site, or Historic District by an ordinance adopted by the Village pursuant to a preservation program that meets
the requirements of the Certified Local Government Program of the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office or where such certification of the
preservation program by the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office is pending.
LAW: A Federal or State Statute, common law, code, rule, regulation, order, or local ordinance or resolution.
MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY: A small wireless facility that is not larger in dimension than twenty four inches (24") in length, fifteen inches (15") in
width, and twelve inches (12") in height and that has an exterior antenna, if any, no longer than eleven inches (11").
MUNICIPAL UTILITY POLE: A utility pole owned or operated by the Village in public rights-of-way.
PERMIT: A written authorization required by the Village to perform an action or initiate, continue, or complete a project.
PERSON: An individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, association, trust, or other entity or organization.
PUBLIC SAFETY AGENCY: The functional division of the Federal government, the State, a unit of local government, or a Special Purpose District
located in whole or in part within this State, that provides or has authority to provide firefighting, police, ambulance, medical, or other emergency
services to respond to and manage emergency incidents.
RATE: A recurring charge.
RIGHT-OF-WAY: The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, public sidewalk, alley, or utility easement dedicated for compatible
use. Right-of-way does not include Village-owned aerial lines.
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY: A wireless facility that meets both of the following qualifications: a) each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no
more than six (6) cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit
within an imaginary enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic feet; and b) all other wireless equipment attached directly to a utility pole associated with
the facility is cumulatively no more than twenty five (25) cubic feet in volume. The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included
in the calculation of equipment volume: electric meter, concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based enclosures,
grounding equipment, power transfer switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other services.
UTILITY POLE: A pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part by a communications service provider or for electric distribution, lighting,
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 133/366
traffic control, or a similar function.
VILLAGE: The Village of Inverness.
WIRELESS FACILITY: Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between user equipment and a communications
network, including: a) equipment associated with wireless communications; and b) radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular
and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration. Wireless facility includes small wireless facilities.
Wireless facility does not include: a) the structure or improvements on, under, or within which the equipment is collocated; or b) wireline backhaul
facilities, coaxial or fiber optic cable that is between wireless support structures or utility poles or coaxial, or fiber optic cable that is otherwise not
immediately adjacent to or directly associated with an antenna.
WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER: Any person authorized to provide telecommunications service in the State that builds or installs
wireless communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, wireless support structures, or utility poles and that is not a wireless services
provider but is acting as an agent or a contractor for a wireless services provider for the application submitted to the Village.
WIRELESS PROVIDER: A wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless services provider.
WIRELESS SERVICES: Any services provided to the general public, including a particular class of customers, and made available on a
nondiscriminatory basis using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile, provided using wireless facilities.
WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER: A person who provides wireless services.
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE: A freestanding structure, such as a monopole; tower, either guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or other
existing or proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless facilities. Wireless support structure does not include a utility
pole. (Ord. 18-997, 7-10-2018)
3-16-3: REGULATION OF SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES:
A. Permitted Use: Small wireless facilities shall be classified as permitted uses and subject to administrative review, except as provided in
subsection C9 of this section regarding height exceptions or variances, but not subject to zoning review or approval if they are collocated: 1) in
rights-of-way in any zoning district, or 2) outside rights-of-way in property zoned exclusively for commercial or industrial use.
B. Permit Required: An applicant shall obtain one or more permits from the Village to collocate a small wireless facility. An application shall be
received and processed, and permits issued shall be subject to the following conditions and requirements:
1. Application Requirements: A wireless provider shall provide the following information to the Village, together with the Village's Small Cell
Facilities Permit Application, as a condition of any permit application to collocate small wireless facilities on a utility pole or wireless support
structure:
a. Site specific structural integrity and, for a Municipal utility pole, make-ready analysis prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is
defined in section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989;
b. The location where each proposed small wireless facility or utility pole would be installed and photographs of the location and its immediate
surroundings depicting the utility poles or structures on which each proposed small wireless facility would be mounted or location where
utility poles or structures would be installed. This should include a depiction of the completed facility;
c. Specifications and drawings prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is defined in section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act
of 1989, for each proposed small wireless facility covered by the application as it is proposed to be installed;
d. The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and all other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility;
e. A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of each small wireless facility covered by the application, if approved; and
f. Certification that the collocation complies with the collocation requirements and conditions contained herein, to the best of the applicant's
knowledge.
g. In the event that the proposed small wireless facility is to be attached to an existing pole owned by an entity other than the Village, the
wireless provider shall provide legally competent evidence of the consent of the owner of such pole to the proposed collocation.
2. Application Process: The Village shall process applications as follows:
a. Priority: The first completed application shall have priority over applications received by different applicants for collocation on the same
utility pole or wireless support structure.
b. Existing Pole Or Structure: An application to collocate a small wireless facility on an existing utility pole or wireless support structure, or
replacement of an existing utility pole or wireless support structure shall be processed on a nondiscriminatory basis and shall be deemed
approved if the Village fails to approve or deny the application within ninety (90) days after the submission of a completed application.
However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the Village in
writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than seventy five (75) days after the submission of a completed
application.
The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the 90th day after submission of the complete application or the 10th day after the
receipt of the deemed approved notice by the Village. The receipt of the deemed approved notice shall not preclude the Village's denial of
the permit request within the time limits as provided under this chapter.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 134/366
c. New Utility Pole: An application to collocate a small wireless facility that includes the installation of a new utility pole shall be processed on a
nondiscriminatory basis and deemed approved if the Village fails to approve or deny the application within one hundred twenty (120) days
after the submission of a completed application.
However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the Village in
writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than one hundred five (105) days after the submission of a
completed application.
The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the 120th day after submission of the complete application or the 10th day after the
receipt of the deemed approved notice by the Village. The receipt of the deemed approved notice shall not preclude the Village's denial of
the permit request within the time limits as provided under this chapter.
d. Denial; Revised Application: The Village shall deny an application which does not meet the requirements of this chapter.
If the Village determines that applicable codes, ordinances or regulations that concern public safety, or the collocation requirements and
conditions contained herein require that the utility pole or wireless support structure be replaced before the requested collocation, approval
shall be conditioned on the replacement of the utility pole or wireless support structure at the cost of the provider.
The Village shall document the basis for a denial, including the specific code provisions or application conditions on which the denial is
based, and send the documentation to the applicant on or before the day the Village denies an application.
The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the Village and resubmit the revised application once within thirty (30) days after notice
of denial is sent to the applicant without paying an additional application fee. The Village shall approve or deny the revised application within
thirty (30) days after the applicant resubmits the application or it is deemed approved. Failure to resubmit the revised application within thirty
(30) days of denial shall require the applicant to submit a new application with applicable fees, and recommencement of the Village's review
period.
The applicant must notify the Village in writing of its intention to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, which may
be submitted with the revised application.
Any review of a revised application shall be limited to the deficiencies cited in the denial. However, this revised application does not apply if
the cure requires the review of a new location, new or different structure to be collocated upon, new antennas, or other wireless equipment
associated with the small wireless facility.
e. Pole Attachment Agreement: Within thirty (30) days after an approved permit to collocate a small wireless facility on a Municipal utility pole,
the Village and the applicant shall enter into a Master Pole Attachment Agreement, provided by the Village for the initial collocation on a
Municipal utility pole by the applicant. For subsequent approved permits to collocate a small wireless facility on a Municipal utility pole, the
Village and the applicant shall enter into a License Supplement of the Master Pole Attachment Agreement.
3. Completeness Of Application: Within thirty (30) days after receiving an application, the Village shall determine whether the application is
complete and notify the applicant. If an application is incomplete, the Village must specifically identify the missing information. An application
shall be deemed complete if the Village fails to provide notification to the applicant within thirty (30) days after all documents, information and
fees specifically enumerated in the Village's permit application form are submitted by the applicant to the Village.
Processing deadlines are tolled from the time the Village sends the notice of incompleteness to the time the applicant provides the missing
information.
4. Tolling: The time period for applications may be further tolled by:
a. An express written agreement by both the applicant and the Village; or
b. A local, State or Federal disaster declaration or similar emergency that causes the delay.
5. Consolidated Applications: An applicant seeking to collocate small wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the Village shall be allowed, at
the applicant's discretion, to file a consolidated application and receive a single permit for the collocation of up to twenty five (25) small
wireless facilities if the collocations each involve substantially the same type of small wireless facility and substantially the same type of
structure.
If an application includes multiple small wireless facilities, the Village may remove small wireless facility collocations from the application and
treat separately small wireless facility collocations for which incomplete information has been provided or that do not qualify for consolidated
treatment or that are denied. The Village may issue separate permits for each collocation that is approved in a consolidated application.
6. Duration Of Permits: The duration of a permit shall be for a period of not less than five (5) years, and the permit shall be renewed for
equivalent durations unless the Village makes a finding that the small wireless facilities or the new or modified utility pole do not comply with
the applicable Village codes or any provision, condition or requirement contained in this chapter.
If the Act is repealed as provided in section 90 therein, renewals of permits shall be subject to the applicable Village Code provisions or
regulations in effect at the time of renewal.
7. Means Of Submitting Applications: Applicants shall submit applications, supporting information and notices to the Village by personal delivery
at the Village's designated place of business, by regular mail postmarked on the date due or by any other commonly used means, including
electronic mail.
C. Collocation Requirements And Conditions:
1. Public Safety Space Reservation: The Village may reserve space on Municipal utility poles for future public safety uses, for the Village's
electric utility uses, or both, but a reservation of space may not preclude the collocation of a small wireless facility unless the Village
reasonably determines that the Municipal utility pole cannot accommodate both uses.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 135/366
2. Installation And Maintenance: The wireless provider shall install, maintain, repair and modify its small wireless facilities in safe condition and
good repair and in compliance with the requirements and conditions of this chapter. The wireless provider shall ensure that its employees,
agents or contractors that perform work in connection with its small wireless facilities are adequately trained and skilled in accordance with all
applicable industry and governmental standards and regulations.
3. No Interference With Public Safety Communication Frequencies: The wireless provider's operation of the small wireless facilities shall not
interfere with the frequencies used by a public safety agency for public safety communications.
A wireless provider shall install small wireless facilities of the type and frequency that will not cause unacceptable interference with a public
safety agency's communications equipment.
Unacceptable interference will be determined by and measured in accordance with industry standards and the FCC's regulations addressing
unacceptable interference to public safety spectrum or any other spectrum licensed by a public safety agency.
If a small wireless facility causes such interference, and the wireless provider has been given written notice of the interference by the public
safety agency, the wireless provider, at its own expense, shall remedy the interference in a manner consistent with the abatement and
resolution procedures for interference with public safety spectrum established by the FCC including 47 CFR 22.970 through 47 CFR 22.973
and 47 CFR 90.672 through 47 CFR 90.675.
The Village may terminate a permit for a small wireless facility based on such interference if the wireless provider is not in compliance with the
Code of Federal Regulations cited in the previous paragraph. Failure to remedy the interference as required herein shall constitute a public
nuisance.
4. Restrictions: The wireless provider shall not collocate small wireless facilities on Village utility poles that are part of an electric distribution or
transmission system within the communication worker safety zone of the pole or the electric supply zone of the pole.
However, the antenna and support equipment of the small wireless facility may be located in the communications space on the Village utility
pole and on the top of the pole, if not otherwise unavailable, if the wireless provider complies with applicable codes for work involving the top
of the pole.
For purposes of this subparagraph, the terms "communications space", "communication worker safety zone", and "electric supply zone" have
the meanings given to those terms in the National Electric Safety Code as published by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.
5. Compliance: The wireless provider shall comply with all applicable codes and local code provisions or regulations that concern public safety.
6. Design Standards: The wireless provider shall comply with written design standards that are generally applicable for decorative utility poles, or
reasonable stealth, concealment and aesthetic requirements that are set forth in a Village ordinance, written policy adopted by the Village, a
comprehensive plan or other written design plan that applies to other occupiers of the rights-of-way, including on a historic landmark or in a
Historic District.
7. Alternate Placements: Except as provided in this collocation requirements and conditions section, a wireless provider shall not be required to
collocate small wireless facilities on any specific utility pole, or category of utility poles, or be required to collocate multiple antenna systems on
a single utility pole. However, with respect to an application for the collocation of a small wireless facility associated with a new utility pole, the
Village may propose that the small wireless facility be collocated on an existing utility pole or existing wireless support structure within one
hundred feet (100') of the proposed collocation, which the applicant shall accept if it has the right to use the alternate structure on reasonable
terms and conditions, and the alternate location and structure does not impose technical limits or additional material costs as determined by
the applicant.
If the applicant refuses a collocation proposed by the Village, the applicant shall provide written certification describing the property rights,
technical limits or material cost reasons the alternate location does not satisfy the criteria in this paragraph.
8. Height Limitations: The maximum height of a small wireless facility shall be no more than ten feet (10') above the utility pole or wireless
support structure on which the small wireless facility is collocated.
New or replacement utility poles or wireless support structures on which small wireless facilities are collocated may not exceed the higher of:
a. Ten feet (10') in height above the tallest existing utility pole, other than a utility pole supporting only wireless facilities, that is in place on the
date the application is submitted to the Village, that is located within three hundred feet (300') of the new or replacement utility pole or
wireless support structure and that is in the same right-of-way within the jurisdictional boundary of the Village, provided the Village may
designate which intersecting right-of-way within three hundred feet (300') of the proposed utility pole or wireless support structures shall
control the height limitation for such facility; or
b. Forty five feet (45') above ground level.
9. Height Exceptions Or Variances: If an applicant proposes a height for a new or replacement pole in excess of the above height limitations on
which the small wireless facility is proposed for collocation, the applicant may apply for a variation in conformance with procedures, terms and
conditions set forth in title 5, chapter 9 of this Code.
10. Contractual Design Requirements: The wireless provider shall comply with requirements that are imposed by a contract between the Village
and a private property owner that concern design or construction standards applicable to utility poles and ground-mounted equipment located
in the right-of-way.
11. Ground-Mounted Equipment Spacing: The wireless provider shall comply with applicable spacing requirements in applicable codes and
ordinances concerning the location of ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way if the requirements include a waiver, zoning or
other process that addresses wireless provider requests for exception or variance and do not prohibit granting of such exceptions or
variances.
12. Undergrounding Regulations: The wireless provider shall comply with local code provisions or regulations concerning undergrounding
requirements that prohibit the installation of new or the modification of existing utility poles in a right-of-way without prior approval if the
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 136/366
requirements include a waiver, zoning or other process that addresses requests to install such new utility poles or modify such existing utility
poles and do not prohibit the replacement of utility poles.
13. Collocation Completion Deadline: Collocation for which a permit is granted shall be completed within one hundred eighty (180) days after
issuance of the permit, unless the Village and the wireless provider agree to extend this period or a delay is caused by make-ready work for a
Municipal utility pole or by the lack of commercial power or backhaul availability at the site, provided the wireless provider has made a timely
request within sixty (60) days after the issuance of the permit for commercial power or backhaul services, and the additional time to complete
installation does not exceed three hundred sixty (360) days after issuance of the permit. Otherwise, the permit shall be void unless the Village
grants an extension in writing to the applicant.
D. Application Fees: Application fees are imposed as follows:
1. Applicant shall pay an application fee of six hundred fifty dollars ($650.00) for an application to collocate a single small wireless facility on an
existing utility pole or wireless support structure, and three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) for each small wireless facility addressed in a
consolidated application to collocate more than one small wireless facility on existing utility poles or wireless support structures.
2. Applicant shall pay an application fee of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each small wireless facility addressed in an application that
includes the installation of a new utility pole for such collocation.
3. Notwithstanding any contrary provision of State law or local ordinance, applications pursuant to this section shall be accompanied by the
required application fee. Application fees shall be non-refundable.
4. The Village shall not require an application, approval or permit, or require any fees or other charges, from a communications service provider
authorized to occupy the rights-of-way, for:
a. Routine maintenance;
b. The replacement of wireless facilities with wireless facilities that are substantially similar, the same size, or smaller if the wireless provider
notifies the Village at least ten (10) days prior to the planned replacement and includes equipment specifications for the replacement of
equipment consistent with subsection B1d of this section; or
c. The installation, placement, maintenance, operation or replacement of micro wireless facilities suspended on cables that are strung between
existing utility poles in compliance with applicable Safety Codes.
5. Wireless providers shall secure a permit from the Village to work within rights-of-way for activities that affect traffic patterns or require lane
closures.
E. Exceptions To Applicability: Nothing in this chapter authorizes a person to collocate small wireless facilities on:
1. Property owned by a private party or property owned or controlled by the Village or another unit of local government that is not located within
rights-of-way, or a privately owned utility pole or wireless support structure without the consent of the property owner;
2. Property owned, leased, or controlled by a Park District, Forest Preserve District, or Conservation District for public park, recreation or
conservation purposes without the consent of the affected district, excluding the placement of facilities on rights-of-way located in an affected
district that are under the jurisdiction and control of a different unit of local government as provided by the Illinois Highway Code; or
3. Property owned by a rail carrier registered under section 18c-7201 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, Metra Commuter Rail or any other public
commuter rail service, or an electric utility as defined in section 16-102 of the Public Utilities Act, without the consent of the rail carrier, public
commuter rail service, or electric utility. The provisions of this chapter do not apply to an electric or gas public utility or such utility's wireless
facilities if the facilities are being used, developed and maintained consistent with the provisions of subsection (i) of section 16-108.5 of the
Public Utilities Act.
For the purposes of this subsection, "public utility" has the meaning given to that term in section 3-105 of the Public Utilities Act. Nothing in this
chapter shall be construed to relieve any person from any requirement: a) to obtain a franchise or a State-issued authorization to offer cable
service or video service or b) to obtain any required permission to install, place, maintain, or operate communications facilities, other than
small wireless facilities subject to this chapter.
F. Pre-Existing Agreements: Existing agreements between the Village and wireless providers that relate to the collocation of small wireless facilities
in the right-of-way, including the collocation of small wireless facilities on Village utility poles, that are in effect on June 1, 2018, remain in effect
for all small wireless facilities collocated on the Village's utility poles pursuant to applications submitted to the Village before June 1, 2018,
subject to applicable termination provisions contained therein. Agreements entered into after June 1, 2018, shall comply with this chapter.
A wireless provider that has an existing agreement with the Village on the effective date of the Act may accept the rates, fees and terms that the
Village makes available under this chapter for the collocation of small wireless facilities or the installation of new utility poles for the collocation of
small wireless facilities that are the subject of an application submitted two (2) or more years after the effective date of the Act by notifying the
Village that it opts to accept such rates, fees and terms. The existing agreement remains in effect, subject to applicable termination provisions,
for the small wireless facilities the wireless provider has collocated on the Village's utility poles pursuant to applications submitted to the Village
before the wireless provider provides such notice and exercises its option under this paragraph.
G. Annual Recurring Rate: A wireless provider shall pay to the Village an annual recurring rate to collocate a small wireless facility on a Village utility
pole located in a right-of-way that equals: 1) two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year or 2) the actual, direct and reasonable costs related to the
wireless provider's use of space on the Village utility pole.
If the Village has not billed the wireless provider actual and direct costs, the fee shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00) payable on the first day
after the first annual anniversary of the issuance of the permit or notice of intent to collocate, and on each annual anniversary date thereafter.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 137/366
H. Abandonment: A small wireless facility that is not operated for a continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned. The
owner of the facility shall remove the small wireless facility within ninety (90) days after receipt of written notice from the Village notifying the
wireless provider of the abandonment.
The notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, by the Village to the owner at the last known address of the
wireless provider. If the small wireless facility is not removed within ninety (90) days of such notice, the Village may remove or cause the removal
of such facility pursuant to the terms of its pole attachment agreement for Municipal utility poles or through whatever actions are provided for
abatement of nuisances or by other law for removal and cost recovery.
A wireless provider shall provide written notice to the Village if it sells or transfers small wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the Village.
Such notice shall include the name and contact information of the new wireless provider. (Ord. 18-997, 7-10-2018)
3-16-4: DISPUTE RESOLUTION:
The Circuit Court of Cook County shall have exclusive jurisdiction to resolve all disputes arising under the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act.
Pending resolution of a dispute concerning rates for collocation of small wireless facilities on Municipal utility poles within the right-of-way, the
Village shall allow the collocating person to collocate on its poles at annual rates of no more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year per
Municipal utility pole, with rates to be determined upon final resolution of the dispute. (Ord. 18-997, 7-10-2018)
3-16-5: INDEMNIFICATION:
A wireless provider shall indemnify and hold the Village harmless against any and all liability or loss from personal injury or property damage
resulting from or arising out of, in whole or in part, the use or occupancy of the Village improvements or right-of-way associated with such
improvements by the wireless provider or its employees, agents, or contractors arising out of the rights and privileges granted under this chapter
and the Act. A wireless provider has no obligation to indemnify or hold harmless against any liabilities and losses as may be due to or caused by the
sole negligence of the Village or its employees or agents. A wireless provider shall further waive any claims that they may have against the Village
with respect to consequential, incidental, or special damages, however caused, based on the theory of liability. (Ord. 18-997, 7-10-2018)
3-16-6: INSURANCE:
The wireless provider shall carry, at the wireless provider's own cost and expense, the following insurance:
A. Property insurance for its property's replacement cost against all risks;
B. Workers' compensation insurance, as required by law; or
C. Commercial general liability insurance with respect to its activities on the Village improvements or rights-of-way to afford minimum protection
limits consistent with its requirements of other users of Village improvements or rights-of-way, including coverage for bodily injury and property
damage.
The wireless provider shall include the Village as an additional insured on the commercial general liability policy and provide certification and
documentation of inclusion of the Village in a commercial general liability policy prior to the collocation of any wireless facility.
A wireless provider may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance coverage and limit requirement required by the Village. A wireless provider that
self-insures is not required, to the extent of the self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the name of additional insureds under this section.
A wireless provider that elects to self-insure shall provide to the Village evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the
insurance coverage limits required by the Village. (Ord. 18-997, 7-10-2018)
3-16-7: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this chapter or application thereof to any person or circumstances is ruled unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such invalidity
shall not affect other provisions or applications of this chapter that can be given effect without the invalid application or provision, and each invalid
provision or invalid application of this chapter is severable. (Ord. 18-997, 7-10-2018)
Title 4
BUILDING REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
GENERAL BUILDING PROVISIONS
4-1-1: SHORT TITLE; DESIGNATION OF PARTS:
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 138/366
A. This title, including the rules and regulations it adopts by reference, is entitled the INVERNESS BUILDING CODE. The number or letter
designations used to set off or identify its various parts refer to sections, subsections, paragraphs, rules, regulations or other divisions as the text
or arrangement may indicate. Reference to any of these parts may be by such designation alone.
B. To the extent that any provisions of this title are inconsistent with other provisions of this title or of this code, the more restrictive provisions shall
prevail, except that to the extent that the provisions of this chapter are inconsistent with any provisions of the code, regulations, standards, or
appendices adopted in this title, in such event the provisions of this chapter shall govern and prevail. (Ord. 06-822, 3-14-2006)
4-1-2: SCOPE OF PROVISIONS; PERMITS REQUIRED:
A. Each regulated building and structure, part and/or appurtenance thereof, both existing and hereafter erected or installed, shall be so maintained
that the occupants and users thereof and all others are reasonably safe from the hazards of fire, explosion, collapse, contagion and spread of
infectious disease.
B. The owner of record of the subject real estate or his employee contractor, or beneficiary on behalf of such owner shall obtain a permit, as
hereinafter provided by this title, in advance, and all other requirements of these building regulations shall be complied with whenever a building
or structure or part or appurtenance thereof, including, but not limited to, any electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, or any portion
thereof, located within the limits of the village is constructed, erected, installed, altered, converted, remodeled, structurally repaired, moved,
demolished or its use or occupancy is established or changed. (Ord. 06-822, 3-14-2006)
4-1-3: ADMINISTRATION; ENFORCEMENT:
The office of building official is hereby created in which is vested the power and duty to administer and enforce all the provisions of this title and
such other regulations as are designated by the board of trustees by ordinance or by direction of the village president. Wherever in this title the term
building official or building officer is used, said reference shall be to the building official as herein created.
A. Building Official Appointment: The village president shall appoint as building official a person who is qualified by professional or practical training
and experience to conduct the affairs and carry out the duties of that office.
B. Duties: The services of the building official and/or deputy building officials shall be provided by one or more persons acting as employees of the
village or acting as independent contractors pursuant to a contract or contracts approved by the board of trustees.
C. Term Of Office: The building official shall have no fixed term of office but shall serve at the pleasure of the president and may be terminated with
or without cause by the president but shall serve until a successor has been appointed and qualified.
D. Inquiries And Reports: The building official shall inquire into and report upon any matter pertaining to building and zoning as may be requested by
the president and/or board of trustees.
E. Deputy Building Official Appointment: The village president may also appoint such deputy building officials as are needed and qualified to carry
out efficiently the duties and powers assigned to them by said village president or building official, and there are hereby created the offices of
deputy building officials, who shall be appointed by the president. The number of such deputies shall be determined, from time to time by the
president and board of trustees, and each such deputy shall serve at the pleasure of the president and may be terminated with or without cause
by the president. Each such deputy shall have the same powers and duties as are assigned to the building official but shall be subject to the
direction of the building official.
F. Compensation: The building official and deputy building officials shall receive such compensation, if any, as employees of the village or as
independent contractors of the village, as may be fixed by the board of trustees from time to time.
G. Department Records: The building official shall keep official records of applications received, permits and certificates issued, fees collected,
reports of inspections, and notices and orders issued. (Ord. 06-822, 3-14-2006)
4-1-4: BUILDING PERMIT FEES:
A. New Construction And Alterations: The fees for all building permits shall be six dollars ($6.00) for each one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) of
scaled cost of construction, or fraction thereof.
The scaled cost of construction shall be determined by the method below:
Type Of Structure Construction Cost
One- and two-family and multiple-family residential structures, per square foot for all finished and/or unfinished space $ 100.00
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 139/366
Business, offices, institutional structures, per square foot for all finished and/or unfinished space 100.00
Manufacturing, industrial structures, per square foot for all finished and/or unfinished space 100.00
Accessory residential structure, and decks per square foot for all finished and/or unfinished space or surface 50.00
Fireplaces (added value of each) 2,500.00
The scaled cost of construction of an addition, alteration or remodeling to a particular type of structure shall be determined at the same rate as
the scaled cost of construction of the existing structure would be determined if new.
There shall be a permit fee for new fences of fifteen dollars ($15.00) per one hundred (100) linear feet or fraction thereof.
In addition to the fees otherwise herein provided for, a fee surcharge of fifty percent (50%) of total building fees will be collected if construction
is started before a construction permit is issued, including site, building, fence demolition, etc., not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00).
Other applicable fees shall be as follows:
Certificate of
occupancy and
administrative costs
$25.00
Insurance fee $25.00 (fixed charge)
Off street parking
facilities permit
$50.00
Permit for moving
of buildings
$6.00 per $100.00 of estimated cost of work
Permit extension
fee
Each and every extension of such a building permit beyond the 2 year term thereof as authorized by section 107.9 of
the Inverness building code, a fee surcharge of fifty percent (50%) of the original total building fees shall be paid by the
permittee prior to the grant of each such extension
Plan review fee $60.00 per hour of actual time required by the building inspector for such plan review, with a minimum charge of onehalf
(1/2) hour, plus reimbursement to the village for any out of pocket expenses incurred by the village in such plan
review
Reinspection fee $100.00 for each inspection after both the initial inspection and after the first reinspection of the same project or of
some portion thereof or of the work of each separate trade due to noncompliance (i.e., the cost of the initial inspection
and the first reinspection are included in the specific permit fees)
Removal of stop
work order fee
$52.00
Septic permit $300.00
Septic repair permit
$150.00
Sign permits The fee for signs, billboards and other display of structures for which permits are required under the provisions of the
basic code shall be in accordance with title 5, chapter 5 of this code
Site development
permit
$200.00
Swimming pool
permit
$200.00
Temporary
certificate of
occupancy
$250.00
Tennis court permit
$100.00
Well permit $50.00
B. Fees For Demolition Or Removal Of Building Or Structure Or Tanks: The fee for a permit for the demolition of a building or structure shall be at
the rate of three dollars ($3.00) for each one hundred (100) square feet of floor area of the building or structure. The fee for removal of
miscellaneous structures such as underground storage tanks shall be thirteen dollars ($13.00) for each item. A performance bond and a road
bond shall be posted for each demolition permit in accordance with section 4-1-5 of this chapter.
C. Electrical Permit And Inspection Fees: In addition to the above fees, the following electrical permit and inspection fees are hereby established:
1. For the inspection of original installations in a single-family residence, during construction of such residence including all circuits, fixtures,
receptacles and equipment:
For a residence to contain up to 1,000 square feet of
livable floor area
$70.00
For a residence to contain 1,001 to 2,000 square feet of
livable floor area
$85.00
For a residence to contain 2,001 to 3,000 square feet of
livable floor area
$105.00
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 140/366
For a residence to contain in excess of 3,000 square
feet of
livable floor area
$105.00 plus $55.00 for each 1,000 square feet of area or any fraction thereof in
excess of 3,000 square feet
2. For the inspection of electrical installations in any nonresidential building during construction of such building including all circuits, fixtures,
receptacles and equipment:
For a building to contain up to 1,000 square feet of
usable floor area
$70.00
For a building to contain 1,001 to 2,000 square feet of
usable floor area
$85.00
For a building to contain 2,001 to 3,000 square feet of
usable floor area
$105.00
For a building to contain in excess of 3,000 square feet
of usable floor area
$105.00 plus $25.00 for each 1,000 square feet of area or any fraction thereof in
excess of 3,000 square feet
3. For each inspection of additional electrical outlets on existing circuits, there shall be no charge.
4. For inspection of any electrical installation in any existing building, and for additional or replacement circuits in an existing building or for
additional circuits in any remodeling or enlargement of an existing building:
For remodeling or additions affecting up to 1,000 square
feet of usable floor area
$70.00
For remodeling or additions affecting 1,001 to 2,000
square feet of usable floor area
$85.00
For remodeling or additions affecting 2,001 to 3,000
square feet of usable floor area
$105.00
For remodeling or additions affecting in excess of 3,000
square feet of usable floor area
$105.00 plus $55.00 for each 1,000 square feet of usable floor area or any
fraction thereof in excess of 3,000 square feet
5. If additional electrical inspections are required by reason of inaccurate or incomplete information supplied by the applicant, a charge of sixty
dollars ($60.00) per hour shall be made for the time consumed in making any such additional inspection. (Ord. 06-822, 3-13-2006)
D. Plumbing Permit And Inspection Fees: The fee for each plumbing permit shall be twenty dollars ($20.00) plus ten dollars ($10.00) for each fixture
included in the system, such as, but not limited to, bathtubs, lavatories, closets, sinks, laundry tubs, drinking fountains, floor drains, and/or any
installed receptacles, devices or other appliances which are supplied with water or which receive or discharge liquids or liquid borne wastes, with
or without discharge into the drainage system with which they may be directly or indirectly connected shall be considered a fixture, but in no
event shall the fee be less than the out of pocket expenses incurred by the village for its plumbing inspection contractor relative to such permit
and the related inspections. The fee for each plumbing permit shall defray the village's charges for all initial plumbing inspections plus one
reinspection related to such permit. If more than one reinspection is required related to any plumbing permit, a charge of one hundred dollars
($100.00) per reinspection shall be paid by the permittee.
E. Refunds: Whenever, after application for a building permit and prior to any building site preparation and/or construction of permanent
improvements on the property, the applicant requests that the application be withdrawn and any permits issued revoked, there shall be refunded
to such applicant all building permit fees paid and all water-sewer connection and similar fees paid excepting, however:
1. Plan review charges;
2. An additional charge, if appropriate, to reimburse the village for time spent or charges incurred other than usual plan review; and
3. Recapture charges which may have been paid by the village to others entitled thereto. (Ord. 07-847, 3-13-2007)
4-1-5: BONDS:
A. Performance Bond:
1. Each person who applies for a building permit for the construction of any new building, for an addition to an existing building, for remodeling of
an existing building, or who applies for any site development permit to be issued pursuant to chapter 8 of this title or for any demolition permit
shall post with the village collector a cash performance bond as follows:
a. One thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for any addition to an existing building or for any remodeling of an existing building where the total
estimated scaled cost of construction is in excess of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) but does not exceed one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00), or for any demolition permit.
b. One thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for any site development permit to be issued pursuant to chapter 8 of this title where the cost of the site
work does not exceed one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00).
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 141/366
c. Two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for any new building or for any addition to an existing building or for remodeling of any existing building
where the total estimated scaled cost of construction exceeds one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00); and
d. Two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for any site development permit to be issued pursuant to chapter 8 of this title where the cost
of the site work exceeds one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00).
2. Such bond shall be refunded to the applicant if the village president finds that the construction, demolition and/or site work has been
completed in compliance with this code and all other applicable rules, regulations and ordinances of the village and with state law. Otherwise,
said performance bond shall be forfeited to the village without prejudice to the rights of the village to require compliance with this code and all
other applicable rules, regulations and ordinances and with state law.
B. Road Bond:
1. Each person who applies for a building permit for the construction of any new building, for an addition to an existing building, or for remodeling
of an existing building, or who applies for any site development permit to be issued pursuant to chapter 8 of this title, or for any demolition
permit shall post with the village collector a cash road bond as follows:
a. One thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for any addition to an existing building or for any remodeling of an existing building where the total
estimated scaled cost of construction is in excess of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) but does not exceed one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00) or for any demolition permit;
b. One thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for any site development permit to be issued pursuant to chapter 8 of this title where the cost of the site
work does not exceed one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00);
c. Two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for any new building or for any addition to an existing building or for remodeling of any existing building
where the total estimated scaled cost of construction exceeds one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00); and
d. Two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for any site development permit to be issued pursuant to chapter 8 of this title where the cost
of the site work exceeds one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00).
2. Such road bond shall be refunded to the applicant if the village president finds that the construction, demolition and/or site work has been
completed without any substantial damage to the streets, roads or highways within the village, including immediate removal of any mud or
debris therefrom. Otherwise, said cash road bond shall be forfeited to the village, without prejudice to the rights of the village to require
compliance with this code and all other applicable rules, regulations and ordinances and with state law.
C. Release Of Bonds: The requirements for the release of the bonds specified in subsections A and B of this section shall include, but shall not be
limited to, the following requirements:
1. A reasonably mature lawn which shall inhibit erosion shall be established and must extend through the ditch and parkway to the near edge of
the paved roadway.
2. For all new construction and when work is performed in the right of way, culverts under driveways shall be constructed of corrugated metal or
concrete, be at least twelve inches (12") in diameter and extend at least five feet (5') beyond the edges of the driveway and be terminated in
flared end sections. Any damage to an existing culvert sustained during the construction shall have been repaired. In order that drainage not
be impaired, ditches shall be properly graded, and culverts shall be cleaned of debris and silt.
3. Drainage pipes from curtain drains, sump pumps, roof drains, etc., shall end twenty feet (20') from any lot line and shall not extend into any
right of way or any ditch or swale within the right of way or directly onto the neighboring property.
4. No posts (other than standard mailbox posts complying with the requirements of this code), and no rocks, structures, lights, light posts, or
obstructions of any kind shall exist in the right of way. In addition, no structures (except for light posts) such as sheds, swing sets, shall be
placed within the building setbacks.
5. Construction and landscaping shall be completed to that stage where the need for further heavy equipment or vehicles such as cement trucks,
end loaders, etc., is unlikely.
6. Public roads shall be in the same condition as existed before construction commenced.
7. Damage to, or debris left upon, neighboring lots or rights of way attributable to the permittee's construction shall be repaired or removed. Ditch
grading shall remain unimpaired at all times on adjacent lots so that drainage shall not be impeded in a manner which might result in standing
water or soil erosion. Erosion fences or other such environmental protections, if required, shall be in place.
8. There shall be no evidence that the septic system is malfunctioning or of violations of this code relative to the septic system. Sprinkler systems
shall not be installed within twenty five feet (25') of the septic seepage field.
D. Forfeiture: Any failure to comply with the provisions of subsections A, B, and/or C of this section or any other provisions of this code or any other
applicable rules, regulations or ordinances of the village or the state law shall result in the forfeiture of any such cash bond held by the village;
provided, however, that prior to any such forfeiture, the village shall give thirty (30) days' written notice by U.S. mail, postage prepaid, to the
applicant at his last known address, that such action is contemplated and that the applicant has the right to request a hearing before the village
president on the question of such forfeiture within that time period, and that if such applicant fails to do so, said bond shall be automatically
forfeited. If any such cash bond is unclaimed for two (2) years, the same may be forfeited to the village by resolution adopted by the village
board; provided, however, that prior to the passage of such a resolution, the village shall give thirty (30) days' written notice by U.S. mail,
postage prepaid, to the applicant at his last known address, that such forfeiture is contemplated if such applicant fails to claim the funds in
question within that time period. (Ord. 06-822, 3-14-2006)
4-1-6: PERMIT APPLICATIONS:
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 142/366
A. Form Of Application:
1. Application for such permits shall be made to the village administrator, who shall refer it to the building official. Four (4) copies of the
application shall be filed and each copy shall contain the legal description, real estate index number and street address for the land on which
the work is to be done. Each set of four (4) copies of applications for building permits shall be accompanied by two (2) sets of plans and
specifications showing the work to be done; such plans and specifications shall be verified by the signature either of the owner of the premises
or by the architect or contractor in charge of operations.
2. When required by the building official, plans shall be drawn to scale and shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the nature and extent of the
work proposed and shall show in detail that it will conform to the provisions of the Inverness building code and all relevant laws, ordinances,
rules and regulations. Plans shall include a plat of survey, drawn to scale, showing all easements, drainage facilities, adjacent grades, property
lines, the proposed building and every existing building on the property. The building official may require the plans and specifications to be
certified and stamped by a registered architect or structural engineer licensed by the state of Illinois. For any construction project where the
scale construction cost therefor may exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), the building official shall require such certificate and stamp be
provided for the plans for such project by such a registered architect or by a structural engineer licensed by the state of Illinois. Soil tests may
be required if in the opinion of the building official and/or the village engineer and/or village president or his designee, tests are deemed
necessary.
3. Each applicant for a building permit shall deliver a copy of the following acknowledgement executed by the applicant and the owners of record
of the property which is the subject of the application:
Acknowledgement of Possible Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions of Record:
The undersigned, having applied to the Village of Inverness for a building permit, acknowledges:
(a) That there may be private covenants, conditions and restrictions running with the title to the property which is the subject of their permit
applications which regulate, govern, control and/or affect what type of improvements may be made on the subject property;
(b) That the Village, by issuance of a building permit has no power to and does not abrogate, vary, terminate, waive or release any such
covenants, conditions and restrictions of record which may be applicable to the subject property;
(c) That the undersigned remains obligated to comply with such covenants, conditions and restrictions of record notwithstanding the fact
that they have received a building permit from the Village of Inverness;
(d) That the undersigned and their attorney should review a title insurance policy or title insurance commitment for the subject property to
determine what covenants, conditions and restrictions of record are in fact applicable to the subject property; and
(e) That, in consideration for the issuance of a building permit, the undersigned further agree to hold harmless and indemnify the Village, its
officers, employees and agents, from any cost, claim, expense or liability to the Village, resulting directly or indirectly from or related to, any
violation claimed by the undersigned of such covenants, conditions and restrictions of record as may be applicable to the subject property,
including reasonable attorneys' fees and other costs of defense.
B. Description Of Work: The application shall contain a general description of the proposed work, its location, the use and occupancy of all parts of
the building or structure and of all portions of the site or lot not covered by the building, provisions for special inspections as required by section
1704 of the international building code, 2003, as adopted in chapter 2 of this title, and such additional information as may be required by the
building official. The application must also contain a plat of survey prepared by a registered Illinois land surveyor showing lot dimensions, total
area, all existing improvements, all easements of record and all building and setback lines required by the zoning ordinance or any recorded
document, provided, however, no such plat of survey shall be required for a condominium unit where all proposed and actual work is confined to
the interior of the existing structure.
C. Time Limitation Of Application: An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned one hundred eighty
(180) days after the date of filing, unless such application has been pursued in compliance with this title or a permit has been issued; except that
the building official is authorized to grant one or more extensions of time for additional periods not exceeding one hundred eighty (180) days in
total. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. (Ord. 06-822, 3-14-2006)
4-1-7: PERMIT TIME LIMITATIONS:
Whenever any building permit is issued, the construction contemplated by such building permit shall begin within three (3) months from the date of
the issuance of such building permit and such construction shall be completed within the time prescribed from the date of the issuance of such
building permit:
New homes and demolition/rebuild projects 24 months
Nonresidential structures 24 months
Residential additions 2,500 square feet or greater 18 months
Residential additions less than 2,500 square feet 12 months
Pools 9 months
Septic repairs/modifications 9 months
Accessory structures, decks and all other exterior work, except as specified above 6 months
All other interior work, except as specified above 12 months
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 143/366
except that if said permit has expired or been abandoned: a) the building official may, in his discretion, and if there is reasonable cause shown, grant
one or more extensions of time for said permit, all of which shall not exceed, in the aggregate, one hundred eighty (180) days for any such permit if
there is reasonable cause shown; and b) in addition, the village president may, in his discretion, and if there is reasonable cause shown, grant one
or more extensions of time for such permit, all of which extensions shall, in the aggregate, not exceed one hundred eighty (180) days for any such
permit. In the event such construction is not begun within said three (3) month period, the building permit shall be null and void. The building or
structure shall be completed within the period referred to above from the date of issuance of said permit and the extensions thereof as authorized by
this section. Each day any building or structure remains incomplete after the expiration of such period and any extensions thereof as authorized by
this section shall be deemed to be a separate offense.
This title shall not require changes in the construction documents, construction or designated occupancy of a structure for which a lawful permit has
been heretofore issued or otherwise lawfully authorized, and the construction of which has been pursued in compliance with this title unless said
permit has expired or been abandoned. (Ord. 06-822, 3-14-2006)
4-1-8: FOUNDATION SURVEYS REQUIRED:
A. A plat of survey (also known as a "spot survey") shall be required when any foundation is completed. A plat of the lot(s) or parcel(s) of land, or
parts or portion thereof, drawn to a scale showing the actual dimensions of the lot(s) or parcel(s), the location of all buildings and improvements,
including excavations and foundation walls, and the elevation of all levels of the top of foundation with respect to United States geological survey
(USGS) datum, and certified by a registered land surveyor licensed by the state as a true copy of the lot(s) or parcel(s) shall be submitted to the
building official for review and approval of the foundation elevation and location immediately after the foundation walls have been completed.
Said plat or spot survey must meet the following requirements:
1. Such survey shall be prepared by and certified by a professional land surveyor registered in the state;
2. The legal description must be clearly set forth thereon;
3. All information on such plat must be legible;
4. The location of all foundations, buildings and improvements upon the lot or parcel shall be defined by measurements perpendicular to the
boundaries;
5. Exterior dimensions of all foundations, buildings and improvements at ground level shall be shown.
B. No further construction other than backfilling shall occur until the foundation wall elevations shown on the plat have been reviewed and approved
by the village engineer. Acceptance of the location and elevation of foundation walls shall be shown by a stamp on the plat of survey marked
"APPROVED, Village of Inverness Village Engineer", with the date and signature of the village engineer. (Ord. 06-822, 3-14-2006)
4-1-9: CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY:
A. General: Except as provided for in subsection B of this section, no building hereafter erected shall be used or occupied in whole or in part until a
certificate of use and occupancy shall have been issued for same by the building official. The nature of the proposed use and occupancy of the
property, including the permitted business or occupation, if any, or other purpose for which such certificate of occupancy is issued shall be
specified in such certificate and the use and occupancy of such premises shall not be altered or modified without application for and issuance of
a new certificate of occupancy.
B. Temporary Occupancy: Upon the request of the holder of a permit and the payment of the required fee, the building official may issue a
temporary certificate of occupancy for a building or structure, or part thereof, before the entire work covered by the permit shall have been
completed, provided such portion or portions may be occupied safely prior to full completion of the building or structure and occupancy shall
have a term specified by the building and zoning officer not exceeding ninety (90) days from the date of issuance. Any occupancy permitted by a
temporary certificate of occupancy shall be discontinued upon the expiration of such temporary certificate.
C. Certificate Of Occupancy; Issuance Procedure: If, as a result of appropriate inspection, the building official determines that all construction has
been completed in compliance with the building permit and all village ordinances, and the proposed use and occupancy of the premises will
comply with all such ordinances, the building official shall issue to the owner a signed certificate of occupancy, and the building official shall then
immediately transmit to the assessor a copy thereof. (Ord. 06-822, 3-14-2006)
4-1-10: FINAL AS BUILT SURVEYS REQUIRED:
A. Prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit, a final as built topographical survey of the lot grading shall be submitted to and approved by the
village engineer. Said surveys shall also be prepared by a registered land surveyor. After the receipt of such final as built survey, the village
engineer shall conduct a final site inspection.
B. Final as built surveys shall show the following information:
1. Property lines (dimensioned), building lines, easements;
2. Lot corners (must be monumented by an iron pipe);
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 144/366
3. Building foundations at ground level, including dimensions;
4. Foundation location measurements relative to all property lines showing clearly that no building setback lines or easements have been
encroached upon;
5. Bench mark description and elevations;
6. The following elevations shall be shown at USGS datum:
a. Top of foundation elevation for each level, and approximate grade change by scale;
b. Brick ledge, if applicable;
c. Garage floor elevation;
d. Centerline and edge of street or top of curb, if same exists, opposite front corners of property (indicate if final surface or not);
e. Ground at twenty five foot (25') intervals along:
(1) Roadside ditch flow line;
(2) Lot lines;
(3) Drainage swale flow lines.
f. Driveway culverts;
g. At locations where proposed elevations are indicated on approved final lot grading plan.
7. A final occupancy permit shall not be issued if the property is not in compliance with the approved foundation plat of survey, the approved site
plan, the approved septic plan, and the approved final lot grading plan and the approved final engineering for the subdivision. (Ord. 06-822, 3-
14-2006)
4-1-11: UNAUTHORIZED CHANGES IN SITE GRADING PROHIBITED:
A. No grades within the village shall be disturbed or otherwise altered except as allowed pursuant to a site development permit issued by the village
engineer.
B. Any change in grading done without authorization of the village engineer shall be regraded and restored to its original approved grades, at
owner's expense. If not completed within fourteen (14) days, regrading may be ordered by the village and charged to owner.
C. No final occupancy permit or other indication of approval of new construction shall be issued or given by the building official until all grade
requirements set forth in this section and other applicable provisions of this code have been met.
D. The applicant, i.e., developer, contractor, and/or the builder, shall provide to the village, prior to the issuance of any occupancy permit, a
statement signed by the applicant and buyer/new owner, if any, stating that grades of the property purchased shall not be altered without a duly
issued site development permit, and that any other improvements to the property shall require permits prior to any construction of such
improvements. (Ord. 06-822, 3-14-2006)
4-1-12: GENERAL DRAINAGE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Nonresidential Properties: All properties, other than residentially zoned properties, shall be drained into village approved drainage structures or
into storm water detention facilities within said property. Drainage onto properties that abut a nonresidential property shall be strictly prohibited
unless such drainage reasonably maintains an existing or historic drainage pattern or unless those other properties are designed to
accommodate such drainage as approved by the village engineer.
B. Residential Properties: Residentially zoned lots or parcels shall be graded and drained in such a manner as to reasonably maintain existing or
historic drainage patterns from and onto other abutting properties. To the greatest extent practical, drainage shall be directed into village
approved drainage swales and/or easements provided and approved for such use.
C. Approval Required For Further Alterations: The passage of drainage to or from other properties shall not be obstructed or altered from the latest
plan approved by the village engineer, without the further written approval of such village engineer.
D. Existing Field Tiles, Drains And Storm Sewers To Be Repaired, Replaced And/Or Rerouted: If any existing field tile, drain, or storm sewer is
destroyed, damaged or interrupted during the course of any construction, said tile, drain, or storm sewer shall be immediately repaired, replaced
and/or rerouted in a manner approved by the village engineer in order to maintain the existing or historic drainage patterns, unless, based upon
the written determination of the village engineer and based upon evidence submitted to such village engineer, such tile, drain, or storm sewer
should be abandoned.
E. Surface Drainage: Surface drainage shall not be directed into any right of way unless approved by the village engineer.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 145/366
F. Point Of Discharge To Be Set Back; Certain Connections To Storm Sewers Required:
1. The point of discharge (i.e., the release at or above grade) of any sump pump drain, swimming pool drain, downspout drain or any other
conduit, pipe, impervious surface, or drain which channels, collects or conveys water related to any structure or improvement shall be set back
at least twenty feet (20') from any property line of the lot or parcel on which the structure or improvement is located unless such conduit, pipe,
impervious surface, or drain is connected directly to a storm sewer within a public right of way (or one offered for dedication) or within a
recorded drainage easement and such connection and the manner of such connection shall have been approved in advance in writing by the
village engineer.
2. Every sump drain, swimming pool drain, downspout drain or any other conduit, pipe, impervious surface, or drain which temporarily,
occasionally, periodically, or permanently channels, collects or conveys unpolluted water related to any structure or improvement shall be
connected to a storm sewer which is within a public right of way (or one offered for public dedication) or within a recorded drainage easement
if such a storm sewer exists, and such connection shall have been approved in advance in writing by the village engineer. (Ord. 06-822, 3-14-
2006)
4-1-13: FOUNDATION GRADING:
A. All foundation grades shall be established in such a manner as to achieve the free and unobstructed flow of surface water away from the
buildings.
B. Every application for a building permit shall show the proposed foundation grade and set forth a grading plan for the proposed construction of the
entire lot, determined in accordance with this section and all other applicable provisions of this code. No building permit shall be issued unless
the proposed foundation grade for the building and grading plan is in accordance with the provisions of this section and all other applicable
provisions of this code.
C. No building permit shall be issued by the building official unless he has on file an approved final grading plan for such subdivision, and the
proposed foundation elevation and lot grading for the lot in question shall substantially comply with same.
D. Every building constructed in a location for which a final grading plan is on file shall conform to said final grading plan. (Ord. 06-822, 3-14-2006)
4-1-14: FIRE SUPPRESSION SYSTEMS:
Notwithstanding anything contained in this code to the contrary, all buildings with a "building area", as defined in chapter 3 of this title, in excess of
four thousand eight hundred (4,800) square feet shall be equipped with a full functioning operational fire sprinkling system meeting NFPA standard
no. 13, 13D, or 13R as applicable. (Ord. 06-822, 3-14-2006)
4-1-15: TRAFFIC IMPACT STUDY REQUIRED:
A traffic impact study prepared by a registered professional engineer qualified in traffic analysis shall be obtained at the applicant's expense and
reviewed and approved by the board of trustees prior to the issuance of any building permit or any site development permit for any nonresidential
use when either such use will include or will utilize more than fifty (50) parking spaces or when such use is likely to generate peak hour traffic
volumes of greater than fifty (50) vehicles per hour. The traffic impact study shall identify those improvements by the applicant reasonably necessary
to mitigate, to the extent possible, the traffic impacts specifically and uniquely attributable to such proposed use. (Ord. 06-822, 3-14-2006)
4-1-16: VIOLATIONS:
A. Notice Of Violation: The building official shall serve a notice of violation or order on the person responsible for the erection, construction,
alteration, extension, repair, use or occupancy of a building, structure, accessory building, or fence in violation of the provisions of this title, or in
violation of a detailed statement or plan approved hereunder, or in violation of a permit certificate issued under the provisions of this title; and
such order shall direct discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation.
B. Penalties: Any person who shall violate a provision of this title or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements hereof, who shall erect,
construct, alter, or repair a building or structure in violation of an approved plan or directive of the building official, or of a permit or certificate
issued under the provisions of this title, shall be guilty of a petty offense, punishable by a fine of not more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00).
Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
C. Unlawful Continuance: Any person who shall continue any work in or about the structure after having been served with a stop work order, except
such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of not less than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) or more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (Ord. 06-822, 3-14-2006)
4-1-17: APPEALS:
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 146/366
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the building official involving the interpretation of this title, the Inverness building code, may petition for an
appeal of said decision to the zoning board of appeals. Upon such appeal being made, the zoning board of appeals shall hold a public meeting and
shall make a recommendation to the board of trustees to affirm, overrule, or modify the decision of the building official as the facts may indicate. No
appeal or variation from this title shall be granted, except by an ordinance approved by the board of trustees. (Ord. 2007-846, 3-13-2007)
4-1-18: CONSTRUCTION PARKING:
No owner of property, contractor, and/or other permittee, who has been issued any village permit, including, but not limited to, any building permit,
demolition permit, site development permit, septic permit, or other permit issued by the village authorizing any construction activity pursuant to this
code ("village permits"), nor any contractor, subcontractor or material supplier of such owner, contractor, or permittee, shall cause, permit, or allow:
A. Any vehicles and/or equipment, related to activity which is or should be the subject of such a village permit, to be parked or stored on any such
village right of way, unless specifically authorized by a special condition of such a permit; and
B. Any nonrubber tired equipment used in any activity related to such village permit(s) to be loaded or unloaded, except within the boundary lines of
the property which is the subject of such village permit(s), and in no event shall such loading or unloading occur within the boundary lines of any
public or private right of way.
The restrictions of this section shall not be applicable to any work within a right of way which has been duly authorized by the entity having
maintenance jurisdiction over said right of way. (Ord. 14-945, 1-14-2014)
Chapter 2
NONRESIDENTIAL BUILDING CODE
4-2-1: INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE ADOPTED:
The international building code, 2003 edition (IBC), of the International Code Council, is hereby adopted, except for such deletions and substitutions
of sections as herein provided, as part of the Inverness nonresidential building code (hereinafter sometimes referred to as "INRBC" and sometimes
referred to in this chapter as "this code"). (Ord. 06-822, 3-14-2006)
4-2-2: AMENDMENTS, DELETIONS, ADDITIONS AND MODIFICATIONS:
The following amendments, deletions, additions and modifications are hereby made to the Inverness building code as adopted in section 4-2-1 of
this chapter:
Sections 101.4.1, 101.4.4, 101.4.7, 103, 104.1, 104.2, 104.3, 104.5, 104.7, 105.1, 105.1.1, 105.1.2, 105.2, 105.2.1, 105.2.2, 105.2.3, 105.3,
105.3.1, 105.3.2, 105.4, 105.5, 106.3.2, 106.3.3, 109.1, 109.2, 109.3, 110.2, 112, 112.1, 112.2, and 112.3 of the IBC are hereby deleted and are not
adopted as parts of the Inverness nonresidential building code.
Section 101.1 shall be and is hereby amended to read as follows:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the "Inverness non-residential building code", hereinafter sometimes referred to as "this
code".
Section 101.2 shall be and is hereby amended to read as follows:
101.2 Scope. The provisions of this code shall apply to the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment,
use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached
to such buildings or structures.
Exceptions:
1. Detached one- and two-family dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than two stories above grade plane in
height (plus any mezzanine as authorized by this code) with a separate means of egress and their accessory structures shall comply with the
Inverness residential building code.
2. All other existing buildings shall comply with this code, the Inverness non-residential building code.
Section 101.4 shall be and is hereby amended to read as follows:
101.4 Referenced Codes. The other codes referenced in this code shall be considered part of the requirements of this code in their entirety.
Section 101.4.5 shall be and is hereby amended to read as follows:
101.4.5 Property Maintenance. The provision of the international property maintenance code (2003), which is hereby adopted, shall apply to
existing structures and premises; equipment and facilities; light, ventilation, space heating, sanitation, life and fire safety hazards;
responsibilities of owners, operators and occupants; and occupancy of existing premises and structures.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 147/366
Section 101.4.6 shall be and is hereby amended to read as follows:
101.4.6 Fire Prevention. The provisions of the international fire code (2003), which is hereby adopted, shall apply to matters affecting or
relating to structures, processes and premises from the hazard of fire and explosion arising from the storage, handling or use of structures,
materials or devices; from conditions hazardous to life, property or public welfare in the occupancy of structures or premises; and from the
construction, extension, repair, alteration or removal of fire suppression and alarm systems or fire hazards in the structure or on the premises
from occupancy or operation, provided, however, section 903.2.7 of the international fire code (2003) shall be amended to provide as follows:
"903.2.7 Group R. An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with section 903.3 shall be provided throughout all buildings with a
group R fire area, provided, however, that this requirement shall not be applicable to R-3 residential occupancies as defined in said fire code,
except where and in the manner that automatic sprinkler systems are otherwise required by this village code."
Section 107.9.1 of the Inverness nonresidential building code shall be and is hereby amended to read as follows:
107.9.1 Accessory Buildings Or Structures. It shall be unlawful to build any garage, shed or other accessory building or structure before the
main building is built on the subject property, and no building permit shall be issued for same, before the main building is built on the subject
property, and no accessory building shall be used as a residence.
Section 1807.4.3 shall be and is hereby amended to read as follows:
Section 1807.4.3 Drainage Discharge. Any floor base and foundation perimeter drain hereinafter installed shall discharge by mechanical
means or by a combination of mechanical means and gravity into an approved drainage system that complies with the Inverness plumbing
code. However, systems relying only on gravity shall not be permitted.
Section 2701 and this code in its entirety are hereby amended by the deletion of all references to the ICC electrical code and the substitution in lieu
thereof of a reference to the national electrical code, 2005.
Section 3410.2 is hereby amended by the insertion as the date of adoption of this Inverness nonresidential building code, the words "the effective
date of this code and title".
Chapters 29, 30 and 32, and appendices A, B, C, D, E, G, H, I, and J of the IBC are hereby deleted and not adopted as part of the Inverness
nonresidential building code.
(Ord. 06-822, 3-14-2006)
Chapter 3
RESIDENTIAL BUILDING CODE
4-3-1: RESIDENTIAL CODE FOR ONE- AND TWO-FAMILY DWELLINGS ADOPTED:
The international residential code for one- and two-family dwellings, 2003 edition (IRC), of the International Code Council, is hereby adopted, except
for such deletions and substitutions of sections as herein provided, as part of the Inverness residential building code (hereinafter sometimes referred
to as the "IRBC" and sometimes in this chapter referred to as "this code"). (Ord. 06-822, 3-14-2006)
4-3-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
The following amendments, deletions, additions, and modifications are hereby made to the Inverness residential building code as adopted in section
4-3-1 of this chapter:
The following chapters of the IRC are not adopted and are hereby deleted in their entirety:
Chapter 11, Energy;
Chapter 25, Plumbing Administration;
Chapter 26, General Plumbing Requirements;
Chapter 27, Plumbing Fixtures;
Chapter 28, Water Heaters;
Chapter 29, Water Supply And Distribution;
Chapter 30, Sanitary Drainage;
Chapter 31, Vents;
Chapter 32, Traps;
Chapter 33, General Requirements;
Chapter 34, Electrical Definitions;
Chapter 35, Services;
Chapter 36, Branch Circuits And Feeder Requirements;
Chapter 37, Wiring Methods;
Chapter 38, Power And Lighting Distribution;
Chapter 39, Devices And Luminaries;
Chapter 40, Appliance Installation;
Chapter 41, Swimming Pools;
Chapter 42, Class 2 Remote-Control Signaling;
Appendix E, Manufactured Housing Used As Dwellings;
Appendix G, Swimming Pools, Spas And Hot Tubs;
Appendix H, Patio Covers;
Appendix I, Private Sewage Disposal;
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 148/366
Appendix J, Existing Buildings And Structures;
Appendix K, Sound Transmission; and
Appendix L, International Residential Code Electrical Provisions/NEC Cross Reference.
Section R101.1 shall be and is hereby amended to read as follows:
R101.1 Title. These provisions shall be known as the "Inverness residential building code".
(Ord. 06-822, 3-14-2006)
Section R101.2 shall be and is hereby amended to read as follows and the "exception" which was previously part thereof is deleted:
R101.2 Scope. The provisions of the Inverness residential building code shall apply to the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement,
replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, removal and demolition of detached one- and two-family dwellings and multiple
single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than two stories (plus any mezzanine or habitable attic authorized by this code) in height with a
separate means of egress and their accessory structures. In addition, the provisions of the Inverness residential building code shall not apply to
manufactured housing which is hereby prohibited.
(Ord. 2011-906, 2-8-2011)
Section R102.7 shall be and is hereby amended to read as follows:
R102.7 Existing Structures. The legal occupancy of any structure existing on the date of adoption of this code shall be permitted to continue
without change, except as is specifically covered in this code, the international property maintenance code (2003), which is hereby adopted, or
the international fire code (2003), which is also hereby adopted, or as is deemed necessary by the building official for the general safety and
welfare of the occupants and the public, provided, however, section 903.2.7 of the international fire code (2003) shall be amended to provide as
follows:
"903.2.7 Group R. An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with section 903.3 shall be provided throughout all buildings with a
group R fire area, provided, however, that this requirement shall not be applicable to R-3 residential occupancies as defined in said fire code,
except where and in the manner that automatic sprinkler systems are otherwise required by this village code."
Section R103 is hereby deleted in its entirety and the following shall be and hereby is substituted therefor:
R103. Building Department; Creation Of Enforcement Agency. The village of Inverness building department is hereby created and the official in
charge thereof shall be known as the building official.
Section R104.10.1 is hereby deleted in its entirety.
Section R105 is hereby deleted in its entirety.
Section R106.1.3 is hereby deleted in its entirety.
Section R106.3.3 is hereby deleted in its entirety.
Section R109.1.3 is hereby deleted in its entirety.
Section R109.3 shall be and is hereby amended to read as follows:
R109.3 Requests For Inspections: It shall be the duty of the permit holder or their agent to notify the building official that such work is ready for
inspection. Requests for inspections by the building official or the village engineer or any other village officer or employee as required by this
code shall be made at least two (2) working days in advance. It shall be the duty of the person requesting any inspections required by this code
to provide access to and means for inspection of such work.
The exception found in section R110.1 is hereby deleted in its entirety.
Section R110.4 is hereby deleted in its entirety.
Section R111 is amended by adding a new section R111.4 which shall read as follows:
R111.4 Building Demolition. Before a building or structure is demolished or removed, the owner or agent shall cause all utility providers to
disconnect and sever their respective service connections to the premises.
Section R112 is hereby deleted in its entirety.
(Ord. 06-822, 3-14-2006)
Section R202 shall be and is hereby amended to add the following definitions in alphabetical order:
ATTIC, HABITABLE: A finished area, not considered a story, complying with all of the following requirements:
1. All habitable areas and spaces shall have emergency escape and rescue provisions per section R310, whether or not said areas and spaces
are used for sleeping.
2. Any and all emergency escape and rescue provisions shall face and be clearly visible from the public street.
3. The maximum sill height of said emergency escape and rescue provisions shall not exceed 24 feet above the immediate finished grade below,
and shall be no more than 2 feet back from roof eave below.
4. The total limits of space finished within the attic shall be not more than 1/3 of the finished space of the floor immediately under the attic.
5. The entire residence shall be equipped with a full functioning operable fire sprinkling system meeting NFPA standard no. 13, 13D, or 13R as
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 149/366
applicable together with a backup electrical supply sufficient to power system pumping equipment.
(Ord. 2011-906, 2-8-2011)
BUILDING AREA. The area included within the surrounding exterior walls (or exterior walls and fire walls) exclusive of vent shafts and courts.
Areas of the building not provided with surrounding walls shall be included in the building area if such areas are included within the horizontal
projection of the roof or floor above.
FIRE WALL. Fire walls shall be constructed of masonry with a UL fire rated design of at least 2 hours. Fire walls shall extend from the foundation
to a termination point at least 30 inches above the roof or to the underside of the roof sheathing if the roof sheathing is constructed of fireretardant-
treated wood for a distance of 4 feet on both sides of the wall. Each portion of a building separated by one or more fire walls shall be
considered a separate building.
Section R202 shall be and is also hereby amended by the amendment of the definition of "accessory structure" which shall read as follows:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A detached building or structure, the use of which is incidental to that of the main building and which is located on
the same lot. It shall be unlawful to build any accessory structure before the main building is built on the subject property, and no building permit
shall be issued for same, before the main building is built on the subject property, and no accessory structure shall be used as a separate
residence. Notwithstanding any provision contained in this title to the contrary, no accessory building or structure shall require a building permit
unless it exceeds one hundred fifty (150) square feet in ground area or has plumbing, gas, or electric service installed therein and connected
thereto but any such accessory building or structure shall otherwise comply with the requirements of this title.
(Ord. 06-822, 3-14-2006)
Section R202 shall be and is hereby amended by the amendment of the definition of "mezzanine, loft", which shall hereafter read as follows:
MEZZANINE, LOFT. An intermediate level or levels between the floor and ceiling of any story with an aggregate floor area of not more than onethird
(1/3) of the area of the room or space in which the level or levels are located and which shall be open and unobstructed to the room in which
such mezzanine or loft is located except for walls not more than 42 inches (1,067 mm) high, columns, and posts.
(Ord. 08-876, 10-14-2008, eff. 11-1-2008)
Section R202 shall be and is also hereby amended by the amendment of the definition of "townhouse" which shall read as follows:
TOWNHOUSE. A single-family dwelling unit constructed in a group of two or more attached dwelling units in which each dwelling unit extends
from foundation to roof and with open space on at least two sides.
Table R301.2 (1) is hereby amended to read as follows:
a. Ground snow load: 30 pounds per square foot
b. Wind speed: 90 mph
c. Seismic design category: Design category B
d. Weathering: Severe
e. Frost line depth: 42 inches below grade
f. Termite: Moderate to heavy
g. Decay: Slight to moderate
h. Winter design temperature: 0°F
i. Ice shield underlayment required: Yes
j. Flood hazards: Official flood prone map, as revised on January 31, 1984, FIRM, effective on November 6, 2000
k. Air freezing index: 2000
l. Mean annual temperature: 50°F.
(Ord. 06-822, 3-14-2006)
Section R301.2.2.4.1 shall be and is hereby amended to read as follows:
R301.2.2.4.1 Building Height. Buildings shall be limited to the lesser of two stories (plus any mezzanine or habitable attic authorized by this
code) with separate means of access of limits as given in table R602.10.1 and further subject to the limitations of the zoning ordinance of the
village of Inverness.
(Ord. 2011-906, 2-8-2011)
Section R309.1 shall be and is hereby amended to read as follows:
R309.1 Opening Protection. Openings from a private garage directly into a room used for sleeping purposes shall not be permitted. Other
openings between the garage and residence shall be equipped with solid wood doors not less than 13/4 inches in thickness, solid or honeycomb
core steel doors not less than 13/4 inches thick, or 90-minute fire-rated doors. The residence shall be protected from the garage with a 6-inch (6")
high concrete gas curb at the common wall.
Section R309.2 shall be and is hereby amended to read as follows:
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 150/366
R309.2 Separation Required. The garage shall be completely separated from the residence and its attic area by not less than 5/8-inch (16 mm)
type X fire rated gypsum board or its equivalent applied to the garage side. Where the separation is a floor-ceiling assembly, the structure
supporting the separation shall also be protected by not less than 5/8-inch (16 mm) type X fire rated gypsum board or its equivalent. The same
material shall be installed in every furnace room.
Section R309.5 is hereby deleted in its entirety.
Section R317.2 shall be and is hereby amended to read as follows:
R317.2 Townhouses. Each townhouse shall be considered a separate building if separated by a firewall as defined in section R202. At a
minimum, townhouses shall be separated by fire-resistance-rated wall assemblies meeting the requirements of R302 for exterior walls and shall,
in addition, be subject to the fire suppression system requirements of section 4-1-14 of the village code.
Exception: A common 2-hour fire-resistance-rated wall is permitted for townhouses if such walls do not contain plumbing or mechanical
equipment, ducts or vents in the cavity of the common wall. Electrical installations shall be installed in accordance with the Inverness electrical
code. Penetrations of electrical outlet boxes shall be in accordance with section R317.3.
Section R323 is hereby deleted in its entirety.
Section R401 is hereby amended by adding a new section R401.6 which shall read as follows:
R401.6 Trenched Foundations. Trenched foundations will be allowed provided soils information prepared and certified by a soils testing
laboratory approved by the village engineer is provided substantiating the use of same. Trenched foundations will be allowed only in those areas
where the character of the soil is such that the trench walls will, in the opinion of the building official, remain stable and in place during the
placement of the foundations, footings and walls.
Sections R402.1, R402.1.1 and R402.1.2 are hereby deleted in their entirety.
Section R403.1 shall be and is hereby amended to read as follows:
R403.1 General. All exterior walls shall be supported on continuous solid or fully grouted masonry or concrete footings, or other approved
structural systems which shall be of sufficient design to accommodate all loads according to section R301 and to transmit the resulting loads to
the soil within the limitations as determined from the character of the soil. Footings shall be supported on undisturbed natural soils or engineered
fill.
Section R405.1 shall be and is hereby amended to read as follows:
Section R405.1 Concrete Or Masonry Foundations. Drains shall be provided around all concrete or masonry foundations that retain earth and
enclose habitable or usable spaces located below grade. Drainage tiles, gravel or crushed stone drains, perforated pipe or other approved
systems or materials shall be installed at or below the area to be protected and shall discharge by mechanical means into an approved drainage
system. Gravel or crushed stone drains shall extend at least 1 foot (305 mm) beyond the outside edge of the footing and 6 inches (153 mm)
above the top of the footing and be covered with an approved filter membrane material. The top of open joints of drain tiles shall be protected
with strips of building paper, and the drainage tiles or perforated pipe shall be placed on a minimum of 2 inches (51 mm) of washed gravel or
crushed rock at least one sieve size larger than the tile joint opening or perforation and covered with not less than 6 inches (153 mm) of the
same material.
(Ord. 06-822, 3-14-2006)
Chapter 4
INVERNESS PLUMBING CODE
4-4-1: PLUMBING INSPECTOR:
A. Position Created, Appointment: There is hereby created the position of plumbing inspector, an administrative position of employment in the
village. Said inspector shall be appointed by the village president.
B. Building Officer Ex Officio Plumbing Inspector: Unless and until a plumbing inspector is appointed by the village president, the building officer
shall be ex officio plumbing inspector and shall have all the powers and perform all the duties connected with that office.
C. General Duties Of Inspector: It shall be the duty of the plumbing inspector to see to the enforcement of all provisions of the ordinances of the
village relating to plumbing and plumbing equipment, and to make such inspections and perform such tests as may be necessary in the
enforcement of such ordinances. (1983 Code)
4-4-2: STOP ORDERS AUTHORIZED; OBEDIENCE; PENALTY:
A. The plumbing inspector shall have the power to order work stopped on the construction, alteration or repair of plumbing equipment when such
work is being done without a permit or otherwise being done in violation of any ordinance of the village.
B. Work shall not be resumed after the issuance of such a stop order except on written permission of the plumbing inspector; provided, that if the
stop order is an oral one, it shall be followed by a written stop order within twenty four (24) hours.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 151/366
C. Any person who shall continue work in violation of a stop order of the plumbing inspector shall be guilty of a violation of this code, and a separate
offense shall be deemed committed each day on which any work in violation of such order is done. (1983 Code)
4-4-3: PLUMBING CODE ADOPTED:
That certain printed document entitled "Illinois state plumbing code", February 2004, published by the state of Illinois department of public health,
office of health regulation, 535 West Jefferson Street, Springfield, IL 62761, and available from said department plumbing code section, at least
three (3) copies of which code were on file in the office of the village clerk for inspection and/or copying by the public for at least thirty (30) days prior
to the adoption thereof, is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter as the rules and regulations governing the construction,
installation, alteration or repair of plumbing in the village; and it shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install, alter or repair, or cause to be
constructed, installed, altered or repaired any plumbing in the village in violation of or without complying with those rules and regulations, and each
and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said code, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully
set out in this code, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, as set forth in section 4-4-4 of this chapter. (Ord. 06-822, 3-14-
2006)
4-4-4: AMENDMENTS, DELETIONS, ADDITIONS, MODIFICATIONS TO THE PLUMBING CODE:
The following amendments, deletions, additions and modifications are hereby made to the plumbing code:
A. The state plumbing code "administrative authority" as used in this code means the building officer of the village or the village president.
B. Water lines within buildings shall be constructed of the following materials:
Below grade - copper type K
Above grade - copper type L or galvanized steel
C. The use of copper waste and vent lines is prohibited in buildings connected to septic systems.
(Ord. 06-822, 3-14-2006)
4-4-5: HARMFUL WASTES PROHIBITED; DAMAGING SEWER OR DRAIN:
A. No garbage, dead animals or obstructions of any kind whatever, including broken glass or any similar articles, or any oil, lubricating grease,
gasoline or other flammable liquids shall be placed, thrown or deposited in any receiving basin or sewer or ditch or culvert and any person so
offending or causing any such obstruction or substance to be so placed so as to be carried into such basin or sewer or ditch or culvert shall be
guilty of a violation of this code.
B. Any person injuring, breaking or removing any portion of any receiving basin covering flag, manhole, vent or any part of any sewer or drain shall
be guilty of a violation of this code.
C. Proper interceptors shall be installed in any establishment, such as bottling plants, where there is a likelihood of such prohibited material flowing
into the sewer, to intercept such material. (1983 Code)
4-4-6: INJURY TO DISPOSAL FACILITIES:
A. Any person who shall, by himself or another person, directly or indirectly, wilfully or maliciously damage or obstruct any sewer, house drain,
cesspool, septic tanks, seepage field, water closet pipe, catch basin, manhole, ditch, culvert, protection pier or any appurtenances thereto, now
or hereafter to be laid or constructed in the village shall be guilty of a violation of this code, and shall be further liable to pay all expenses
incurred on account of repairs or damages resulting from such wilful or malicious act.
B. Any person who shall, by himself or another, destroy or injure the bank of any ditch, gully or open drain or culvert or place any substance therein,
tending to obstruct the same or render it obnoxious, or shall, by himself or another, directly or indirectly tap any public ditch or drain in the village
or connect any private sewer, drain or ditch therewith, without the written consent of the village had and obtained, shall be guilty of a violation of
this code. (1983 Code)
4-4-7: OVERHEAD PLUMBING:
All new buildings with basements, floors, rooms or occupancy areas below ground level at the building site and served by a public or private sewer
system, shall be served by overhead plumbing. No building permit application will be accepted nor any permits issued for construction of any
structure unless plans and specifications therefor provide for overhead plumbing as required by this section. (Ord. 93-488, 8-10-1993)
4-4-8: FOOTING DRAINS:
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 152/366
Footing drains shall be connected to sump pumps for further discharge into a seepage trench or dry well installed and used only for this purpose or,
where available, into a storm sewer or a drainage ditch if approved by the village. No footing drain or drainage tile shall be connected to the sanitary
sewer system. (Ord. 93-488, 8-10-1993)
4-4-9: POINT OF DISCHARGE TO BE SET BACK; CERTAIN CONNECTIONS TO STORM SEWERS REQUIRED:
A. The point of discharge (i.e., the release at or above grade) of any sump pump drain, swimming pool drain, downspout drain or any other conduit,
pipe, impervious surface, or drain not connected to a septic system or to a sprinkler system which channels, collects or conveys water related to
any structure or improvement shall be set back at least twenty feet (20') from any property line of the lot or parcel on which the structure or
improvement is located unless such conduit, pipe, impervious surface, or drain is connected directly to a storm sewer within a public right of way
(or one offered for dedication) or within a recorded drainage easement and such connection and the manner of such connection shall have been
approved in advance in writing by the village engineer.
B. Every sump drain, swimming pool drain, downspout drain or any other conduit, pipe, impervious surface, or drain not connected to a septic
system or to a sprinkler system which temporarily, occasionally, periodically, or permanently channels, collects or conveys unpolluted water
related to any structure or improvement shall be connected to a storm sewer which is within a public right of way (or one offered for public
dedication) or within a recorded drainage easement if such a storm sewer exists within seventy five feet (75') of the point on the perimeter of
such improvement or structure where such conduit, pipe, or drain commences, and such connection shall have been approved in advance in
writing by the village engineer. (Ord. 95-546, 9-12-1995)
Chapter 5
INVERNESS ELECTRICAL CODE
4-5-1: DEFINITION:
The term "electrical equipment", as used in this chapter, means conductors, fittings, devices, fixtures and other equipment installed for the utilization
of electricity for light, heat or power. It does not include radio apparatus or equipment for wireless reception of sounds and signals, and it does not
include apparatus, conductors or other equipment installed for or by public utilities, including common carriers which are under the jurisdiction of the
Illinois commerce commission, for use in their operation as public utilities. (1983 Code)
4-5-2: ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR:
A. Position Created; Appointment: There is hereby created the position of electrical inspector, an administrative position of employment in the
village. The electrical inspector shall be appointed by the village president.
B. Ex Officio Inspector: Unless and until an electrical inspector shall be appointed by the president, the building officer shall act as ex officio
electrical inspector and shall have all of the powers and perform all of the duties connected with that office.
C. General Powers Of Inspector: The electrical inspector shall have the right during reasonable hours to enter any building in the discharge of his
official duties, or for the purpose of making an inspection or test of the electrical equipment therein; and he shall have the authority to enforce all
provisions of this chapter relating to electrical wiring and equipment. If entry to any occupied residence or apartment is refused, the electrical
inspector shall seek a search warrant authorizing such entry. He shall have the power to order or otherwise cause the current in any wire or
conduit to be turned off whenever this becomes necessary for the protection of life or limb, or property. (1983 Code)
4-5-3: INSPECTIONS REQUIRED; CONCEALING WIRING PROHIBITED:
The electrical inspector shall make all inspections necessary to see to the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter relating to electricity; and no
electric wiring shall be covered or concealed until it has been inspected and approved. (1983 Code)
4-5-4: APPROVAL OF INSTALLATIONS; USING UNAPPROVED INSTALLATIONS:
A. Inspection Certificate: The electrical inspector shall issue a certificate after each inspection in which the wiring or apparatus is found to be in
compliance with the terms of this chapter and with the rules hereby adopted.
B. Unlawful Use: It shall be unlawful to use or turn on power into any wires or apparatus hereafter installed for which such certificate has not been
issued because the permit was not secured for installation or because the work was not completed in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
C. Temporary Use: The building official may, in his discretion, give temporary permission for a reasonable time to supply and use current in part of
an electric installation before such installation has been fully completed and the final certification of approval has been issued; provided, that the
part covered by the temporary certificate complies with all the requirements specified for temporary lighting, heat or power as specified in the
Inverness electrical code as hereinafter adopted.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 153/366
D. Final Inspections And Tests: On completion of the work, the building officer shall inspect the work and cause tests to be made of the operation of
the entire system to ensure compliance with all requirements. (1983 Code)
4-5-5: CODE ADOPTED:
Pursuant to the recommendations of the electrical commission of the village, there is hereby adopted as providing safe and practical standards and
specifications for the installation, alteration and use of electrical equipment in the village, the national electrical code, 2005 edition, published by the
National Fire Protection Association, and adopted by the American National Standards Institute, except for such amendments, deletions, additions
and/or modifications as hereinafter provided. (Ord. 06-822, 3-14-2006)
4-5-6: AMENDMENTS TO ELECTRICAL CODE:
The following amendments, deletions, additions and/or modifications are hereby made to the Inverness electrical code as adopted in section 4-5-5
of this chapter:
A. Section 250.104.(A)(1) of the Inverness electrical code is hereby amended by the addition of a subparagraph (a) thereto, which subparagraph
shall provide as follows:
"(a) Grounding shall be bonded to the street side of the water supply with a bonding jumper around the water meter."
B. Article 300 of the Inverness electrical code is hereby amended by the addition of a new section 300-1A which shall read as follows:
"300-1A: WIRING METHODS: Notwithstanding anything contained in this article or code to the contrary, all wiring for services, feeders and
branch circuits installed on or within buildings shall be installed in electrical metallic tubing (as defined in article 348), in intermediate metal
conduit (as defined in article 346), provided, however, (1) sections of armored cable (as defined in article 333) not exceeding six feet in length
where necessary may be permitted but only with prior express and specific written approval of the electrical inspector; and (2) other approved
methods which would provide equal or superior protection to conductors may be permitted but only if such method or methods have received the
prior express and specific approval of the electrical inspector."
C. Section 310-13 of the Inverness electrical code is hereby amended by the addition of the following subparagraph at the end of the present text
thereof, which subparagraph shall provide as follows:
"Notwithstanding anything contained in this article or elsewhere in this code, any feeder or branch feeder circuit of less than fifty (50) amperes
shall use copper rather than aluminum wire."
(Ord. 06-822, 3-14-2006)
4-5-7: REGULATIONS GOVERNING PERMITS:
There is hereby adopted as reasonable rules and regulations governing the issuance of permits for electrical installations or alterations, the
following:
A. Required: It shall be unlawful to install or alter any electric equipment or wiring without having first obtained a permit therefor. (1983 Code)
B. Application Required: Applications for such permits shall be made, in writing, to the building official. (Ord. 92-468, 12-8-1992)
C. Application Contents: Each such application shall contain the name of the owner of the premises to be served, the name of the contractor doing
the work, and the nature of the work to be done, and where the work consists of new installation or extensive repairs or alterations, plans and
specifications of the work shall accompany the application. (1983 Code)
4-5-8: PERMIT AND INSPECTION FEES:
(Rep. by Ord. 06-822, 3-14-2006)
4-5-9: STOP ORDERS:
A. The electrical inspector shall have the power to order all work stopped on construction or alteration or repair of buildings in the village when such
work is being done in violation of any provision of this chapter relating thereto.
B. Work shall not be resumed after the issuance of such an order except on the written permission of the electrical inspector; provided, however,
that if the order is an oral one, it shall be followed by a written stop order within twenty four (24) hours. Such stop order may be served by a
police officer. (1983 Code)
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 154/366
Chapter 6
TENNIS COURTS
4-6-1: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to construct, maintain, install or enlarge any tennis court in the village except in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
(1983 Code)
4-6-2: LOCATION:
No portion of a tennis court shall be located within the setback lines as established by the zoning ordinance1 of the village. No part of a tennis court
shall be located between the front line of any residence located on the same lot as the court and any street abutting said lot. For the purpose of this
chapter, the front line of any residence shall be a line drawn parallel to any road abutting the lot and intersecting the point of the residence located
closest to the road. (1983 Code)
4-6-3: ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. Any fence which encloses a tennis court shall be entirely of metal and colored dark green or black.
B. Only a standard sized tennis court shall be constructed. A tennis court shall be constructed only as an accessory use to a residence and the
residence must be erected prior to the construction of a tennis court.
C. Tennis courts may not be lit, nor may they be built over any part of a septic system. (Ord. 2003-747, 3-11-2003)
4-6-4: PERMIT REQUIRED:
Prior to the construction, installation, enlargement or alteration of any tennis court or the fence surrounding same, a permit shall be obtained from
the village. Drawings and plans shall be presented to the building officer for examination and approval, and each tennis court shall be constructed in
conformity with the approved plans. (1983 Code)
Chapter 7
SWIMMING POOLS
4-7-1: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to construct, maintain, install or enlarge any swimming pool in the village except in compliance with all the provisions of this
chapter. Swimming and bathing pools shall conform to the requirements of this chapter, provided that these regulations shall not be applicable to
any such pool less than twenty four inches (24") (610 mm) deep, except where such pools are permanently equipped with a water recirculation
system or involve structural materials. For the purposes of this code, pools are classified as private swimming pools or public swimming pools as
defined in section 4-7-2 of this chapter. Materials and construction used in swimming pools shall comply with the applicable requirements of this
code. (Ord. 06-822, 3-14-2006)
4-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and terms shall, for the purpose of this chapter and as used elsewhere in this code, have the meaning shown herein:
ABOVEGROUND/ONGROUND POOL: See definition of Private Swimming Pool. Except for hot tubs and spas, aboveground/onground pools are
prohibited.
BARRIER: A fence, a wall, a building wall, the wall of an aboveground swimming pool, or a combination thereof, which completely surrounds the
swimming pool and obstructs access to the swimming pool.
HOT TUB OR SPA: A private swimming pool with a surface area no greater than ninety six (96) square feet in the aggregate.
INGROUND POOL: See definition of Private Swimming Pool.
POWER SAFETY COVER: A pool cover which is placed over the water area, and is opened and closed with a motorized mechanism activated by a
control switch.
PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL: Any structure that contains water over twenty four inches (24") (610 mm) in depth and which is used or intended to be
used, for swimming or recreational bathing in connection with an occupancy in use group R-3 and which is available only to the family and guests of
the householder. This definition includes inground, aboveground and onground swimming pools, hot tubs and spas.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 155/366
PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL, INDOOR: Any private swimming pool that is totally contained within a private structure and surrounded on all four (4)
sides by walls of said structure.
PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL, OUTDOOR: Any private swimming pool that is not an indoor pool.
PUBLIC SWIMMING POOL: Any swimming pool other than a private swimming pool.
SWIMMING POOL: A receptacle for water or an artificial pool of water intended for the purpose of immersion or partial immersion therein of human
beings having a depth at any point of more than two feet (2'), placed in an excavation. No swimming pool shall extend two feet six inches (2'6") or
more aboveground. A "swimming pool" includes all appurtenant equipment, such as, but not limited to, pumps, filters and disinfectant equipment.
(Ord. 06-822, 3-14-2006; amd. Ord. 2012-928, 8-14-2012)
4-7-3: LOCATION:
No portion of an outdoor swimming pool, including appurtenant equipment, enclosing barrier and other structures as required by this chapter, shall
be located less than twenty five feet (25') from any property line, or less than one hundred feet (100') from any residence, existing at the time of
construction of the pool, on any other property. No portion of any swimming pool shall be located within twenty five feet (25') from any septic tank or
any septic field. No part of any swimming pool shall be located between the front line of any residence located on the same lot as the pool and any
street abutting said lot. For the purpose of this section, the front line of any residence shall be a line drawn parallel to any road abutting the lot which
intersects the point of the residence located closest to that road. (Ord. 06-822, 3-14-2006)
4-7-4: PERMIT REQUIRED:
Prior to the construction, installation, enlargement or alteration of any swimming pool or appurtenances, a permit shall be obtained from the building
officer. Drawings and plans first shall be presented to the building officer for examination and approval, and each pool shall be constructed in
conformity with the approved plans. Said drawings and plans shall identify the side and rear yards of the property on which the swimming pool is
proposed to be located as such yards are established by the village zoning ordinance. A hot tub or spa shall not require a permit unless it has a
permanent electrical and/or plumbing connection. (Ord. 06-822, 3-14-2006)
4-7-5: INSPECTION:
The building officer may, in his discretion, from time to time, inspect any swimming pools to determine whether or not all applicable provisions of this
code regarding health, sanitation and safety are being complied with. (Ord. 06-822, 3-14-2006)
4-7-6: GENERAL CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS:
A. Building Codes Applicable: Appendix G of the international one- and two-family dwelling code, 2003, is hereby adopted as part of this chapter in
the following amended and restated form and shall read as follows (to the extent that said amended appendix G is inconsistent with the other
provisions of this chapter, the more restrictive provisions shall govern and prevail):
APPENDIX G.
SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS AND HOT TUBS
Section AG103 - Swimming Pools:
AG103.1 In-Ground Pools. In-ground pools shall be designed and constructed in conformance with ANSI-NSPI-5 as listed in section AG108.
Section AG104 - Spas And Hot Tubs:
AG104.1 Permanently Installed Spas And Hot Tubs. Permanently installed spas and hot tubs shall be designed and constructed in
conformance with ANSI-NSPI-3 as listed in section AG108.
AG104.2 Portable Spas And Hot Tubs. Portable spas and hot tubs shall be designed and constructed in conformance with ANSI/NSPI-6 as
listed in section AG108.
Section AG105 - Barrier Requirements:
AG105.1 Application. The provision of this chapter shall control the design of barriers for residential swimming pools, spas and hot tubs.
These design controls are intended to provide protection against potential drownings and near-drownings by restricting access to swimming
pools, spas and hot tubs.
AG105.2 Outdoor Swimming Pool. An outdoor swimming pool, including an in-ground pool, hot tub or spa shall be provided with a barrier
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 156/366
which shall comply with the following:
1. The top of the barrier shall be at least 60 inches above grade measured on the side of the barrier which faces away from the swimming
pool. The maximum vertical clearance between grade and the bottom of the barrier shall be 2 inches (51 mm) measured on the side of
the barrier which faces away from the swimming pool. Where the top of the pool structure is above grade, such as a hot tub or spa, the
barrier may be at ground level, such as the hot tub or spa, or mounted on top of the hot tub or spa. Where the barrier is mounted on top of
the hot tub or spa, the maximum vertical clearance between the top of the hot tub or spa and the bottom of the barrier shall be 4 inches
(102 mm).
2. Openings in the barrier shall not allow passage of a 4-inch-diameter (102 mm) sphere.
3. Solid barriers which do not have openings, such as a masonry or stone wall, shall not contain indentations or protrusions except for
normal construction tolerances and tooled masonry joints.
4. Where the barrier is composed of horizontal and vertical members and the distance between the tops of the horizontal members is less
than 45 inches (1,143 mm), the horizontal members shall be located on the swimming pool side of the barrier. Spacing between vertical
members shall not exceed 1.75 inches (44 mm) in width. Where there are decorative cutouts within vertical members, spacing within the
cutouts shall not exceed 1.75 inches (44 mm) in width.
5. Where the barrier is composed of horizontal and vertical members and the distance between the tops of the horizontal members is 45
inches (1,143 mm) or more, spacing between vertical member shall not exceed 4 inches (102 mm). Where there are decorative cutouts
within vertical members, spacing within the cutouts shall not exceed 1.75 inches (44 mm) in width.
6. Maximum mesh size for chain link fences shall be a 2.25-inch (57 mm) square unless the fence is provided with slats fastened at the
top or the bottom which reduce the openings to not more than 1.75 inches (44 mm).
7. Where the barrier is composed of diagonal members, such as a lattice fence, the maximum opening formed by the diagonal members
shall not be more than 1.75 inches (44 mm).
8. Access gates shall comply with the requirements of section AG105.2, items 1 through 7, and shall be equipped to accommodate a
locking device. Pedestrian access gates shall open outward away from the pool and shall be self-closing and have a self-latching device.
Gates other than pedestrian access gates shall have a self-latching device. Where the release mechanism of the self-latching device is
located less than 54 inches (1,372 mm) from the bottom of the gate, the release mechanism and openings shall comply with the following:
8.1 The release mechanism shall be located on the pool side of the gate at least 3 inches (76 mm) below the top of the gate, and
8.2 The gate and barrier shall have no opening greater than 0.5 inch (12.7 mm) within 18 inches (457 mm) of the release mechanism.
9. Where a wall of a dwelling serves as part of the barrier, one of the following conditions shall be met:
9.1 The pool shall be equipped with a powered safety cover in compliance with ASTM F1346-91, as listed in section AG108; or
9.2 All doors with direct access to the pool through that wall shall be equipped with an alarm which produces an audible warning when the
door and its screen, if present, are opened. The alarm shall sound continuously for a minimum of 30 seconds immediately after the door is
opened and be capable of being heard throughout the house during normal household activities. The alarm shall automatically reset
under all conditions. The alarm system shall be equipped with a manual means, such as touchpad or switch, to temporarily deactivate the
alarm for a single opening. Such deactivation shall last for not more than 15 seconds. The deactivation switch(es) shall be located at least
54 inches (1,372 mm) above the threshold of the door; or
9.3 Other means of protection, such as self-closing doors with self-latching devices, which are approved by the governing body, shall be
acceptable so long as the degree of protection afforded is not less than the protection afforded by item 9.1 or 9.2 described above.
AG105.3 Indoor Swimming Pool. All walls surrounding an indoor swimming pool shall comply with section AG105.2, item 9.
AG105.4 Prohibited Locations. Barriers shall be located so as to prohibit permanent structures, equipment or similar objects from being
used to climb the barriers.
AG105.5 Barrier Exceptions. Spas or hot tubs with a safety cover which complies with ASTM F1346-91, as listed in section AG108, shall be
exempt from the provision of this appendix.
Section AG106 - Entrapment Protection For Swimming Pool And Spa Suction Outlets:
AG106.1 General. Suction outlets shall be designed to produce circulation throughout the pool or spa. Single outlet systems, such as
automatic vacuum cleaner systems, or other such multiple suction outlets whether isolated by valves or otherwise shall be protected against
user entrapment.
AG106.2 Suction Fittings. All pool and spa suction outlets shall be provided with a cover that conforms with ANSI/ASME A112.19.8M, as
listed in section AG108, or a 12" x 12" drain grate or larger, or an approved channel drain system.
Exception: Surface skimmers.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 157/366
AG106.3 Atmospheric Vacuum Relief System Required. All pool and spa single or multiple outlet circulation systems shall be equipped with
atmospheric vacuum relief should grate covers located therein become missing or broken. Such vacuum relief systems shall include at least
one approved or engineered method of the type specified herein, as follows:
1. Safety vacuum release system conforming to ASME A112.19.17, as listed in section AG108, or
2. An approved gravity drainage system.
AG106.4 Dual Drain Separation. Single or multiple pump circulation systems shall be provided with a minimum of two (2) suction outlets of
the approved type. A minimum horizontal or vertical distance of three (3) feet shall separate such outlets. These suction outlets shall be
piped so that water is drawn through them simultaneously through a vacuum relief-protected line to the pump or pumps.
AG106.5 Pool Cleaner Fittings. Where provided, vacuum or pressure cleaner fitting(s) shall be located in an accessible position(s) at least
six inches (6") and not greater than twelve inches (12") below the minimum operational water level or as an attachment to the skimmer(s).
Section AG107 - Abbreviations:
AG107.1 General.
ANSI - American National Standards Institute, 11 West 42nd Street, New York, NY 10036
ASTM - ASTM International, 100 Barr Harbor Drive, West Conshohocken, PA 19428
NSPI - National Spa and Pool Institute, 2111 Eisenhower Avenue, Alexandria, VA 22314
Section AG108 - Standards:
AG108.1 General.
ANSI/NSPI
ANSI/NSPI-3-99 standard for permanently
installed residential spas AG104.1
ANSI/NSPI-5-2003 standard for residential in-ground
swimming pools AG103.1
ANSI/NSPI-6-99 standard for residential
portable spas AG104.2
ANSI/ASME A112.19.8M-1987 suction fittings
for use in swimming pools, wading
pools, spas, hot tubs and whirlpool
bathing appliances AG106.2
ASTM
ASTM F 1346-91 (1996) performance specification
for safety covers and labeling requirements
for all covers for swimming pools, spas,
and hot tubs AG105.2, AG105.5
ASME
ASME A112.19.17 manufacturers safety vacuum
release systems (SVRS) for residential
and commercial swimming pool, spa,
hot tub and wading pool AG106.3
B. Materials: Swimming pool walls and floors shall be constructed of any impervious material which will provide a tight tank with white or light
colored finish and easily cleaned surfaces. The floor or bottom surface of the pool shall have a nonslip finish as smooth as possible.
C. Structural Design: Swimming pools shall be designed to withstand the water pressure from within and to resist the pressure of the earth when the
pool is empty and a certificate of an architect licensed by the state or of a structural engineer licensed by the state, shall be required as evidence
of such design characteristics.
D. Walk Areas: Unobstructed walk areas not less than thirty six inches (36") wide shall be provided immediately adjacent to and extending entirely
around the pool. The walk area shall be constructed of impervious material, and the surfaces shall be of such as to be smooth and easily
cleaned and of nonslip construction. The slope of the walks shall have a pitch of at least one-fourth inch to one foot (1/4":1'), designed so as to
prevent back drainage from entering the pool.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 158/366
E. Steps Or Ladders: No less than two (2) or more means of egress in the form of steps or ladders shall be provided for all swimming pools, one of
which shall be located at the deep end of the pool and one of which shall be located at the shallow end of the pool. Treads of steps and ladders
shall be constructed of nonslip material and at least three inches (3") wide for their full length. Steps and ladders shall have a handrail on both
sides.
F. Inlets:
1. Swimming pool water recirculation system inlet shall be located so as to produce, so far as possible, uniform circulation of water throughout
the pool without the existence of dead spots and to carry pool bottom deposits to the outlets, and shall discharge at a minimum depth of ten
inches (10") below the pool overflow level. A minimum of one recirculation system inlet shall be provided for every six hundred fifteen (615)
square feet of surface area of the pool.
2. Pools shall be equipped with suitable facilities for adding makeup water as needed. There shall be no physical connection between the water
supply line and the pool system. If the makeup water is added directly to the pool, the outlet shall be at least six inches (6") above the upper
rim of the pool. If the makeup water supply line discharges to a surge or balancing tank, the point of discharge shall be at least six inches (6")
above the rim of the tank. If a hose connection from a sill cock or other plumbing fixture is to be used for supplying makeup water, then an
approved vacuum breaker shall be installed between the sill cock or control valve at the fixture and the hose connection. Maximum size of the
fill pipe shall be two inches (2").
3. The system's supply of recirculated water and makeup water to the pool shall be constructed in conformance with all the applicable provisions
of this code.
G. Outlets:
1. In swimming pools thirty feet (30') in width or less, water circulation system outlets shall be located so as to provide at least one outlet at the
deepest point in the pool. If the pool width is more than thirty feet (30') apart, multiple outlets shall be provided and spaced not more than thirty
feet (30') apart, nor closer than four feet (4') to any wall. All pool drain outlets shall be equipped with gratings having an area of openings not
less than four (4) times the cross sectional area of the outlet pipe. The gratings shall be of such design so they cannot be readily removable by
bathers and will not injure bathers' fingers. One outlet shall be provided for each eight hundred (800) square feet of surface area.
2. Pools shall be equipped with facilities for completely emptying the pool and the discharge of the pool water shall be at a rate not exceeding
two hundred (200) gallons per minute.
3. Water drained from the pool shall not be discharged during periods of rain or storms.
4. No pool shall be drained into any septic system or septic field or be drained in such manner as to cause such septic system or septic field to
malfunction or to contribute to the malfunction of any such septic system or septic field.
5. The swimming pool and equipment shall be equipped to be emptied completely of water and the discharged water shall be disposed of in an
approved manner that will not create a nuisance. All discharged water shall be drained entirely upon the property on which the swimming pool
is located and shall not flow on any adjoining property. (Ord. 06-830, 7-11-2006)
4-7-7: RECIRCULATION SYSTEMS AND APPURTENANCES:
A. All swimming pools shall be provided with a recirculating skimming device or overflow gutters to remove scum and foreign matter from the
surface of the water. Where skimmers are used for private pools, there shall be at least one skimming device for each one thousand (1,000)
square feet (93 m2) of surface area or fraction thereof. For public pools where water skimmers are used, there shall be at least one skimming
device for each six hundred (600) square feet (55.8 m2) of surface area or fraction thereof. Overflow gutters shall not be less than three inches
(3") (76 mm) deep and shall be pitched to a slope of one unit vertical to forty eight units horizontal (1:48) toward drains, and constructed so that
such gutters are safe, cleanable and that matter entering the gutters will not be washed out by a sudden surge of entering water.
B. The swimming pools' circulation systems shall consist of pumping equipment, hair and lint catcher, filters, together with the necessary pipe
connections to the pool inlets and outlets, facilities and pipe connections necessary for backwashing filter, and filters, and facilities and
equipment for disinfecting the pool water.
C. Every swimming pool shall have a recirculating system with an hourly capacity equal to the pool volume divided by eight (8) (i.e., an 8 hour
turnover).
D. The recirculation system pump shall have sufficient capacity to discharge the volume of water required for an eight (8) hour turnover of the pool
against the maximum head in the recirculating system.
E. The pump used for backwashing filters shall have sufficient capacity to provide a filter backwash rate of at least twelve (12) gallons per minute
per square foot of filter area.
F. A hair and lint catcher or strainer shall be installed on the suction side of the circulation pump to prevent hair, lint and other extraneous matter
from reaching the pump and filters. Hair and lint catchers shall be so designed that they can be easily dismantled for cleaning and inspection and
shall be so located as to be easily accessible for cleaning. The design features shall be as follows: Water shall pass through the strainer from the
outside; the strainer is made of noncorrosive material; the width or diameter of strainer openings shall be not more than one-eighth inch (1/8");
the area of the strainer openings shall be at least five (5) times the cross sectional area of the inlet pipe to the strainer.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 159/366
G. Recirculating systems shall contain rapid pressure filters. Sufficient filter area shall be provided to filter the entire contents of the pool in eighteen
(18) hours at the rate of not more than three (3) gallons per square foot of filter area per minute. The filter backwashing facilities shall be
sufficient to backwash at a rate of twelve (12) gallons per minute per square foot of filter area. All backwash water and effluents shall be
discharged through an indirect connection. Pressure filters shall be equipped with readily accessible air relief valves, loss of head or pressure
gauges on the inlet and outlet pipes, and an access head or hole large enough to permit inspection, maintenance and repair work. Sight glasses
that can be easily removed for cleaning shall be provided in effluent line from the filter units.
H. Equipment shall be provided for the disinfection of all pool water. Any disinfection method using materials other than chlorine compounds shall be
subject to the approval of the building officer. Disinfection equipment installed for the use of chlorine compounds shall have sufficient capacity to
maintain a minimum free chlorine residual of five-tenths (0.5) parts per million. The disinfectant shall be introduced into the recirculation system
ahead of the filters.
I. Gaseous chlorination system shall not be made use of as a disinfection method of pool water. (Ord. 06-822, 3-14-2006)
4-7-8: ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. Electrical Installations: All electrical installations provided for, installed and used in conjunction with private residential swimming pools shall be in
conformance with chapter 5 of this title regulating electrical installations and NFPA 70 (2005) and to the extent the provisions of this chapter,
chapter 5 of this title, and/or NFPA 70 (2005) are inconsistent, the more restrictive provisions shall govern and prevail.
B. Electrical Conductors: No current carrying electrical conductors shall cross private residential swimming pools, either overhead or underground or
within fifteen feet (15') of such pools. No type MC cable shall be permitted in conjunction with swimming pools.
C. Metal Fences, Enclosures Or Railings: All metal fences, enclosures or railings near or adjacent to swimming pools, which might become
electrically alive as a result of contact with broken overhead conductors or from any other cause, shall be effectively grounded.
D. Underwater Lighting Fixtures: Underwater lighting fixtures shall be approved for the service.
E. Location Of Receptacle: Where a permanently installed pool is installed at a dwelling unit(s), at least one GFCI protected one hundred twenty five
(125) volt receptacle shall be located a minimum of ten feet (10') (3.05 m) from and not more than twenty feet (20') (6.10 m) from the inside wall
of the pool.
F. Nuisances: Pools shall be operated with due consideration to the comfort and well being of adjoining property owners. Lighting shall be directed
so as not to constitute a nuisance or annoyance to other property owners. (Ord. 06-822, 3-14-2006)
4-7-9: RESCUE DEVICES:
Every swimming pool shall be equipped with one or more throwing ring buoys not less than fifteen inches (15") in diameter and having sixty feet
(60') of three-sixteenths inch (3/16") line attached or other material of such length but of equivalent strength, and one or more light but strong poles
with blunted ends and not less than twelve feet (12') in length, for making reach assists or rescue. (Ord. 06-822, 3-14-2006)
4-7-10: ENCLOSURES:
Any outdoor swimming pool shall be completely enclosed by a barrier which shall not be more than fifteen feet (15') from the edge of the walk areas
as required by this chapter; and the combined measurement between the edge of said walk areas and said required barrier as measured at the
farthest points of separation on each of the four (4) sides shall not exceed thirty two feet (32') in total. (For the purposes of this combined or total
measurement and the application of this section, any swimming pool shall be considered as having 4 sides, based upon the 4 most significant
changes of direction.) Notwithstanding the foregoing requirements of this section, a residence located on the same property as such an outdoor
swimming pool may be used as one or more of the sides of the required enclosure. However, the area within the swimming pool barrier, excluding
the swimming pool and walk areas, shall not exceed one thousand two hundred forty (1,240) square feet. The barrier shall be designed, to the
extent reasonably possible, in such a way so as to discourage easy climbing from the outside. (Ord. 06-822, 3-14-2006)
4-7-11: EQUIPMENT AND APPURTENANT STRUCTURES:
A. All appurtenant structures, installations and equipment, such as showers, dressing rooms, equipment houses or other buildings and structures,
including plumbing, heating and air conditioning systems, shall comply with all applicable requirements of this code.
B. Pumps, filters, heaters, and other mechanical and electrical equipment shall be located outside of the pool enclosure. (Ord. 06-822, 3-14-2006)
4-7-12: DIVING BOARDS:
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 160/366
A. Minimum water depths and distances for diving hoppers for pools, based on board height above water, shall comply with table 4-7-11(A) for
public pools and table 4-7-11(B) for private pools in section 4-7-13 of this chapter.
B. The maximum slope permitted between point D2 and the transition point shall not exceed one unit vertical to three units horizontal (1:3) in private
and public pools. D1 is the point directly under the end of the diving boards. D2 is the point at which the floor begins to slope upwards to the
transition point. (See figure 4-7-11 in section 4-7-13 of this chapter.) (Ord. 06-822, 3-14-2006)
4-7-13: FIGURES AND TABLES:
FIGURE 4-7-11
MINIMUM WATER DEPTHS AND DISTANCES BASED ON
BOARD HEIGHT FOR PUBLIC AND PRIVATE POOLS
TABLE 4-7-11(A)
MINIMUM WATER DEPTHS AND DISTANCES BASED ON
BOARD HEIGHT FOR PUBLIC POOLS
Board Height Minimum Depth1 At D1 Directly Under End Of Board Distance1 Between D1 And D2 Minimum Depth1 At D2
2'2" (2/3 meter ) 7'0" 8'0" 8'6"
2'6" (3/4 meter ) 7'6" 9'0" 9'0"
1 meter 8'6" 10'0" 10'0"
3 meters 11'0" 10'0" 12'0"
Note:
1. 1 foot = 304.8 millimeters
TABLE 4-7-11(B)
MINIMUM WATER DEPTHS AND DISTANCES BASED ON
BOARD HEIGHT FOR PRIVATE POOLS
Board Height Minimum Depth1 At D1 Directly Under End Of Board Distance1 Between D1 And D2 Minimum Depth1 At D2
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 161/366
1'8" (1/2 meter ) 6'0" 7'0" 7'6"
2'2" (2/3 meter ) 6'10" 7'6" 8'0"
2'6" (3/4 meter ) 7'5" 8'0" 8'0"
3'4" (1 meter ) 8'6" 9'0" 9'0"
Note:
1. 1 foot = 304.8 millimeters
(Ord. 06-822, 3-14-2006)
Chapter 8
EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL
4-8-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
The regulations contained in this Chapter governing the clearing, grading, excavating and transporting of or otherwise disturbing land, are
established for the purpose of avoiding or lessening the following situations and to provide minimum standards to safeguard persons, to protect
property and to prevent the despoliation of the environment and to promote the public welfare by regulating and controlling the design, construction,
quality of materials and the construction, use and maintenance of any development or other activity which disturbs or breaks the topsoil or otherwise
results in the movement of earth on land situated within the corporate limits of the Village:
A. That the washing, blowing and falling of eroded soil across and upon roadways endangers the health and safety of users thereof by decreasing
vision and reducing traction of road vehicles;
B. That said soil erosion necessitates the costly repairing of gullies, washed out fills and embankments;
C. That the sediment from said soil erosion tends to clog sewers and ditches and to pollute and silt rivers, streams, lakes and reservoirs;
D. That said sediment limits the use of water and waterways for most beneficial purposes, destroying fish and other aquatic life and that said
sediment is costly and difficult to remove;
E. That said sediment reduces the channel capacity of waterways, resulting in greatly increased chances of flooding at grave danger to public health
and safety; and
F. That stripping and disturbing and breaking the topsoil of land tends to destroy the physical characteristics of such land and its natural beauty.
4-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter, certain terms used herein are defined as follows:
BORROW: Material not native to the site under development which is hauled or otherwise transported for placement thereon.
BUILDING PERMIT: A permit issued by the Village for the construction, erection or alteration of a structure or building as required by this Code.
CERTIFY or CERTIFICATION: That the specific inspections and tests where required have been performed, and that such tests comply with the
applicable requirements of this Chapter.
CUBIC YARDS: The unit of measurements for the amount of material in excavation and/or fill determined by the "average end area method", or
other method approved by the Village Engineer.
EXCAVATION: Any act by which organic matter, earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other similar material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered,
removed, displaced, relocated or bulldozed and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
EXISTING GRADE: The vertical location of the existing ground surface prior to excavation or filling.
FILL: Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material is deposited, placed, replaced, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or
otherwise artificially moved to a new location and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
GRADING: Excavation, fill or borrow, or any combination thereof and shall include the conditions resulting from any excavation or fill.
LAND SURVEYOR: A registered surveyor of the State of Illinois.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 162/366
PARCEL: All contiguous land in one ownership.
PERMIT OFFICER: Those officers or employees authorized by the Village President to enforce this Chapter.
PERMITTEE: Any person to whom a site development permit is issued.
PERSON: Any person, firm or corporation being a legal entity, public or private, the State of Illinois and its agencies or political subdivisions, and the
United States of America, its agencies and instrumentalities, and any agent, servant, officer or employee of any of the foregoing.
REMOVAL: Cutting vegetation to the ground or stumps, complete extraction or killing by spraying.
SITE: A lot resulting from any subdivision approved after January 1, 1974 and any of the following whether approved before or after January 1,
1974:
A. Any subdivision of property; or
B. Any planned unit development; or
C. Any combination of lots or sites where grading work is performed as a single unified operation.
SITE DEVELOPMENT or ALTERATION: Altering terrain and/or vegetation and constructing driveways.
SITE DEVELOPMENT or ALTERATION PERMIT: The permit provided for and required by this Chapter and in other applicable provisions of this
Code.
VACANT: Land on which there are no structures, or, only structures which are secondary to the use or maintenance of the land itself.
VILLAGE: The Village of Inverness.
VILLAGE BOARD: Inverness President and Board of Trustees.
4-8-3: STANDARDS:
The following general principles shall apply to any and all applications and plans for and the granting of a permit provided for herein and the work
carried out pursuant to such plans and permit:
A. The smallest practical area of land shall be exposed at any given time during development.
B. Such minimum area of exposure shall be kept to as short a duration of time as is practical.
C. Temporary vegetation or, where appropriate, mulching or other nonviable cover, shall be used to protect areas exposed during development.
D. Sediment basins, debris basins, desilting basins or silt traps shall be installed and maintained where necessary to remove sediment from run-off
waters from land undergoing development (1983 Code)
E. Increased run-off shall be impounded and released in accordance with Title 7 of this Code. (Ord. 83-240, 5-10-83)
F. Permanent, final plant covering or structures shall be installed as soon as possible.
G. The plan of development shall relate to the topography and soils of the site so that the lowest potential for erosion is created.
H. Natural plant covering, trees, shrubbery and vines shall be retained and protected so far as is consistent with developing the site.
4-8-4: PLANS AND SITE DEVELOPMENT OR ALTERATION PERMIT:
A. When Permit is Required: Before land is cleared, graded, excavated, transported or otherwise disturbed by the movements of earth for purposes
including, but not limited to, the construction of buildings, the mining of minerals, including sand and gravel, the development of golf courses, and
the construction of roads and streets by any person, or any alterations to the topography of proposed or existing developments, a site
development or alteration permit embodying the proposed earth movement shall be obtained from the Permit Officer, where development comes
under any one or more of the following provisions, unless such development is exempted therefrom by subsection B of this Section:
1. Excavation, fill, borrow or any combination thereof, which will exceed one hundred (100) cubic yards.
2. Fill will exceed three feet (3') in vertical depth at its deepest point measured from the natural ground surface.
3. Excavation will exceed four feet (4') in vertical depth at its deepest point.
4. Excavation, fill, borrow or a combination thereof will exceed an area of five thousand (5,000) square feet of ground surface.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 163/366
5. Plant cover is to be removed from an area exceeding five thousand (5,000) square feet on any vacant parcel of land or any parcel of land in
excess of ten (10) acres. (1983 Code)
B. When a Separate Permit under this Chapter is not Required:
1. Excavations below finished grade for septic tanks and drain fields, tanks, water and sewer and sewer pipes, vaults, tunnels, equipment
basements, swimming pools, cellars or footings of buildings or structures for which a building and/or septic permit has been applied for and
said permit application contains all the information required by this Chapter.
2. Excavation or removal of vegetation in public utility easements by public utility companies for the purpose of installing underground utilities.
3. Tilling of the soil for fire protection purposes. (Ord. 92-451, 6-9-92)
4-8-5: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
A. No site development or building permit shall be issued until the developer submits a site development plan, together with other submissions
required by this Chapter and any other applicable ordinances of the Village, and certifies that any land clearing, construction or development
involving the movement of earth shall be in accordance with such plan and submissions.
B. Each application for a site development permit shall be made by the owner of the property or his authorized agent to the Permit Officer on a form
furnished for that purpose.
C. When grading or plant cover removal is proposed as a part of a building permit application, the building permit application and the site
development permit application may be combined, and one plot plan, in the number of copies required by the Permit Officer, may be submitted
showing building plans and site development plans. An Illinois Registered Professional Engineer or Registered Illinois Land Surveyor shall certify
as to the accuracy of the existing and proposed topography. The requirements for individual lots may be met by reference to a subdivision or
planned unit development for which a site development permit has been issued, subject to the review by the Permit Officer.
D. With respect to site developments, a vicinity sketch, showing acreage of site, boundary lines, zoning, type of proposed sewer and water facilities,
location of existing utilities, buildings and drains on and within one hundred feet (100') of the site; provided, however, that in the event adjacent
property owners refuse access to their property so that exact measurements may not be furnished, then the best available information regarding
such utilities, buildings and drains on such property shall be acceptable, together with a legend and scale. There shall be included on or with
such a vicinity sketch:
1. A soil map of the subject property showing the predominant soil types on the site based on the soil maps prepared by the United States
Department of Agriculture or soil borings for the specific property.
2. Such information on those areas abutting or adjacent to the site showing existing drainage patterns and the drainage course that may affect,
or be affected by, the development of the site.
3. The name an address of the developer or owner.
4. The name and address of any consulting firm retained by the applicant, together with the name of applicant's principal contact at such firm.
5. Limits of natural flood plain(s), if any, as defined in Title 7 of this Code.
6. Areas to be sodded, seeded, mulched or paved.
7. Acreage of area to be vegetatively stabilized, if any.
8. Areas to be left undisturbed.
E. With respect to site grading, existing topography of the site and a one hundred foot (100') adjacent peripheral strip, proposed contours and final
grades, and street profiles; and indicating what measures will be employed to protect cut and fill slopes from surfaces runoff. In the event
adjacent property owners will not permit access to their property so that accurate measurements of property within one hundred feet (100')
cannot be furnished as required by this paragraph, then approximate dimensions of adjacent property shall be acceptable.
F. Storm drainage by means of a plan based upon a storm drainage study with a one hundred (100) year rainfall return frequency (24-hour duration)
including a drainage area map and computations, and indicating existing conditions at proposed and natural outlets, including:
1. Whether the drainage course if bare earth or vegetated.
2. Whether the constructed outlet will be in open sun, open shade, or dense shade.
3. Whether the natural or proposed outlet is subject to long term or continuous flow.
4. Whether the existing outlet is actively eroding.
5. Whether there if evidence of a high water table (permanent or seasonal).
6. Whether the area is subject to seepage or spring flow.
7. The elevation of normal water level in all proposed and natural outlets.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 164/366
8. A profile below outlet for a sufficient distance to indicate the natural gradient of the accepting natural outlet and/or stream channel.
9. A cross section and profile of existing stream channels where applicable.
10. A ditch design and computations of all seeded, sodded, or bare earth outlets, ditches and similar water conduction facilities.
G. Estimate schedule and phasing development of site:
Phase I Stripping and/or clearing
Phase II Rough grading and construction
Phase III Final grading and vegetative establishment
Phase IV Maintenance
All erosion and sediment control plans submitted to the Permit Officer for approval shall show all erosion and sediment control measures
planned to provide protection throughout all the phases of construction listed above. These plans shall also include any off-site borrow and spoil
areas; sewer lines, utility lines, and haul and access roads, and shall further indicate.
1. The start of clearing date.
2. Duration of exposure of disturbed areas.
3. Installation of temporary sediment control measures (vegetative and structural) by phase and date.
4. Installation of storm drainage improvements by phase and date.
5. Paving of streets and parking areas, if any by phase and date.
6. Establishment of permanent vegetative cover (plans will show what will be done to shorten the duration of exposure of disturbed areas as
soon after grading as possible), including seeding mixes and rates, type of sod, seedbed preparation, seeding dates, line and fertilizer
application, temporary seedings, if needed, mulching, or similar stabilization procedures.
7. Details of all structural sediment control measures.
8. Computations for sediment basins, if any. (1983 Code)
H. The "Procedures and Standards for Urban Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control in Illinois", published October, 1981, or current edition ("said
Handbook"), and the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency's "Standards and Specifications for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control, October,
1987", as amended from time to time ("said IEPA Standards"), are both hereby incorporated into this Chapter and made a part hereof by this
reference, and said IEPA Standards and said Handbook shall constitute the requirements, criteria and factors which should enter into the
preparation of a site development plan. In the event of conflict between provisions of said IEPA Standards and said Handbook, the more
restrictive provisions shall control. (Ord. 94-521, 6-14-94)
4-8-6: LETTER OF CREDIT:
In developments where the aggregate volume of grading will be over one thousand (1,000) cubic yards, the applicant shall be required to file with
the Village Administrator a letter of credit in a form satisfactory to the Village Attorney in the amount deemed sufficient by the Permit Officer to cover
engineering, inspection fees, incidental expenses and all the costs of improvements, landscaping and maintenance of landscaping for such periods
as specified by the Village. (Ord. 92-468, 12-8-92)
4-8-7: REVIEW PROCEDURES:
To further the specific purposes of this Chapter, the following review procedures are established:
A. Grading Work Under Five Hundred Cubic Yards: Where the aggregate volume of grading on any site or contiguous group of sites is in excess of
one hundred (100) cubic yards but not over five hundred (500) cubic yards, the Permit Officer shall review the application for the proposed site
development permit. If the Permit Officer finds that the application for the proposed grading plan is in conformance with the provisions of this
Chapter and that all other ordinances of the Village pertaining to site development permits are complied with, he shall issue a permit with such
reasonable conditions as he may deem necessary to secure substantially the objectives of this Chapter and other applicable ordinances of the
Village.
B. Grading and/or Removal of Vegetation Work in Excess of One Thousand Cubic Yards: Where the aggregate volume of grading on any site or
contiguous group of sites is in excess of one thousand (1,000) cubic yards, or the proposed cuts and fills exceed at their maximum point, three
feet (3') for cuts and four feet (4') for fills, or where approval to remove plant cover is required by this Chapter.
1. The Permit Officer shall refer the application and his recommendations to the Village Engineer for review and recommendation to the Village
Board, together with recommendations on other applicable subdivision regulation.
2. Upon receipt of the recommendations of the Village Engineer by the Village Board, and upon approval by the Village Board, the Village
President shall sign the plat of subdivision or other development documents.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 165/366
3. The Permit Officer shall issue a site development permit upon compliance with the conditions established by the Village Board and with other
applicable ordinances of the Village.
C. Prohibition of Earth Removal: No site development permit shall be issued for an intended building site unless such permit is accompanied by or
combined with a valid building permit issued by the Village. (1983 Code)
4-8-8: APPEALS:
The applicant, as well as any person who has received notice of filing of the application for site development permit may appeal the decision of the
Permit Officer to the Village Board. Upon receipt of a notice of appeal, the Board shall schedule and hold a public hearing. The Board shall render a
decision within thirty (30) days of the completion of the hearing. Factors to be considered on review and findings to be made may include, but shall
not be limited to, possible saturation of fill and unsupported cuts by water, both natural and domestic; surface water run-off that produces erosion
and silting of drainage ways; the nature and type of soil or rock that, when disturbed by the proposed grading, may create earth movement and
produce slopes that cannot be landscaped through grading or removal of vegetation. (1983 Code)
4-8-9: RESPONSIBILITY:
Failure of the Village officials to observe or recognize hazardous or unsightly conditions or to recommend denial of the site development permit, or
of the Village Board to deny said permit, shall not relieve the permittee from responsibility for the condition or damage resulting therefrom, and shall
not result in any liability on the part of the Village, its officers of agents, for any condition or damage resulting therefrom. (1983 Code)
4-8-10: RETENTION OF PLANS:
Plans, specifications and reports for all site development permits shall be retained in original form or on microfilm by the Permit Officer. (Ord. 92-
468, 12-8-92)
4-8-11: INSPECTIONS:
A. The Permit Officer shall make inspections as hereinafter required and shall either approve that portion of the work completed or shall notify the
permittee wherein the same fails to comply with the site development permit. Where it is found by inspection that conditions are not substantially
as stated or shown in the said plan, the Permit Officer may stop further work until approval of a revised grading plan conforming to the existing
conditions is obtained by the permittee. Plans for grading work, bearing the stamp of approval of the Permit Officer, shall be maintained at the
site during the progress of the grading. Until the final inspection is made, a copy of the site development permit or the building permit indicating
permission to grade has been granted by the Village shall be prominently displayed on the property involved so as to be visible from the street
on which the property fronts. In order to obtain inspections in accordance with the following schedule, the permittee shall notify the Permit Officer
at least two (2) full working days before the said inspection is to be made:
1. Preconstruction site inspection.
2. Rough Grading: When all rough grading has been completed.
3. Final Inspection: When all work, including installation of all drainage improvements and other structures and required planting, has been
completed.
B. The permittee shall also submit current photographic evidence of condition of the site and the existence of all erosion and sedimentation control
measures on the site at the time of each of the inspections as specified in subsection A of this section and at such time or times as directed by
the permit officer. (Ord. 94-521, 6-14-1994)
4-8-12: OPERATION STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS:
A. Applicability: All earth moving and grading operations not specifically exempted by the provisions of this chapter shall comply with the applicable
standards and requirements set forth in this section in addition to the other requirements of this chapter.
B. The Illinois environmental protection agency's "Standards And Specifications For Soil Erosion And Sediment Control, October, 1987", as
amended from time to time ("IEPA standards") and "Procedures And Standards For Urban Soil Erosion And Sedimentation Control In Illinois,
published in October, 1981", or current edition ("the handbook") are hereby respectively incorporated into this section and made a part hereof by
this reference, for the purpose of delineating procedures and methods of operation under development plans approved in this section. In the
event of conflict between provisions of said IEPA standards and said handbook, the more restrictive provisions shall control. In the event of a
conflict between the said IEPA standards and the other provisions of this chapter, said IEPA standards shall govern. In the event of a conflict
between the provision of said handbook and the other provisions of this chapter, the other provisions of this chapter shall control.
C. Special Precautions:
1. If, at any stage of the grading, the permit officer determines by inspection that the nature of the formation is such that further work as
authorized by an existing permit is likely to imperil any property, public way, watercourse or drainage structure, the permit officer may require,
as a condition to allowing the work to be done, that such reasonable safety precautions be taken as he considers advisable to avoid the
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 166/366
likelihood of such peril. "Special precautions" may include, but shall not be limited to, specifying a less steep exposed slope, construction of
additional drainage facilities, berms, terracing, compaction or cribbing and installation of plant materials for erosion control. (Ord. 94-521, 6-14-
1994)
2. Where it appears that storm damage may result because the grading is not complete, work may be stopped and the permittee required to
install temporary planting to control erosion, install temporary structures or take such other measures as may be required to protect adjoining
property or the public safety. On large operations or where unusual site conditions prevail, the permit officer may specify the time of starting
grading and time of completion or may require that the operations be conducted in specific stages so as to ensure completion of protective
measures or devices prior to the advent of seasonal rains.
D. Expiration Of Permit: Every site development permit shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the work authorized by such permit has
not been commenced within one hundred eighty (180) days, or is not completed within one year from the date of issue; except that the permit
officer may, if the permit holder presents satisfactory evidence that unusual difficulties have prevented work being started or completed within the
specified time limits, grant a reasonable extension of time if written application is made before the expiration date of the permit. (1983 Code)
4-8-13: EXCEPTIONS, FEES AND VIOLATIONS:
A. Exceptions: The village board may authorize exceptions to any of the requirements and regulations set forth in this chapter.
1. Application For Exception: Application for any exception shall be made by a verified petition of applicant stating fully the grounds of the
application and the facts relied upon by the petitioner. Such petition shall be filed with the site development permit application. In order for the
land referred to in the petition to come within the provisions of this section, it shall be necessary that the village board make findings of facts
with respect thereto:
a. That the land is of such shape or size or is affected by such physical conditions or is subject to such title limitations of record that it is
impossible or impractical for the applicant to comply with the specified regulations of this chapter.
b. That the exception is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the petitioner.
c. That the granting of the exception will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property in the vicinity of the subject
property.
2. Referral Of Proposed Exception: Each proposed exception may be referred by the village board to qualified persons for investigation and such
persons shall transmit to the village board their recommendations, which recommendations shall be reviewed along with all other matters
submitted prior to the granting of any exception.
3. Village Board: After consideration thereon, the village board, by resolution, may approve of the site development permit application with the
exceptions and conditions it deems necessary or it may disapprove of such site development permit application and exception application or it
may take such other action as is appropriate.
B. Revocation Of Permit: In the event any person holding a site development permit pursuant to this chapter violates the terms of the permit, or
conducts or carries on said site development in such a manner as to materially have an adverse effect on the health, welfare or safety of
persons residing or working in the neighborhood of the property of the said permittee, or conducts or carries on said site development so that it is
materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property or improvements in the neighborhood, the permit officer shall temporarily
revoke or suspend the permit. (1983 Code)
C. Fees: Permit fees and bonds shall be as respectively required in sections 4-1-4 and 4-1-5 of this title. (Ord. 92-451, 6-9-1992)
D. Violations: This chapter shall not be construed as authorizing any person to maintain a private or public nuisance upon their property, or to
perform any act which the statute or case law of the state of Illinois would not permit regarding drainage and waterways and compliance with the
provisions of this chapter shall not be a defense in any action to abate such nuisance or involving water rights. No person shall construct,
enlarge, alter, repair or maintain any grading, excavation or fill, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any provisions of this
chapter, and no person shall fail to do any act required by this chapter. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is
committed, continued or permitted. (1983 Code)
Chapter 9
INVERNESS MECHANICAL CODE
(Rep. by Ord. 06-822, 3-14-2006)
Chapter 10
VILLAGE ARCHITECT
4-10-1: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 167/366
A. To promote the public health, safety, morals, comfort and general welfare of the citizens of the Village.
B. To preserve and enhance the values of property throughout the Village.
C. To protect and to stabilize the general appearance of buildings, structures, landscaping and open areas lying within the Village along the lines
presently existing.
D. To ensure adequate light, air and privacy for property lying within the Village.
E. To encourage and promote acceptability, attractiveness, cohesiveness and compatibility of new buildings, development, remodeling and additions
so as to maintain and improve the established standards of values of property and to continue the present architectural characteristics of
buildings lying within the Village. (1983 Code)
4-10-2: CREATION AND TERM OF OFFICE:
There is hereby created the office of Village Architect to be appointed by the Village President with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees.
Such appointment shall be for a term of three (3) years. The Village Architect may be removed from office at any time by the Village President with
approval of the Board of Trustees. (1983 Code)
4-10-3: QUALIFICATIONS:
The Village Architect shall be a resident of the Village and shall serve without compensation. He shall be a registered architect holding a certificate
of registration issued by the Department of Registration and Education of the State, or a person who is recognized as expert in matters of aesthetic
judgment by virtue of training, education and experience (such as registered architects, landscape architects, real estate appraisers and land
planners) and possessing qualities of impartiality and broad judgment. The Village Architect, before entering his official duties, shall take the oath of
office prescribed by law for Village officials. (1983 Code)
4-10-4: VACANCIES:
A vacancy in the office of Village Architect shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner in which original appointments are required to
be made. (1983 Code)
4-10-5: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The Village Architect shall have the following powers and duties:
A. To consult with and cooperate with the Plan Commissioner or other Village officials on matters affecting the appearance of the Village.
B. To study exterior design drawings, landscape and site plans and materials and to make recommendations to the Board of Trustees as to the
architectural or aesthetic aspects thereof.
C. To consider the effects of building or reconstruction plans on property values in the Village.
D. To hold hearings, when required, on the issuance of certificates of appropriateness as provided by this Chapter, in connection with questions
pertaining to applications for building permits and to issue or deny such certificates pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter. (1983 Code)
4-10-6: CERTIFICATE REQUIRED:
No building or other permit, otherwise required under ordinances of the Village for the erection, construction, alteration or repair of any building or
structure shall be issued except upon the granting of a certificate of appropriateness by the Village Architect. This requirement shall not preclude the
issuance of a building permit without such certificate if the enforcing officer, who is authorized to deny or issue such permit, shall determine that no
"external architectural feature" as hereinafter defined is involved in the work for which the building permit is sought.
The term "external architectural feature" as used in this Chapter shall mean the architectural style and general arrangement of such portion of a
building or structure as is designed to be open to view from a public street, place, or way, including the kind, color and texture of the building
material and the types of windows, doors, lights, attached or ground signs, and other fixtures appurtenant to such building or structure. (1983 Code)
4-10-7: CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS, PRELIMINARY CONSIDERATION:
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 168/366
The Village Architect shall, at the written request of a prospective applicant for a certificate of appropriateness, give consideration to preliminary
exterior drawings, sketches, landscape and site plans and materials on a specific project before a formal application is filed, and shall provide such
advice, counsel, suggestions and recommendations on matters pertaining to aesthetics or otherwise as he may deem necessary to guide said
prospective applicant in the development of a plan. The Village Architect shall act in an advisory capacity only, with regard to preliminary plans, and
shall provide consultation only on projects for which preliminary drawings and materials are furnished by prospective applicants, and shall not
participate in the development of basic concepts, plans or drawings. All hearings held by the Village Architect to consider preliminary plans shall be
public. Upon finding the preliminary exterior drawings, sketches, landscape and site plans and materials are appropriate to or compatible with the
character of the immediate neighborhood and the Village, the Village Architect will issue preliminary approval. Such approval will be irrevocable, and
makes the issuance of the certificate of appropriateness mandatory upon application, unless the final presentation does not substantially comply
with the preliminary presentation upon which the preliminary approval was based. (1983 Code)
4-10-8: CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS, FINAL HEARINGS:
Upon the filing of an application for building permit for which a certificate of appropriateness is or may be required under the provisions of this
Chapter, the permit enforcing officer shall immediately transmit said application to the Village Architect. The fact that an application for a certificate
of appropriateness has been filed shall not be cause for the permit enforcing officer to delay the review of plans relating to the building and zoning
aspects of the project, while said application is pending. The Village Architect shall consider the application for a building permit and other
necessary evidence such as exterior elevation renderings submitted by the applicant or his agent or attorney and from Village officials or other
persons as to whether the external architectural features of the proposed building or structure complies with the requirements of this Chapter. (1983
Code)
4-10-9: APPROVAL OF VILLAGE ARCHITECT:
If preliminary approval has not been requested under the terms and provisions of this Chapter, prior to making his decision, the Village Architect
may make recommendations to the applicant as to changes in the exterior drawings, sketches, landscaping, site plans and materials which in the
judgment of the Village Architect would tend to effect the general purposes of this Chapter. The Village Architect shall make his decision within
fifteen (15) days after the hearing is closed and shall issue to the Building Officer a certificate of appropriateness, unless the Village Architect finds
that the plans submitted do not conform to this Chapter and that the proposed building or structure will be inappropriate to or incompatible with, the
character of the immediate neighborhood and of the Village and cause substantial depreciation in property values. If preliminary approval was
previously granted by the Village Architect as provided in this Chapter, the Village Architect shall issue a certificate of appropriateness immediately;
provided, that the final drawings, plans and materials as presented comply in all respects with the preliminary presentation upon which the
preliminary approval was based. (1983 Code)
4-10-10: APPEAL:
All final decisions of the Village Architect under this Chapter may be appealed by the applicant to the Board of Trustees. Notice of such appeal shall
be filed within ten (10) days after such final decision with the Village President, or his or her designee, who, upon receipt thereof, shall notify the
Board of Trustees, which shall consider the appeal at the next regular meeting of the Board which occurs more than seven (7) days after the filing of
the appeal. The decision of the Board of Trustees shall be final. (Ord. 92-468, 12-8-1992)
4-10-11: FOLLOW-UP BY BUILDING OFFICER:
Upon the granting of a certificate of appropriateness, the exterior drawings, sketches, landscape and site plans, renderings and materials upon
which said certificate was granted shall be turned over to the Building Officer whose responsibility shall be to determine from time to time as the
project is in progress and finally upon its completion that there have been no unauthorized substantial deviations from the evidence upon which the
granting of the certificate of appropriateness was originally based. (1983 Code)
Chapter 11
PAYMENTS OF AND DEPOSITS FOR OUT OF POCKET EXPENSES
4-11-1: OUT OF POCKET EXPENSES:
Petitions to appeal from a decision of the zoning enforcement officer and/or to appeal from a decision of the building official, petitions for a variation
or a special use, petitions for a change in or amendment to the zoning ordinance or zoning map, or applications or petitions for plat approval,
requests for building site assessments and any petitions or applications for any permit or approval or variation required under any provision of this
code must be accompanied by the specified application fee required by this code or as established by resolution (which is intended to cover the
costs of the review and processing of such petition or application which are difficult to identify) and such deposits for reimbursable out of pocket
expenses as required by the applicable ordinances or resolutions of the president and board of trustees. No action shall be taken on any such
petition, request or application until the specified fee has been paid and all required deposits made unless the board of trustees specifically waives
the requirement of the payment of same. All petitioners or applicants shall be required to pay to the village any out of pocket expenses incurred by
the village in the village's review and consideration of their petition, request or application, including, but not limited to, engineering fees, court
reporter charges including the costs of any necessary transcripts, legal fees and expenses of such other consultants as the village deems
appropriate and necessary, and such petitioners or applicants may also be required to execute an agreement to make such reimbursement. (Ord.
2007-846, 3-13-2007)
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 169/366
Chapter 12
PREEMPTION OF AFFORDABLE HOUSING, PLANNING AND APPEAL ACT
4-12-1: FINDINGS:
A. The village president and board of trustees of the village of Inverness, Cook County, Illinois, find that the village of Inverness, Cook County,
Illinois (the "village") is a home rule municipal corporation as provided in article VII, section 6 of the 1970 constitution of the state of Illinois and,
pursuant to said constitutional authority, may exercise any power and perform any function pertaining to its government and affairs for the
protection of the public health, safety, morals and welfare.
B. The village president and board of trustees further find that the availability of affordable housing in the village is a matter pertaining to the public
health, safety and welfare and, therefore, the adoption of plans, ordinances, regulations and other legislative and administrative actions to
provide for the development of affordable housing are matters pertaining to the government and affairs of the village and, consequently, are
within the constitutional grant of home rule authority to the village.
C. The village president and board of trustees further find that the few areas where infrastructure for public sanitary sewers and a public water
service might be available have already been developed, and the remainder of the village has already fully been developed with single-family
homes which are supported by private wells and individual sewage disposal systems, and to support redevelopment of existing single-family
homes or single-family lots for this purpose would unfairly impact existing homeowners and their respective neighborhoods and would create an
environmental disaster in terms of the health and sanitation regulations of this code which govern the installation and maintenance of individual
private sewage disposal systems.
D. The village president and board of trustees further find that the state of Illinois has enacted the affordable housing, planning and appeal act,
public act 93-595, effective January 1, 2004, as amended by public act 93-678, and as now or hereafter amended (collectively, the "act"), which
provides for the designation of particular municipalities in the state as either "exempt" or "nonexempt", based on the amount of housing in those
municipalities determined under the act to be "affordable", requires nonexempt municipalities to develop and submit to the state on or before
April 1, 2005, an "affordable housing plan", and provides that, beginning January 1, 2009, developers who have been denied land use approvals
by a "nonexempt" municipality may appeal such a decision to a "state housing appeals board", in order to seek relief from the decision.
E. The village president and board of trustees further find that the village has been identified by the Illinois housing development authority as a
municipality that will be "nonexempt" under the act and, therefore, would, but for this chapter, be subject to the requirements of the act aforesaid,
including possible appeal of local land use decisions to the state housing appeals board.
F. The village president and board of trustees further find that the act does not preempt home rule authority and that there is considerable
uncertainty over provisions of the act governing local land use decisions and possible loss of local control over those decisions, and that the
public interest would be best served by the village not ceding its final authority over local land use decisions to a state board or commission.
G. The village president and board of trustees further find that the act constitutes both an unfunded mandate, the implementation of which would
require local expenditures which will result in little, if any, local impact and a "one size fits all" approach that does not consider the unique
circumstances of individual communities, including, but not limited to, for example, the fact that the village of Inverness is fully developed, the
fact that the village has extremely limited infrastructure, and the fact that a significant number of affordable housing units are available
immediately adjacent to or within a short distance of the village of Inverness.
H. The village president and board of trustees further find that it is extremely unlikely that any reasonable opportunity for the development of
affordable housing within the village will be identified in the foreseeable future, given the continually increasing cost of land within the village,
which makes it prohibitive to implement.
I. The village president and board of trustees further find that the village will give due consideration to any viable opportunity to accommodate new
affordable housing options within the village in the unlikely event that any such opportunities are ever presented to develop or redevelop
significant parcels for residential uses in the village of Inverness for this purpose, and the village pledges to work on a cooperative basis with any
such proposed developer(s) to facilitate the development of affordable housing in Inverness consistent with the other well reasoned zoning,
planning and environmental policies of the village.
J. The village president and board of trustees further find that the village, as a home rule municipality, has the authority to adopt ordinances and to
promulgate ordinances, rules and regulations that pertain to its government and affairs. Article 7, section 6(a) of the Illinois constitution provides
that "[. . .] Except as limited by this section, a home rule unit may exercise any power and perform any function pertaining to its government and
affairs including, but not limited to, the power to regulate for the protection of the public health, safety, morals and welfare". The act does not
preempt home rule authority, based on the following:
1. In article 7, section 6(m), the Illinois constitution specifically provides that "powers and functions of home rule units shall be construed
liberally".
2. The general powers granted in section 6(a) continue in force even if the general assembly adopts less stringent or conflicting statutes, so long
as the general assembly does not preempt the use of home rule powers.
3. The general assembly has not preempted the power of the village to except itself from the coverage of the act. The act does not contain home
rule preemption, and the general assembly failed to approve the act by the three-fifths (3/5) majority constitutionally required to preempt the
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 170/366
powers of a home rule unit.
4. The act does not supersede the powers of home rule units of local government.
5. In Kalodimos v. Village Of Morton Grove, 103 Ill.2d 483, 502, 470 N.E.2d 266 (1984), the Illinois supreme court found that "Home rule is
predicated on the assumption that problems in which local governments have a legitimate and substantial interest should be open to local
solution and reasonable experimentation to meet local needs, free from veto by voters and elected representatives of other parts of the state
who might disagree with the particular approach advanced by the representatives of the locality involved or fail to appreciate the local
perception of the problem".
6. The act does not supersede the powers of home rule units of local government.
7. The act does not contain any express statement that affordable housing is purely a matter of statewide interest or give the state exclusive
authority over affordable housing. On the contrary, the act provides that each nonexempt unit of local government establish its own plans and
policies for achieving levels of affordable housing.
8. The act's requirement of local based planning is inconsistent with the type of exclusive state control required for home rule preemption. This
inconsistency is apparent not only in the language of the act but also in the application of the act. IHDA was charged with the responsibility of
determining which communities fell within the ambit of the act. Out of the one thousand two hundred ninety eight (1,298) municipalities in the
state, IHDA determined that the act applied only to forty nine (49) municipalities, or municipalities constituting approximately 4.7 percent of the
state's population based on the 2000 census. All of the nonexempt communities identified by IHDA are in Cook, Lake, DuPage, Will, McHenry
or Kane counties. Not one is downstate. IHDA's determination further validates that affordable housing is not purely a matter of statewide
interest or concern.
9. The act does not specifically limit local governments' concurrent exercise of municipal planning, development and zoning power or specifically
declare the state's exercise of those powers under the act to be exclusive. Rather, the opposite is true. The act requires the local exercise of
authority and discretion in establishing plans and implementing regulations relating to affordable housing.
10. There is no indication in the act that the provision of affordable housing and the act's attendant derogation of local land use planning and
zoning regulations are not a subject within a home rule unit's government and affairs.
11. The house floor debate on the act contains numerous statements and representations by the act's sponsor, Representative Sloane, that the
act was not intended to apply to home rule units of local government.
K. The village president and board of trustees further find that compliance by the village of Inverness with the act is impractical and is not in the best
interests of the village.
L. The village president and board of trustees further find that the village of Inverness comprehensively regulates planning, zoning and development
within its boundaries.
M. The village president and board of trustees further find that the village also intends that pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, all decisions
about Inverness' housing needs and future development will continue to be made at the local level and not be subject to appeal to a state board
or commission.
N. The village president and board of trustees further find that, based on all the foregoing, the village intends this chapter to constitute the total,
comprehensive and exclusive regulation of the subject matter of affordable housing within the village of Inverness generally, by the village in the
exercise of the village's home rule authority, notwithstanding any provision of the act, and that this chapter shall totally displace and preempt the
act and all its provisions as permitted under the village's constitutional home rule authority. (Ord. 2005-795, 3-8-2005)
4-12-2: PURPOSE AND POLICY:
This chapter codifies the village's abrogation of the act, and any amendments thereto within the corporate limits of the village. The village board of
trustees has specifically found since the village is fully developed and that it comprehensively regulates planning, zoning and development within its
corporate limits, that the village's compliance with the act and any amendments thereto is impractical and not in the best interests of the health,
safety and welfare of the village. The village board of trustees has determined that the act shall not apply within the corporate limits of the village.
The village will give due consideration to any viable opportunity to accommodate new affordable housing within the village when opportunities are
presented to develop or redevelop significant parcels for residential use within the village, consistent with the other well reasoned zoning, planning,
and environmental policies of the village. (Ord. 2005-795, 3-8-2005)
4-12-3: EXERCISE OF HOME RULE AUTHORITY:
This chapter is specifically enacted pursuant to the village's home rule authority granted under the Illinois constitution, article VII, section 6. This
chapter shall constitute an exercise of the home rule authority of the village of Inverness on the subject matter hereof under the constitution and
laws of the state of Illinois. (Ord. 2005-795, 3-8-2005)
4-12-4: PREEMPTION, ABROGATION OF AFFORDABLE HOUSING, PLANNING AND APPEAL ACT:
The village board of trustees, pursuant to its home rule authority, abrogates the application of the act and any amendments thereto, within the
corporate limits of the village, and the act and any amendments thereto shall not apply within the corporate limits of the village. This chapter shall
totally preempt and displace each and every provision of the affordable housing, planning and appeal act, 310 Illinois Compiled Statutes 67/1 et
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 171/366
seq. (public act 93-595, effective January 1, 2004, as amended by public act 93-678), and as now or hereafter amended (collectively, the "act"), and
said act shall not be applicable to or within the village of Inverness. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, pursuant to this chapter enacted
pursuant to the home rule authority of this village, no land use decision of the village of Inverness shall be subject to appeal to a state housing
appeals board described in the act, as now or hereafter amended. (Ord. 2005-795, 3-8-2005)
4-12-5: AFFORDABLE HOUSING, PLANNING AND APPEAL ACT SUPERSEDED BY VILLAGE ORDINANCES:
This chapter, and this code of which it is part, the village zoning ordinance, and the village's official comprehensive plan, shall entirely supersede the
affordable housing, planning and appeal act and any amendments thereto, and shall fully occupy the field in relation to matters of planning, building,
zoning and development within the corporate limits of the village. (Ord. 2005-795, 3-8-2005)
Title 5
ZONING REGULATIONS1
Footnotes - Click any footnote link to go back to its reference.
Footnote 1: The Village Zoning Ordinance has been inserted in this Code for convenience only and is not part of this Code.
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
5-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This title shall be known and may be cited as the ZONING ORDINANCE OF THE VILLAGE OF INVERNESS. (1983 Code)
5-1-2: SCOPE OF REGULATIONS:
Except as provided herein and except after obtaining written permission from the zoning enforcement officer, it shall be unlawful within the corporate
limits of the village:
A. To establish any use of a building, structure or land, either by itself or in addition to another use.
B. To expand, change or reestablish any nonconforming use.
C. To erect a new building or structure or part thereof.
D. To rebuild, structurally alter, add to or relocate any building or structure or part thereof.
E. To reduce the open space or plot area required for a building or structure, or to include any part of such open space or plot area as that required
for an adjoining building or structure.
F. To permit or maintain more than one single-family residence on an existing lot of record in a recorded subdivision in any single-family residence
district, except conveyances to adjoining property owners as are otherwise permitted in this zoning ordinance.
G. To divide an existing lot of record in a recorded subdivision.
These provisions shall not nullify the more restrictive provisions of covenants, agreements, resolutions, other ordinances or laws of the village, but
shall prevail notwithstanding such provisions which are less restrictive. (1983 Code)
5-1-3: INCIDENTAL USES, HOME OCCUPATIONS, AND TEARDOWNS:
A. Incidental Uses: Unless otherwise prohibited or restricted herein, a permitted use also allows buildings, structures and uses incidental thereto if
located on the same site or building plot. However, such incidental use, buildings and structures shall not be established or erected prior to the
establishment or construction of the principal use.
B. Home Occupations:
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 172/366
1. Purposes: Home occupations are allowed as long as they are uses that conform to the standards of this section. In general, a home
occupation is a permitted incidental use only if it is so located and conducted that the average neighbor, under normal circumstances, would
not be aware of its existence. The standards for home occupations are intended to ensure compatibility with other permitted uses and the
residential character of the village and to maintain the subordinate and incidental status of the home occupation.
2. Location: A home occupation may be conducted in any dwelling unit or in any building or structure accessory to the dwelling unit in any zoning
district in which dwelling units are permitted.
3. Standards: The following standards shall govern the operation of a home occupation:
a. The building or structure in which the home occupation is located shall be fully subject to the regulations of the zoning district in which it is
located.
b. The home occupation shall be conducted completely within the dwelling unit or within a permitted incidental building or structure.
c. Only the permanent residents of the dwelling unit shall be employed in the home occupation. No other persons shall be employed or
involved with the home occupation activity on the premises other than a member of the immediate family residing in the dwelling unit but not
more than one other person shall be permitted to visit the premises for such purpose on any day.
d. The home occupation shall be subordinate and incidental to the principal use of the building or structure for residential purposes. No more
than fifteen percent (15%) of the gross floor area of the dwelling unit and accessory buildings or structures on the premises on which the
home is located shall be devoted to the home occupation.
e. The outside display or storage of equipment, materials, goods, articles, commodities and/or supplies and/or the outside parking of motor
vehicles utilized in the home occupation shall be prohibited. No stock in trade goods or other commodity may be kept, displayed, sold or
offered for sale upon the premises.
f. No article or commodity shall be sold or offered for sale on the premises and no wholesale, jobbing or retail business shall be permitted,
except when it is conducted entirely by mail and/or telephone and does not involve the receipt, sale, shipment, delivery or storage of
merchandise on, to or from the premises. The delivery of goods or services directly to the consumer from the premises shall be prohibited.
Delivery or distribution of articles or products, or other items related to the home occupation to or from the premises to or by independent
contractors, employees or others shall be prohibited.
g. No such home occupation shall include or involve keeping, sorting or maintaining of inventory, equipment or machinery.
h. No mechanical or electrical equipment shall be installed or maintained which is not customarily incidental to domestic or household use, but
this shall not prohibit the use of telephones, microcomputers and connected peripherals, facsimile machines, and/or photocopy machines.
i. Home occupations shall not in any event generate noise, vibration, glare, smoke, fumes, odors, particulate matter or electrical interference
beyond that which normally occurs in the residential zoning district in which it is located, or otherwise constitute a nuisance or safety hazard
to the occupants of nearby properties.
j. No exterior indication of the home occupation or variation from the residential character of the dwelling shall be permitted. No alteration of
any building on the premises shall be made which changes the character thereof as residential structures.
k. There shall be no exterior display and no exterior signs.
l. All commercial vehicles used in connection with the home occupation shall be stored or parked within a fully enclosed and closed private
garage.
m. A home occupation shall not create any additional vehicular or pedestrian traffic to the dwelling.
n. The conduct of any home occupation shall not reduce or render unusable areas provided for the required off street parking or prevent the
number of cars intended to be parked in a garage from doing so. (Ord. 93-507, 12-14-1993)
C. Teardown Regulations: Teardowns, as defined in section 5-1-6 of this chapter, shall be allowed as long as they conform to the standards of this
subsection:
1. The top of foundation elevation for any structure which replaces the structure which is subject to the teardown shall be limited to an elevation
which is no greater than two feet (2') higher than the top of the foundation elevation of the structure which is subject to the teardown, except as
may be determined by the village engineer to be necessary in order to provide flood protection for the proposed structure, but only where the
need for such flood protection is not self-imposed.
2. All development which occurs after March 13, 2007, on any lot or parcel which is or will be subject to a teardown after March 13, 2007, shall
be required to provide and maintain seepage trenches for the discharge of all sump pump drains. Said seepage trenches shall be designed in
compliance with section 9-4-25, illustration J of this code and shall provide a minimum of one square foot of seepage trench per ten (10)
square feet of basement area.
3. All development which occurs after March 13, 2007, on any lot or parcel which is or will be subject to a teardown after March 13, 2007, shall
be required to comply with the regulations set forth in title 8, chapter 6, "Tree Preservation On Private Property", of this code, which
regulations are hereby incorporated by reference into this subsection as fully as set forth herein. (Ord. 2007-845, 3-13-2007)
5-1-4: EXCEPTIONS AND RESTRICTIONS:
If permitted by any franchise ordinance of the village (now existing or hereafter adopted or amended) and required for service to the village and
adjacent areas, poles, wires, cables, conduits, vaults, laterals or any other similar distributing equipment of a public utility are permitted in any
district. (1983 Code)
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 173/366
5-1-5: APPLICATIONS FOR ZONING PERMITS:
A. Applications for zoning permits, as required by this section, shall be filed in written form with the zoning enforcement officer, shall state the legal
description of the property as of public record and the name of the owner and applicant, shall describe the uses to be established or expanded
and shall give such other information as may be required for the enforcement of this title. Each copy of the application shall be accompanied by
a dimensioned drawing of the building plot showing the location of buildings and structures, lot areas to be used, auto parking areas and water
supply and sewage disposal facilities, an agreement to reimburse the village for any out of pocket expenses incurred by the village on behalf of
the applicant, as well as payment of the applicable deposit(s), permit and other fees as established from time to time by ordinance of the village
board.
B. Except where an extension has been obtained in writing from the zoning enforcement officer, a zoning permit issued pursuant to this section shall
expire within one hundred eighty (180) days if substantial construction or establishment of the use applied for has not commenced and, in any
event, said zoning permit shall expire within one year if construction or establishment of the use applied for is not completed. Permit and other
fees shall be as established by ordinance of the village board from time to time and shall be the responsibility of the applicant to pay to the
village on a timely basis.
C. No building or structure hereafter erected or altered shall be occupied or used until a zoning permit as described above and a certificate of
occupancy has been issued by the zoning enforcement officer, certifying that the building or structure and the proposed use comply with the
provisions of this title.
D. Petitions to appeal from a decision of the zoning enforcement officer, petitions for a variation or a special use, and petitions for a change in or
amendment to the zoning ordinance, must be accompanied by an application fee and such deposits for reimbursable out of pocket expenses as
hereinafter described and as shall be established by the resolution of the president and board of trustees. No action shall be taken on any such
petition until the fee has been paid and required deposits made unless the board of trustees waives the requirement of the payment of same. All
petitioners shall be required to pay any out of pocket expenses incurred by the village in the review and consideration of their petitions by the
village, including, but not limited to, engineering fees, legal fees, and expenses of such other consultants as the village deems appropriate and
necessary. (Ord. 2007-846, 3-13-2007)
5-1-6: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this title and future amendments thereto, certain terms and words are hereby defined. Words used in the present tense shall
include the future; the singular shall include the plural and the plural the singular; the word "building" shall include the word "structure" and the word
"shall" is mandatory and not directory.
ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND USES: An accessory building is a subordinate building or a portion of the main building, the use of which is
incidental to that of the main building or to the main use of the premises. An accessory use or structure is one which is incidental to the main use of
the premises. Notwithstanding any provision contained in this code, no accessory building or structure shall require a building permit unless it
exceeds one hundred fifty (150) square feet in ground area or has plumbing, gas or electric service installed therein and connected thereto but any
such accessory building or structure shall otherwise comply with the requirements of this title, including, but not limited to, minimum height and
setback provisions.
AGRICULTURAL LAND: An area which is used for the growing of the usual farm products such as vegetables, fruit, trees and grain, and their
storage on the area, as well as for the raising thereon of the usual farm poultry and livestock. The term "farm" or "agricultural use" includes the
operation of such an area for one or more of the above uses, including the necessary uses for treating or storing the produce; provided, however,
that the operation of any such accessory uses shall be secondary to that of the normal farming activities, and provided further, that farming does not
include the feeding of garbage or offal to swine or other animals.
BASEMENT: A story having part but not less than two-thirds (2/3) of its height below grade. A basement shall not be counted as a story for the
purposes of height regulation.
BOARDING HOUSE: A building other than a hotel where, for compensation meals, or lodging and meals are provided for three (3) but not more
than twelve (12) persons.
DISTRICT: A section or sections of the village for which the regulations governing the use of buildings and premises, the height of buildings, the size
of yards and intensity of use are uniform.
DWELLING OR RESIDENCE: Any building or portion thereof, but excluding a trailer, which is designed and used exclusively for residential
purposes.
FAMILY: Excepting domestic employees, any number of persons related by blood or marriage, or not to exceed three (3) persons not so related,
living together in a room or rooms comprising a single housekeeping unit shall be considered a family.
FENCE: A fence shall include any barrier whether or not fixed to the ground, other than a building, earth, hedge or shrubbery, but the following shall
not be construed to be fences:
A. Enclosures for dogs which:
1. Are not located in the front yard or side yards of such premises,
2. Do not exceed four hundred (400) square feet in ground area, and
3. If constructed of wire, shall be of chainlink fencing and shall be screened from view by shrubbery to the full height of the enclosure.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 174/366
B. Swimming pool enclosures as required by and meeting the requirements of any village ordinance regulating swimming pools, as now in force
or as hereafter adopted or as hereafter amended.
C. Enclosures for tennis courts as permitted by any village ordinances regulating tennis courts, including, but not limited to, the building code of
the village of Inverness as now in force or as hereafter adopted or as hereafter amended.
D. Any enclosure which provides for the complete screening of refuse areas but only when such enclosure: 1) is constructed of solid wood, stone
and/or brick; 2) does not exceed six feet (6') in height; 3) is set back at least one hundred feet (100') from the boundary line of any adjacent
property which is in any A (residential) zoning district; 4) is appurtenant to a use other than a single-family residence; and 5) does not enclose
ground area in excess of four hundred twenty five (425) square feet.
E. A landscape screening which conforms to all of the following requirements:
1. The vertical posts shall not exceed four feet (4') in height as measured from the ground adjacent to the post to the highest part of the post;
2. The landscape screening, excluding the posts, shall not exceed three feet (3') in height as measured from ground adjacent to such
landscape screening to the highest part of such screening;
3. The landscape screening shall be composed of brick, stone, wood, vinyl clad and/or metal consisting of a minimum thickness of three
thousand one hundred twenty five ten thousandths (0.3125) of an inch (i.e., chainlink fences or cyclone fences are not permitted);
4. Not less than forty percent (40%) of the gross surface area from one end of the landscape screening to the opposite end of the landscape
screening on any line of the landscape screening shall be open to the other side (for example, a solid stockade screening is not permitted
but a picket screening would comply with this standard if there is at least a 2 inch opening between pickets which are 3 inches in width);
5. The entire length of all such landscape screening on the lot or parcel in question shall not exceed sixty feet (60');
6. No such screening shall be located in any yard or setback area required by this zoning ordinance;
7. No such screening shall be located more than twenty five feet (25') from the residence or principal structure on such lot or parcel; and
8. A building permit shall be required for such screening, issued either separately or as part of a larger project.
F. Enclosures for outdoor recreational areas which are accessory to a school.
Except as specifically authorized above, no fences shall be permitted in any A residential zoning district.
GRADE OR GRADE LEVEL: The lower of A or B:
A. The elevation measured six inches (6") below the top of the foundation at the main entrance in the front of the building or structure, or if there
is no entrance in the front of the building or structure, then the elevation measured six inches (6") below the top of the foundation at the
entrance which is closest to the front of the building or structure;
B. The average elevation of the highest one-third (1/3) of the perimeter of the foundation, as measured six inches (6") below the top of the
foundation.
HEIGHT OF A BUILDING OR A STRUCTURE: The vertical distance from the grade level to the highest point of any part of the building, but
excluding therefrom any noncombustible chimneys.
HOME OCCUPATION: Any activity, including, but not limited to, a hobby or avocation, carried out for gain or support by a resident conducted as an
incidental use in the resident's dwelling unit or in an incidental or accessory building.
INSTITUTION: A building occupied by a nonprofit corporation or a nonprofit establishment for public use.
LOT OF RECORD: A lot which is a part of a subdivision, the map of which has been recorded in the office of the recorder of deeds or registered in
the office of the registrar of titles or a parcel of land, the deed to which was so recorded or so registered prior to the date of the effective date hereof.
NONCONFORMING USE: A building or lot lawfully occupied by a use at the time of passage hereof or any amendment hereto, which does not
conform to the use regulations of the district in which it is situated as such use regulations are prescribed by this zoning title and amendments
hereto.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT: A tract of land developed in a way which may not be allowable under zoning district requirements, where the property
is of such size and character that it may be treated as a separate development and may create its own environment. A planned development is
intended to provide flexibility in land use and retain controls for the village which otherwise would not be present or available and must be
compatible with the goals and objectives of the then applicable comprehensive plan of the village. A planned development special use is a privilege
to be earned and not a right which can be claimed simply upon complying with all the standards established in this title. The plan commission may
recommend, and the corporate authorities may require, any reasonable condition which will promote proper development of benefit to the
community. It is not intended that the corporate authorities automatically grant the maximum use exceptions or density increase in the case of each
planned development. The plan commission shall recommend, and the corporate authorities shall grant only such increase or latitude which is
consistent with the benefit accruing to the village as a result of the planned development. As a condition for approval, each planned development
must be compatible with the character and objectives of the zoning district or districts within which it is located.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE: Whether or not incidental to a residence or the occupation of a resident and including the offices of doctors or
practitioners, ministers, architects, landscape architects, lawyers, authors, artists, musicians and other professional occupations.
SCHOOL: A public or private institution which offers instruction in any of the branches of learning and study comparable to that taught in the public
schools under the Illinois school code, including prekindergarten, kindergarten, elementary school and junior and senior high schools, but excluding
trade, business, commercial, or boarding schools, and also excluding the maintenance, storage, and overnight parking of school buses.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 175/366
STORY: That portion of a building, other than a cellar, included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there
be no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it.
STORY, HALF: A space under a sloping roof which has the line of intersection of roof and wall space not more than three feet (3') above the top
floor level, and in which space not more than sixty percent (60%) of the floor area is finished off for use.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS: Any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or
girders, or any substantial change in the roof or in the exterior walls.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground or which is attached to something having a
location on the ground. The term "structure" shall include, but without limiting the generality of the foregoing, sheds, outbuildings, storage buildings,
playhouses, arbors, trellises, pergolas, playground equipment, other recreational freestanding structures, and antennas of any kind. Notwithstanding
any provision of this code, no structure shall require a building permit unless it exceeds one hundred fifty (150) square feet in ground area or has
plumbing, gas or electric service installed therein or connected thereto.
TEARDOWN: Any demolition of or any addition to any existing main or principal residential structure, to the extent of fifty percent (50%) or more of
such structure's existing ground floor area, which occurs after March 13, 2007.
TRAILER: Any structure used for living, sleeping, business or storage purposes, which is, has been or reasonably can be, equipped with wheels or
other devices for transporting the structure from place to place, whether by motive power or other means. The term "trailer" shall include camp car
and house car. (1983 Code; amd. Ord. 87-315, 10-13-1987; Ord. 92-437, 3-10-1992; Ord. 93-507, 12-14-1993; Ord. 94-509, 1-11-1994; Ord. 94-
524, 7-12-1994; Ord. 98-617, 6-9-1998; Ord. 02-731, 7-9-2002; Ord. 2007-845, 3-13-2007)
Chapter 2
DISTRICTS AND BOUNDARIES
5-2-1: DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED:
For purposes of this Title, all land lying within the limits of the Village is hereby divided into the following districts, listed in order from the highest
class to the lowest class, and designated as follows:
A-1 Residential District (1 acre)
A-2 Residential District (20,000 square feet)
A-3 Multiple-Family Residential District
C Golf Course and Club District
M Miscellaneous Special Use District
B-1 Business District
B-2 Public Use District
I-1 Industrial District (Light)
F Farming District
5-2-2: BOUNDARIES OF DISTRICTS:
The boundaries of such districts are hereby established as shown on the Zoning Map consisting of one page, which Map is hereby adopted by
reference and incorporated herein. Until differently classified by amendment, any land whose classification is not shown thereon and land hereafter
annexed to the Village shall be classified in the F-Farming District in the case of any tract of twenty (20) or more acres under common ownership
and otherwise shall be classified as in the A-1 District.
Chapter 3
DISTRICT USES PERMITTED
5-3-1: A-1 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS (1 ACRE):
In A-1 residential districts, the only uses which may hereafter be established are:
Churches.
Fire stations.
Public and community parks excluding commercial enterprises therein.
Schools, provided that the zoning lot or parcel (i.e., building plot) for said use has an area of not less than fifteen (15) acres.
Single-family residences, excluding trailers, each on a building plot or lot of not less than one hundred forty feet (140') average width and one acre
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 176/366
in area, excepting any smaller lot or parcel of land of public record on the adoption date of this title or on the date of the annexation thereof to the
village, but only when and if consistent with and to the extent permitted by the provisions of section 5-8-6 of this title, as amended. (Ord. 02-731, 7-
9-2002)
5-3-2: A-2 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
In A-2 residential districts, the only uses which may hereafter be established are those permitted in A-1 residential districts and in addition the
following:
Single-family residences, excluding trailers, each on a building plot or lot of not less than one hundred feet (100') average width and twenty
thousand (20,000) square feet in area, excepting any smaller lot or parcel of land of public record on the adoption date of this title or on the date of
the annexation thereof to the village. (1983 Code)
5-3-3: A-3 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
In A-3 residential (multiple-family residence district) the only uses which may hereafter be established are:
Any use permitted in the A-1 and A-2 residential districts.
Multiple-family dwelling units.
Single-family detached dwellings.
Townhouses, cluster houses and one- and two-family attached dwellings.
Any one or more of the foregoing uses individually or in combination with one another under a planned unit development. (1983 Code)
5-3-4: C DISTRICTS:
In the C districts (golf courses and clubs) the only uses which may hereafter be established are those permitted in A-1 districts and in addition, the
following:
Clubs incorporated and operated on a not for profit basis.
Golf courses. (1983 Code)
5-3-5: M DISTRICTS:
In the M districts (miscellaneous special uses) the only uses which may hereafter be established are those permitted in the A-2 residential districts
and in addition, the following:
Apiaries.
Dog kennels.
Filling of holes, pits, quarries or lowland with nonodorous and noncombustible material free from garbage and food wastes.
Greenhouses.
Mushroom barns.
Nurseries.
Removal of black dirt or topsoil, stone, gravel and clay (sites of fixed plants for processing such materials shall be classified in the I-1 districts).
Riding stables.
Specialized poultry, pigeon, rabbit and other animal farms, but not including the feeding or disposal of or collection of refuse or garbage.
Storage of farm products.
Veterinary establishments.
Sale of products from any of the above uses. (1983 Code)
5-3-6: B-1 BUSINESS DISTRICTS:
In B-1 business districts the only uses which may hereafter be established are those permitted in the A-2 residential districts and in addition, the
following:
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 177/366
Animal hospitals.
Commercial swimming pools.
Greenhouses.
Nurseries.
Professional and business offices.
Residential apartments and duplex or group houses at the rate of not more than one living unit for each two thousand five hundred (2,500) square
feet of lot or building plot.
Restaurants.
Retail business and service establishments, excluding those listed in lower class districts. (1983 Code)
5-3-7: B-2 PUBLIC USE DISTRICTS:
In the B-2 public use districts the only uses which may hereafter be established are those permitted in A-1 residential districts, and in addition the
following:
Buildings utilized for police stations and municipal facilities.
Community waterworks, other than mains and hydrants which may be located in any zoning district.
Historical buildings and landmarks preserved for the public.
Parks and playgrounds.
Parks and playgrounds, including fieldhouses.
Public forest and/or wildlife nature preserves. (Ord. 92-453, 6-9-1992)
5-3-8: I-1 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS:
In I-1 industrial districts (light industry) the only uses which may hereafter be established are those permitted in the B-1 and B-2 business districts
and light industrial and manufacturing uses, but expressly prohibiting those uses which are especially detrimental to property or to the health and
safety of persons beyond the district, by reason of the emission of odor, dust, gas, fumes, smoke, noise, vibration or waste material; and in addition
expressly prohibiting the following:
Asbestos manufacturing.
Auto dismantling and storage of junk or nonoperable motor vehicles.
Cement mills.
Fixed plants for processing stone, gravel or clay.
Glue factories, tanneries, oil refineries, garbage dumps and combustible refuse dumps.
Iron and steel mills.
Locomotive plants.
Other heavy industrial uses and manufacturing. (1983 Code)
Chapter 4
BULK, LOT AND AREA REQUIREMENTS
5-4-1: LOT AREA REQUIREMENTS:
A. A-1 Residential District: A building plot or lot (i.e., a zoning lot or parcel) of not less than one hundred forty feet (140') average width and one acre
in area, except any smaller lot or parcel of land of public record on the effective date of this zoning title or on the date of the annexation thereof
to the village, but only when and if consistent with and to the extent permitted by the provisions of section 5-8-6 of this title, as amended,
provided, however, that any school in the A-1 residential zoning district shall be located on a building plot or lot (i.e., on a zoning lot or parcel)
which has an area of not less than fifteen (15) acres, and any other nonsingle-family residential use in the A-1, residential zoning district shall be
located on a building plot or lot (zoning lot or parcel) which has an area of not less than three (3) acres.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 178/366
B. A-2 Residential District: Building plot or lot of not less than one hundred feet (100') average width and twenty thousand (20,000) square feet in
area, except any smaller lot or parcel of land of public record on the effective date of this zoning ordinance, provided however, any nonsinglefamily
residential use in the A-2, residential zoning district shall be located on a building plot or lot (zoning lot or parcel) which has an area of not
less than three (3) acres. (Ord. 2010-904, 12-14-2010)
C. A-3 Multiple-Family Residential District: To qualify in the A-3 residential district a parcel or lot under common ownership or control shall consist of
not less than five (5) acres.
The number of dwelling units shall not exceed an average rate of eight (8) units per acre for any one parcel or lot under common ownership or
subject to common development based upon the total acreage of the site.
D. B-1 Business District: For residential apartments and duplex or group houses, at the rate of not more than one living unit for each two thousand
five hundred (2,500) square feet of lot or building plot. (1983 Code)
E. B-2 Public Use District: For public uses as defined by section 5-3-7 of this title, each building or use on a plot or lot of not less than one hundred
forty feet (140') average width and one acre in area, except any smaller lot or parcel of land of public record on the effective date hereof. (Ord.
85-268, 3-12-1985)
5-4-2: FLOOR AREA MINIMUMS:
Every dwelling hereafter erected in the following zoning districts shall have the total floor area as set beside the respective zoning districts, said total
floor area being measured from the outside of the exterior walls, including utility rooms but excluding cellars, basements, open porches,
breezeways, garages and other spaces that are not used frequently or during extended periods for living, eating or sleeping purposes:
Zoning District 1 Story More Than 1 Story
A-1 (1 acre) 1,550 square feet 1,750 square feet
A-2 (20,000 square feet) 1,350 square feet 1,550 square feet
(1983 Code)
5-4-3: HEIGHT RESTRICTIONS:
A. A-1 And A-2 Districts: The maximum height of any building or structure shall be limited to thirty five feet (35').
B. A-3 Districts: The maximum height of any building shall not exceed thirty five feet (35') with a maximum of three (3) stories.
C. B-1 And B-2 Business Districts, C District (Golf Courses And Clubs), And M Districts (Miscellaneous Special Uses): The maximum height of any
building or structure in any B-1 and B-2 business districts, in any C district or in any M district shall be limited to thirty five feet (35'); provided,
however, that roof mounted equipment, including, but not limited to, heating, ventilating and/or air conditioning equipment and elevator
enclosures and equipment shall not exceed forty five feet (45') in height.
D. Single-Family Residence With Fire Sprinkling System: Notwithstanding anything contained in this zoning ordinance to the contrary, the maximum
height of any single-family residence shall be forty two feet (42') if a functionally operational fire sprinkling system meeting NFiPA standard no.
13, 13R or 13D, as applicable, is installed in such residence. (Ord. 98-617, 6-9-1998)
5-4-4: MINIMUM SETBACK REQUIREMENTS:
A. Setbacks Established: Every part of a building or structure hereafter created or relocated shall be located or set back from the established
centerline of every federal aid, state bond issue, state aid and section line road or street at least one hundred feet (100'); from the established
centerline of every half section line road or street at least ninety feet (90'); and from the established centerline of every other road or street
fronting a lot or building plot, at least eighty five feet (85'). Where special setbacks are noted on the zoning map, such special setbacks shall be
observed. If, in the application of this zoning ordinance to a specific case, there should be conflict between this section and any other section of
this title, the higher or more restrictive of the requirements of the conflicting provisions shall govern.
B. Exceptions:
1. Steps, open terraces and underground structures.
2. Hedges and shrubbery, provided that such obstructions located at road or street corners within the vision triangle provided by the required
building setback and side yard shall preserve a clear view between points four feet (4') above the crown of each intersecting roadway.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 179/366
3. Eaves, chimneys, bay windows and other ordinary building projections, including the foundations thereof, may extend into the required
setback area for not more than eighteen inches (18").
4. Any entrance column, flagpole, lightpost, or any mailbox which is in compliance with all other applicable provisions of this code provided such
structure and any attached screening shall meet the following requirements:
a. No such structure shall exceed eight feet (8') in height except flagpoles which shall not exceed thirty five feet (35') in height.
b. Any screening attached to any of the foregoing structures shall not exceed six feet (6') in height as measured from the ground adjacent to
such screening to the highest point of such screening.
c. Any attached screening shall be composed of brick, stone, wood, vinyl clad and/or metal consisting of a minimum thickness of three
thousand one hundred twenty five ten thousandths (0.3125) of an inch (i.e., chainlink fences or cyclone fences are not permitted).
d. No such structure or the attached screening shall include any gate or gates which are capable of being closed or locked across any
driveway. No gate or gates which are capable of being closed or locked across any driveway shall be permitted within any setback required
by this section.
e. The entire length of such screening shall not exceed twelve feet (12') per post or column, and a total of not more than twenty four feet (24')
of screening on any one zoning lot.
f. A building permit shall be required for any such structure and attached screening, issued either separately or as part of a larger project.
g. Any such structure located at road or street corners within the vision triangle provided by the required building setback and side yard shall
preserve a clear view between points four feet (4') above the crown of each intersecting roadway. (Ord. 97-584, 3-11-1997)
5-4-5: YARD AREA REQUIREMENTS:
A. Front Yards:
1. A-1 And A-2 Districts: In A-1 and A-2 residential districts, any building or structure or part thereof hereafter erected shall be provided with a
minimum front yard of fifty feet (50').
2. A-3 Districts: In A-3 multiple-family residential districts, there shall be a minimum front yard of thirty feet (30').
3. Exceptions:
a. Steps, open terraces and underground structures.
b. Hedges and shrubbery, provided that such obstructions located at road or street corners within the vision triangle provided by the required
building setback and side yard shall preserve a clear view between points four feet (4') above the crown of each intersecting roadway.
c. Eaves, chimneys, bay windows and other ordinary building projections, including the foundations thereof, may extend into the required
setback area for not more than eighteen inches (18").
d. Any entrance column, flagpole, lightpost, or any mailbox which is in compliance with all other applicable provisions of this code provided
such structure and any attached screening shall meet the following requirements:
(1) No such structure shall exceed eight feet (8') in height except flagpoles which shall not exceed thirty five feet (35') in height.
(2) Any screening attached to any of the foregoing structures shall not exceed six feet (6') in height as measured from the ground adjacent
to such screening to the highest point of such screening.
(3) Any attached screening shall be composed of brick, stone, wood, vinyl clad and/or metal consisting of a minimum thickness of three
thousand one hundred twenty five ten thousandths (0.3125) of an inch (i.e., chainlink fences or cyclone fences are not permitted). (Ord.
97-584, 3-11-1997)
(4) The entire length of such screening shall not exceed twelve feet (12') per post or column, and a total of not more than twenty four feet
(24') of screening on any one zoning lot.
(5) A building permit shall be required for such structure screening, issued either separately or as part of a larger project.
(6) Any such structure located at road or street corners within the vision triangle provided by the required building setback and side yard
shall preserve a clear view between points four feet (4') above the crown of each intersecting roadway. (Ord. 97-584, 3-11-1997; amd.
Ord. 2016-968, 6-14-2016)
e. No gate or gates which are capable of being closed or locked across any driveway shall be permitted except on a lot with a lot width across
its frontage of one hundred forty feet (140') or more. The gate shall be located between two (2) parallel lines, the first line being no less than
ten feet (10') from the front property line or thirty five feet (35') from the edge of the roadway, whichever distance is greater, and the second
line being further extended from that greater distance no further than twenty (20) additional feet. The gate shall be located no less than one
hundred feet (100') from the closest point of the residence building. The entire length of the gate together with any attached structures and
screening shall not exceed forty five feet (45'). Multiple gates located on a single zoning lot shall be calculated as a single gate not to
exceed the length of forty five feet (45'). Gates shall be operated by electronic devices capable of operating without manual assistance.
Gates shall only be the dual swing type and open toward the property. Driveway gates shall comply with the building department's
requirements. (Ord. 2016-968, 6-14-2016)
B. Side Yards:
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 180/366
1. In the A-1 and A-2 residential districts, any building or structure or part thereof hereafter erected shall be provided with a minimum side yard
as follows:
a. In A-1 residential districts, twenty five feet (25').
b. In A-2 residential districts, twenty feet (20').
Any building or structure erected in or relocated to any other district shall be provided with a minimum side yard of twenty feet (20').
2. Exceptions:
a. Steps, open terraces and underground structures.
b. Eaves, chimneys, bay windows and other ordinary building projections, including the foundations thereof, may extend into the required
setback area for not more than eighteen inches (18").
c. Hedges and shrubbery, provided that such obstructions located on land at road or street corners within the vision triangle provided by the
required building setback and side yard shall preserve a clear view between points four feet (4') above the crown of each intersecting
roadway.
C. Rear Yards:
1. In the A-1 and A-2 residential districts any building or structure or part thereof hereafter erected shall be provided with a minimum rear yard as
follows:
a. In A-1 districts, fifty feet (50').
b. In A-2 districts, forty feet (40').
Any building or structure erected in or relocated to any other district shall be provided with a minimum rear yard of twenty five feet (25').
2. Exceptions:
a. Steps, open terraces and underground structures.
b. Swimming pools and appurtenant walk areas and required enclosures for such swimming pools and appurtenant walk areas as specified in
section 5-1-6 of this title (definition of "fence").
c. Eaves, chimneys, bay windows and other ordinary building projections, including the foundations thereof, may extend into the required
setback area for not more than eighteen inches (18").
d. Hedges and shrubbery, provided that such obstructions located on land at road or street corners within the vision triangle provided by the
required building setback and side yard shall preserve a clear view between points four feet (4') above the crown of each intersecting
roadway. (Ord. 97-584, 3-11-1997)
5-4-6: OFF STREET VEHICLE PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
The purpose of this section is to alleviate or prevent congestion of the public streets and to promote the safety and welfare of the public, by
establishing minimum requirements for off street parking and loading and unloading of motor vehicles in accordance with the use of property.
A. General Provisions; Parking And Loading:
1. Procedure: An application for a building permit for a new or enlarged building, structure or use, shall include therewith a plot plan, drawn to
scale and fully dimensioned, showing any parking or loading facilities to be provided in compliance with the requirements of these standards.
2. Scope Of Regulations: The off street parking and loading provisions herein shall apply as follows:
a. When the intensity of use of any building, structure, or premises shall be increased through addition of dwelling units, gross floor area,
seating capacity (18 inches per seat), or other units of measurement specified herein for required parking or loading facilities, parking and
loading facilities herein shall be provided for such increase in intensity of use.
However, no owner of a building or structure lawfully established prior to December 15, 2010, shall be required to provide such additional
parking or loading facilities unless and until the uses established increase the parking requirements by fifteen percent (15%) or more
measured by the requirements, existing on December 1, 2010, in which event parking or loading facilities as required herein shall be
provided for the total increase.
b. Whenever the existing use of a building or structure shall hereafter be changed to a new use, parking or loading facilities shall be provided
as required for such new use. However, if the said building or structure was erected prior to December 15, 2010, additional parking or
loading facilities are mandatory only in the amount by which the requirements for the new use would exceed those for the existing use if the
latter were subject to the parking and loading provisions herein.
3. Existing Parking And Loading Facilities: Accessory off street parking or loading facilities that are located on the same lot as the building or use
served, and that were in existence on December 15, 2010, or were provided voluntarily after such effective date shall not thereafter be
reduced below; or if already less than, shall not further be reduced below the requirements of this section for a similar new building or use.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 181/366
4. Permissive Parking And Loading Facilities: Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the voluntary establishment of off street parking
or loading facilities to serve any existing use of land or buildings provided that all regulations herein governing the location, design,
improvement, and operation of such facilities are adhered to.
5. Damage And Destruction: For any conforming or legally nonconforming building or use which is in existence on December 15, 2010, which
subsequent thereto is damaged or destroyed by fire, collapse, explosion, or other cause, and which is reconstructed, reestablished, or
repaired, off street parking or loading facilities equivalent to any maintained at the time of such damage or destruction shall be restored or
continued in operation. However, in no case shall it be necessary to restore or maintain parking or loading facilities in excess of those required
by this section for equivalent new uses or construction.
B. Additional Regulations; Parking:
1. Use Of Parking Facilities: Off street parking facilities accessory to residential use and developed in any residential district in accordance with
the requirements of this section, shall be used solely for the parking of passenger automobiles and not more than one truck of not more than
one and one-fourth (11/4) tons' capacity used by occupants of the dwelling structures to which such facilities are accessory. Under no
circumstances shall required parking facilities accessory to residential structures be used for the storage of commercial vehicles or for the
parking of automobiles belonging to the employees, owners, tenants, visitors, or customers of business or manufacturing establishments.
2. Joint Parking Facilities: Off street parking facilities for different buildings, structures, or uses, or for mixed uses, may be provided collectively in
any zoning district in which separate parking facilities for each constituent use would be permitted, provided that the total number of spaces so
located together shall not be less than the sum of the separate requirements for each use.
C. Design And Maintenance Standards:
1. Applicability: The following design and maintenance standards shall apply to all accessory parking facilities and to all commercial or public
parking facilities built as a primary land use.
2. General On Site Circulation Design Standards:
a. There shall be an adequate, safe, and convenient arrangement of pedestrian circulation facilities, roadways, driveways, off street parking,
and loading space.
b. For access, each required off street parking space shall open directly upon an aisle or driveway of such width and design as to provide safe
and efficient means of vehicular access to such parking space. All off street parking facilities shall be designed with appropriate means of
vehicular access to a street or alley in a manner which will least interfere with traffic movements.
c. Roads, pedestrian walks, and open space shall be designed as integral parts of an overall site design. They shall be properly related to
existing and proposed building and appropriate landscaping.
d. Buildings, vehicular circulation, and open spaces shall be arranged so that pedestrians moving between buildings are not unnecessarily
exposed to vehicular traffic.
e. Landscaped, paved, and comfortably graded pedestrian walks shall be provided along the lines of the most intense use, particularly from
building entrances to streets, parking areas, and adjacent buildings.
f. The materials used in the design of paving, lighting fixtures, retaining walls, fences, curbs, and benches shall be of good appearance, easily
maintained, and indicative of their function.
g. Ramps shall be provided giving access from parking areas to the building served for disabled persons utilizing wheelchairs.
3. General On Site Parking And Loading Design Standards:
a. A site plan shall be submitted to the village engineer for his approval when the required off street parking is for more than three (3) parking
spaces.
b. Parking facilities shall be landscaped and screened from public view to the extent necessary to eliminate unsightliness and monotony of
large concentrations of parked cars.
c. Parking facilities shall be designed with careful regard to orderly arrangement, topography, landscaping, ease of access, and shall be
developed as an integral part of an overall site design.
d. Any above grade loading facility shall be screened from public view to the extent necessary to eliminate unsightliness.
e. Adequate parking spaces shall be specially designated for the parking of vehicles of disabled persons. Such spaces shall be located close
to the building entry. All parking spaces for the physically handicapped shall comply with the standards set forth by the Americans with
disabilities act, title III: public accommodations.
4. Sizes Of Parking Spaces:
a. The following schedule of parking space and layout standards shall apply to all parking facilities in the village, in accordance with this
section:
Angle Of Parking Row To Driveway Aisle (Degrees)
45
One-Way
60
One-Way
75
One-Way
90
One- Or Two-Way
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 182/366
Width parallel to aisle 12.7 10.4 9.3 9.0
Depth of parking row 18 19 19 18
Width of parking space 9 9 9 9
Width of aisle 13 18 22 24
Parallel parking spaces shall be at least twenty two feet (22') in length, and eight feet (8') in width.
5. Parking Surface, Drainage, And Maintenance: All open off street parking areas shall be improved with a compacted select gravel base
surfaced with an all weather, dustless material suitably designed for the intended use to a standard approved by the village engineer. Parking
and loading facilities shall be provided with adequate stormwater drainage facilities to prevent damage or inconvenience to abutting property
and/or public streets and alleys. Parking and loading areas shall be maintained in a clean, orderly, and dust free condition at the expense of
the owner or lessee.
6. Marking: All parking spaces shall be marked by durable painted lines at least four inches (4") wide and extending the length of the space or by
curbs or other means to indicate individual spaces. Signs or markers located on the surface within a parking lot shall be used as necessary to
ensure efficient and safe traffic operation of the lot.
7. Lighting: Lighting shall be provided to illuminate any off street parking or loading spaces to be used at night. If provided, the lighting shall be
arranged and installed to deflect, shade, and focus lights away from adjacent properties. The height, type, spacing, and degree of cutoff of a
light standard may be further regulated by the village engineer in relation to specific site conditions or types of development. Standards to be
used shall be in accordance with the Illuminating Engineering Society Of North America's publication entitled "Lighting For Parking Facilities".
8. Screening And Landscaping: All parking and loading areas shall be properly screened and landscaped as set forth in this section. It is the
purpose and intent of this section to require adequate protection for contiguous property against undesirable effects from the creation and
operation of parking or loading areas, and to protect and preserve the appearance and character of the surrounding neighborhoods and of the
village through the screening effects and aesthetic qualities of such landscaping.
a. The landscaping shall include to the extent necessary to further the intent of this section, berms, shrubs, bushes, hedges, trees, decorative
walls, or fencing as set forth below:
(1) The frontage along the entire parking or loading area adjacent to any public or private street shall be landscaped and protected so as to
separate and screen any parking area from the adjacent streets.
(2) When off street parking or loading uses and other areas zoned for any use except one-family and two-family residential districts, are
located adjacent to a residential district or to any lot upon which there is a dwelling as a permitted use, there shall be provided along the
lot line a continuous, solid fence, a masonry wall, or a densely planted compact hedge, to a height adequate to prevent the direct light
from automobile headlights being cast on adjacent residential units both with a minimum height of four feet (4') and not more than six feet
(6') except that the height of such fence or wall shall not exceed three feet (3') within any front yard setback.
(3) In addition to any landscaped front, back, or side yard areas required by this or any other section, a minimum of ten (10) square feet of
interior landscaped area for each parking space, shall be provided within a parking lot which has thirty (30) or more parking spaces. The
landscaping shall be in one or more areas so as to minimize and reduce the apparent size of parking areas.
(4) All interior landscaped areas provided in accordance with the preceding paragraph, shall be raised and curbed and shall have a
minimum area of thirty (30) square feet and a minimum width of five feet (5'). The ends of parking rows abutting a circulation aisle shall be
defined by interior landscaped areas whenever feasible.
(5) No landscaped hedge shall be less than two feet (2') in height, and three feet (3') in spread; however, no hedge, wall, or berm shall
exceed three feet (3') in height within ten feet (10') of any driveway opening. The individual plants used in the development of such a
hedge shall be placed so as to be not more than twenty four inches (24") on center.
(6) Interior planting bed areas, which are used for the planting of trees, or which are used for landscaping treatment generally, may be
treated with either grass and/or other types of ground cover or open spaced pavers on a sand and gravel base located beneath the
surrounding trees and shrubs.
(7) All landscaping shall be permanently maintained in good condition with at least the same quality and quantity of landscaping as initially
approved.
(8) A perimeter landscaped buffer strip shall be provided and maintained at a width of not less than five feet (5') between a parking lot or
driveway and the abutting property line at a side or rear yard. The landscaped strip shall be at least five feet (5') in width along any front or
side property line abutting a public or private street. More restrictive standards for yards or buffering shall govern where required by this
chapter.
(9) All landscaped areas in parking areas or adjacent to parking or loading areas, or that can be encroached upon by a motor vehicle, shall
be provided with an adequate permanent curb as approved by the village engineer to restrict the destruction of the landscaped areas by
vehicles.
9. Number Of Entrances And Exits To Parking Lots: There shall be not more than one entrance and one exit or one combined entrance and exit
along any street unless same is deemed necessary by the plan commission and/or village engineer for the alleviation of traffic congestion and
interference of traffic movement along such street. The maximum width for entrances and exits shall be thirty five feet (35') for commercial and
industrial and thirty feet (30') for residential.
10. Maintenance: Any persons operating or owning a parking lot shall keep it free, as may be practical, of dust and loose particles and shall
promptly remove the snow and ice from the surface of the parking lot. Such persons shall also keep all adjacent sidewalks free from dirt, ice,
sleet, and snow and shall keep the sidewalks in a safe condition for use by pedestrians. All signs, markers, or any other methods used to
indicate direction of traffic movement and location of parking spaces shall be maintained in a neat and legible condition. Likewise any walls,
landscaping, including trees and shrubbery, as well as surfacing and curbing of the parking lot, shall be maintained in good condition
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 183/366
throughout its use for parking purposes. The village shall have the authority to prohibit use of the area for parking purposes unless and until
proper maintenance, repair, or rehabilitation is completed, including the replacement of any landscaping material which may die from time to
time, or the failure of the landscape irrigation or surface drainage system within the parking area.
D. Location Of Parking Facilities:
1. Extent Of Control: Off street automobile parking facilities shall be located as hereinafter specified; where a distance is specified, such distance
shall be walking distance measured from the nearest point of the parking area to the nearest entrance of the building that said parking area is
required to serve:
a. For one- and two-family dwellings, on the same lot with the building they are required to serve.
b. For three- and four-family dwellings not over two (2) stories in height, on the same lot or parcel of land as the building they are required to
serve. For the purpose of these suggested standards, a group of such uses constructed and maintained under single ownership or
management shall be assumed to be on a single lot or parcel of land.
c. For apartment houses containing four (4) or more dwelling units, on the same lot or parcel of land as the building they are required to serve,
or on a separate lot or parcel of land not more than three hundred feet (300') from the nearest entrance to the principal building being
served, provided the lot or parcel of land selected for the parking facilities is located in an apartment district or a less restricted district.
d. For rooming houses, lodging houses, clubs, hospitals, sanatoriums, orphanages, homes for the aged, convalescent homes, dormitories,
sorority and fraternity houses, and for other similar uses, the off street parking facilities required shall be on the same lot or parcel of land as
the principal building or buildings being served, or upon properties contiguous to the zoning lot upon which is located the building or
buildings they are intended to serve.
e. For uses other than those specified above, off street parking facilities shall be provided on the same lot or parcel of land as the principal
building being served, or on a separate lot or parcel of land not over one thousand feet (1,000') from the entrance of the principal building,
measured from the nearest point of the parking area, provided the separate lot or parcel of land intended for parking facilities is located in
the same district as the principal permitted use or in a less restricted district.
2. Control Of Off Street Parking Facilities: When required parking facilities are provided on land other than the zoning lot on which the building or
use served by such facilities is located, they shall be and remain in the same possession or ownership as the zoning lot occupied by the
building or use to which the parking facilities are accessory. No such off site parking facilities shall be authorized and no occupancy permit
shall be issued where the plans call for parking other than on the same zoning lot until and unless the zoning board of appeals has reviewed
the plans and heard the applicant and has made findings that the common ownership or possession of the zoning lot and that the site of the
parking facilities will be maintained at all times during the life of the proposed use or building. A covenant to this effect shall be recorded with
the Cook County recorder.
E. Schedule Of Parking Requirements: For the following uses, accessory off street parking spaces shall be provided as required hereinafter. Parking
spaces required on an employee basis shall be based on the maximum number of employees on duty or residing, or both, on the premises at
any one time.
1. Residential uses, as follows:
Buildings containing more than two (2) dwelling units:
Efficiency and one bedroom units - one and one-half (11/2) parking spaces;
Two (2) bedroom units - two (2) parking spaces; and
Three (3) or more bedroom units - two and one-fourth (21/4) parking spaces.
Community residences: Two (2) parking spaces shall be provided for each community residence.
Hotels: One parking space for each guestroom and one parking space for each employee shall be provided.
Lodging, rooming, and boarding houses: One parking space shall be provided for each lodging room, plus one space for each employee.
Mobile home parks: Two (2) parking spaces shall be provided for each mobile home space.
Motels and inns: One parking space shall be provided for each guestroom, plus one space for the manager and two (2) additional spaces for
each three (3) employees.
One-family dwellings and two-family dwellings: Two (2) parking spaces shall be provided for each dwelling unit.
Private clubs and lodges (with sleeping facilities for guests): One parking space shall be provided for each lodging room, plus parking spaces
equal in number to seventy five percent (75%) of the capacity in persons (exclusive of lodging room capacity) of such club or lodge.
2. Retail and service uses, as follows:
Automobile service stations: One parking space shall be provided for each employee, plus three (3) spaces for each service stall.
Bowling alleys: Five (5) parking spaces shall be provided for each alley, plus such additional spaces as may be required for affiliated uses -
bars, restaurants, and the like.
Car wash: Ten (10) stacking spaces shall be provided for each wash rack, plus one parking space for each employee.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 184/366
Establishments dispensing food or beverages for consumption on the premises: One parking space shall be provided for each one hundred
(100) square feet of floor area.
Furniture and appliance stores, household equipment, or furniture repair shops: One parking space shall be provided for each six hundred
(600) square feet of floor area.
Retail stores and banks: One parking space shall be provided for each two hundred (200) square feet of floor area. Drive-in banks or other
similar drive-in establishments shall provide six (6) stacking spaces per teller or customer service window.
Theaters (indoor): For single or double screen, one parking space shall be provided for each two (2) seats; for three (3) or more screens, one
parking space shall be provided for each three and one-half (31/2) seats.
Undertaking establishment, funeral parlors: Twenty five (25) parking spaces shall be provided for each chapel or parlor, plus one parking
space for each funeral vehicle kept on the premises.
3. Office-business, professional, and governmental: One parking space shall be provided for each two hundred (200) square feet of floor area.
4. Medical or dental clinics: Eight (8) parking spaces shall be provided for every doctor or one space for every two hundred (200) square feet of
floor area, whichever is greater.
5. Wholesale establishments (but not including warehouses and storage buildings other than accessory): One parking space shall be provided
for each six hundred (600) square feet of floor space.
6. Manufacturing uses or any establishments engaged in production, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing, or repair of materials, goods, or
products: One parking space shall be provided for each employee as related to the working period when the maximum number of employees
are employed on the premises, plus one parking space for each vehicle used in the conduct of the enterprise. But in no case less than one
parking space per six hundred (600) square feet of floor space.
7. Warehouses and storage buildings: One parking space shall be provided for each employee, plus one space for each vehicle used in the
conduct of the business.
8. Community service uses, as follows:
Church, school, college, and other institutional auditoriums: One parking space shall be provided for each four (4) auditorium seats. Adequate
space shall also be provided for buses used in connection with activities of the institution, and all loading and unloading of passengers shall
take place upon the premises.
Colleges, universities, and business, professional, and trade schools: One parking space shall be provided for each employee and one
parking space shall be provided for each student based on the maximum number of students attending classes on the premises at any one
time during any twenty four (24) hour period.
Health centers, government operated: Eight (8) parking spaces shall be provided for every doctor or one space for every two hundred (200)
square feet of floor area, whichever is greater.
High school: One parking space shall be provided for each employee plus one space for each three (3) students.
Hospitals: Two (2) parking spaces shall be provided for each three (3) hospital beds, plus one parking space for each employee, plus one
parking space for each doctor assigned to the staff.
Libraries, art galleries, and museums - public: One parking space shall be provided for each five hundred (500) square feet of floor area.
Municipal or privately owned recreation buildings or community centers: One parking space shall be provided for each employee, plus spaces
adequate in number, as determined by the plan commission, to serve the visiting public.
Public utility and public service uses: One parking space shall be provided for each employee, plus spaces adequate in number, as
determined by the plan commission, to serve the public, plus one space for each service vehicle.
Schools - nursery, elementary: One parking space shall be provided for each employee plus one for each twenty (20) students.
9. Places of assembly: Stadiums, arenas, auditoriums (other than church, college, or institutional school), convention halls, dance halls,
exhibition halls, skating rinks, and other similar places of assembly: Parking spaces equal in number to one for every two (2) persons shall be
provided.
10. Miscellaneous uses, as follows:
For the following uses, parking spaces shall be provided in adequate number, as determined by the village engineer, to serve persons
employed or residing on the premises as well as the visiting public:
Airports or aircraft landing fields; heliports.
Convents and monasteries.
Crematories or mausoleums.
Implement dealer, machinery, and automobile sales.
Outdoor amusement establishments - fairgrounds, permanent carnivals, kiddy parks, and other similar amusement centers.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 185/366
Penal and correctional institutions.
Rectories and parish houses.
Swimming pools.
Fraternities, sororities, and dormitories: One parking space shall be provided for each three (3) active resident members, plus one parking
space for the manager thereof.
Private clubs and lodges (without sleeping facilities for guests): Parking spaces equal in number to forty percent (40%) of the capacity in
persons shall be provided.
Rest homes, nursing homes, and institutional care facilities: One parking space shall be provided for each four (4) beds, plus one parking
space for each employee, plus one parking space for each doctor assigned to the staff or one parking space for every five hundred (500)
square feet of floor area, whichever is greater.
Theaters - automobile drive-in: Reservoir parking space equal to ten percent (10%) of the vehicle capacity of such theaters shall be provided.
11. Mixed uses: When two (2) or more uses are located on the same zoning lot within the same building, parking spaces equal in number to the
sum for the most similar listed use, or as determined by the village engineer.
12. Other uses: For uses not listed heretofore in this schedule of parking requirements, parking spaces shall be provided on the same basis as
required for the most similar listed use, or as determined by the village engineer.
F. Additional Regulations - Off Street Loading:
1. Location: All required loading berths shall be located on the same zoning lot as the use served. No loading berth for vehicles over two (2) tons'
capacity shall be closer than fifty feet (50') to any property in a residence district, unless completely enclosed by building walls, or solid
landscape screening, not less than six feet (6') in height. No permitted or required loading berth shall be located in any front or side yard. No
permitted or required loading berth shall be located within twenty five feet (25') of the nearest point of intersection of any two (2) streets.
2. Size: Unless otherwise specified, a required loading berth shall be at least ten feet (10') in width by at least twenty five feet (25') in length,
exclusive of aisles and maneuvering space, and shall have a vertical clearance of at least fourteen feet (14').
3. Access: Each required off street loading berth shall be designed with appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley in a manner
which will least interfere with traffic movement.
4. Surfacing: All open off street loading berths shall be improved with a compacted base of number 8 crushed stone, not less than eight inches
(8") thick, and surfaced with not less than two inches (2") of asphaltic concrete or six inches (6") of portland cement concrete with pavement
mesh on a compacted subgrade or equal.
5. Repair And Service: No motor vehicle repair work or service of any kind shall be permitted in conjunction with loading facilities provided in any
residence or business districts.
6. Allocated Space: Space allocated to any off street loading berth shall not, while so allocated, be used to satisfy the space requirements for
any off street parking facilities or portion thereof.
7. Other Special Uses: For special uses other than prescribed for hereinafter, loading berths adequate in number and size to serve such uses, as
determined by the village engineer, shall be provided.
8. Buildings Of Less Floor Area: Uses for which off street loading facilities are required herein, but which are located in buildings of less floor
area than the minimum prescribed for such required facilities, shall be provided with adequate receiving facilities off of any adjacent alley,
service drive, or open space on the same lot which is accessible by motor vehicle.
G. Schedule Of Loading Requirements: For the following uses, off street loading berths shall be provided on the basis of gross floor area of
buildings or portions thereof devoted to such uses in the amounts shown herein:
1. Hospitals, sanatoriums, and other institutional uses: One berth plus one additional berth for each one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet
of gross floor area. Minimum horizontal dimensions are ten feet by twenty five feet (10' x 25').
2. Hotels, clubs, and lodges except as set forth in subsection G3 of this section: One berth for each structure over fifteen thousand (15,000)
square feet of gross floor area. Minimum horizontal dimensions are ten feet by twenty five feet (10' x 25').
3. Hotels, clubs, and lodges when containing any of the following: Retail shops, convention halls, auditoriums, exhibition halls, or business or
professional offices (other than accessory): One berth for each structure twenty thousand (20,000) to one hundred thousand (100,000) square
feet plus one berth for each additional one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet or fraction thereof of gross floor area. Minimum horizontal
dimensions are ten feet by fifty feet (10' x 50').
4. Retail stores: One berth for each structure over ten thousand (10,000) square feet of gross floor area plus one berth for each additional one
hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of gross floor area. Minimum horizontal dimensions are ten feet by twenty five feet (10' x 25').
5. Establishments dispensing food or beverages for consumption on the premises: Two (2) berths for each structure over ten thousand (10,000)
square feet of gross floor area. Minimum horizontal dimensions are ten feet by twenty five feet (10' x 25').
6. Motor vehicle and machinery sales: One berth plus one additional berth for each twenty five thousand (25,000) square feet of gross floor area.
Minimum horizontal dimensions are ten feet by fifty feet (10' x 50').
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 186/366
7. Wholesale establishments (but not including warehouse and storage building other than accessory): Three (3) berths for each structure forty
thousand (40,000) to one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of gross floor area plus one berth for each additional one hundred
thousand (100,000) square feet or fraction thereof of gross floor area. Minimum horizontal dimensions are ten feet by fifty feet (10' x 50'). (Ord.
2010-904, 12-14-2010)
5-4-7: PARKING OF RESTRICTED VEHICLES AND/OR EQUIPMENT:
A. The term "restricted vehicle" as used in this section and in section 5-4-8 of this chapter shall mean and include any of the following types of
vehicles or equipment: all-terrain vehicles, ambulances, any boat and/or boat trailer(s), buses, camping trailers, commercial vehicles, commuter
vans, construction equipment, conversion vans, derelict vehicles, farm tractors and/or other farm equipment, for-hire vehicles, hauler trailers,
horse trailers or horse carriers, house trailers, junk vehicles, implements of husbandry, landscaping maintenance equipment (but this shall not
prohibit a lawn tractor or a small garden trailer and/or similar equipment designed or intended to be towed by such lawn tractors), limousines,
motorcycles, minimotor homes, motor homes, personal watercraft and/or trailers for same, recreational vehicles, road tractors, school buses,
semitrailers, snowmobiles and/or trailers for same, tank vehicles, trailers, travel trailers, trucks, truck campers, truck tractors, and van campers.
All terms used in this section and in section 5-4-8 of this chapter shall have those respective definitions provided in the Illinois vehicle code, as
amended from time to time, except as otherwise modified herein.
B. No restricted vehicle(s) may be parked on any premises except in accordance with the provisions and restrictions of this section and as otherwise
authorized by other applicable ordinances of this village but may not otherwise be parked, used or occupied for any purpose.
C. No restricted vehicle(s) shall be parked on any premises unless totally shielded from the view of other properties and public streets by a legal
garage or other legal accessory buildings as permitted by this zoning ordinance.
D. The foregoing notwithstanding, any restricted vehicle may be parked on any such premises for purposes of loading or unloading for a period of
not more than six (6) hours within a thirty (30) day period commencing with the first day during which a vehicle is so parked.
E. The foregoing notwithstanding, station wagons, minivans, pickup trucks, passenger vans, conversion vans and sports utility vehicles shall not be
considered "restricted vehicles", provided that no signage is displayed on such vehicle and further provided that no cargo or equipment is carried
thereon except on the interior thereof, while such vehicles are parked out of doors within the village.
F. The foregoing notwithstanding, temporary and nonconforming parking or storage of restricted vehicles for a total period not to exceed fourteen
(14) days within a ninety (90) day period may be permitted upon application for written approval to do so from the village administrator or his
designee and at his discretion. Such temporary and nonconforming parking or storage approval may be renewed only once by the village
president or his designee, and thereafter may be renewed only by the village board.
G. The foregoing notwithstanding, this section shall not be construed to prohibit restricted vehicles owned, leased, or utilized by someone other than
an owner or occupant of the premises from being parked on the premises temporarily for the immediate purpose of either making deliveries
and/or rendering service to owners or occupants of such premises.
H. Except as specifically permitted in subsections C through G of this section, no restricted vehicle(s) shall be permitted to be permanently parked
unless they are within an enclosed garage.
I. A vehicle which is not a restricted vehicle but which is inoperative and/or not licensed shall not be permitted to remain for more than forty eight
(48) hours unless it is in an enclosed garage. All repairs on such vehicles shall be accomplished within an enclosed garage.
J. Notwithstanding anything contained in this zoning ordinance to the contrary, no violations of this section shall be permitted to continue or remain
after January 1, 2001. (Ord. 01-696, 4-10-2001)
5-4-8: OUTDOOR PARKING RESTRICTED; PARKING IN YARDS PROHIBITED:
The outdoor parking of vehicles, other than restricted vehicles, on any property located within any residential zoning district within the village shall
only be within the confines of a "hard surface driveway" as defined in section 8-3-5 of this code, but no such parking shall occur within that portion of
such driveway that is within a public right of way.
No such hard surface driveway used for such parking purposes shall exceed fifty percent (50%) of the area of the front yard of the lot in question.
No hard surface driveway may hereinafter be established in any front, rear or side yard as required by this section unless such driveway provides
access to an entrance to the residence on the subject property or to a garage or other structure utilized to enclose vehicles. (Ord. 01-696, 4-10-
2001)
Chapter 5
SIGNS, CANOPIES, AWNINGS AND CLOCKS
5-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 187/366
Unless otherwise expressly stated the following words or terms shall, for the purpose of this Chapter, have the meanings indicated in this Section.
APPROVED COMBUSTIBLE MATERIALS: Any material more than one-twentieth of an inch (1/20") in thickness, which burns at a rate of not more
than two and one-half inches (21/2") per minute when subjected to the American Society for Testing Materials then prevailing standard test for
flammability in sheets of six-hundredths inches (0.06") in thickness.
AWNING: Any structure with a frame attached to a building and projecting therefrom, which is capable of being raised to a position flat against the
building when not in use.
BANNER: A piece of cloth or other material attached to a staff or line, to attract attention.
BEACON LIGHTS: Any light with one or more beams, capable of being directed in any direction or directions or capable of being revolved
automatically.
BENCH SIGN: A sign located on any part of the surface of a bench or adjacent to a public right of way.
BILLBOARD: Any sign erected upon the land or attached to any building which does not advertise the business, profession, service conducted or
product offered on the premises to which such sign is annexed or attached.
BUILDING OFFICER: Means and includes the duly appointed Building Inspector, Building Commissioner, Building Officer or any deputy thereof.
CANOPY: Any structure, other than an awning, made of cloth or metal with metal frames attached to a building projecting over a public area as
defined in this Chapter, carried by a frame supported by the ground or sidewalk.
CONSTRUCTION SIGN: Any sign giving the name or names of principal contractors, architects and lending institutions responsible for construction
on the site where the sign is placed, together with other information.
DIRECTORY SIGN: A sign on which the names and locations of occupants or the use of a building is given. This shall include office buildings and
church directories.
ERECT: To build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend or affix and shall also include the initial painting of any sign.
FACING OR SURFACE: The surface of a sign upon, against or through which a message is displayed or illustrated on a sign.
FLASHING SIGN: Any illuminated sign where each artificial light unit is not maintained in a stationary condition, or where all light units are not
constant in intensity and color at all times when such sign is illuminated. Flashing signs are not permitted.
FREESTANDING SIGN: Any mobile or portable sign or sign structure, not securely attached to the ground or to any other structure. This shall not
include car signs as defined herein.
GROSS SURFACE AREA OF SIGN: The entire area within a single continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of a sign and in no case
passing through or between any adjacent elements of the same. However, such perimeter shall not include any structural elements lying outside the
limits of such sign and not forming an integral part of the display.
GROUND SIGN: Includes any sign supported by uprights, poles or braces placed upon the ground or a sign placed directly on the ground and not
attached to any building.
ILLUMINATED SIGN: Any sign which has characters, letters, figures, designs or outline illuminated by electric lights, luminous tubes or any other
means of illumination as part of the sign.
INCOMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL: Any material which will not ignite at or below a temperature of one thousand two hundred degrees Fahrenheit
(1,200°F) and will not continue to burn or glow at that temperature.
MARQUEE: Any fixed hood which includes a sign or advertising or announcements (other than a canopy or awning) projecting from the wall of a
building above an entrance extending over a public area. Marquees are not permitted.
MOVING OR ROTATING SIGN: Any sign which physically moves or rotates in any manner whatsoever, in whole or in part. Moving signs are not
permitted.
NAMEPLATE: Any sign which states the name or address or both of the business or occupancy of the lot where the sign is placed.
NONCONFORMING SIGN: Any sign which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment to these sign regulations, but which now fails by
reasons of such adoption, revision or amendment, to conform to the present requirements of these sign regulations.
PERSON: Any natural person, partnership, trust, corporation or association. Whenever used with respect to any penalty, the term "person" as
applied to partnerships or associations, shall mean the partners or members thereof; as applied to trusts, shall mean the trustees and beneficiaries
thereof; and as applied to corporation, shall mean the officers thereof.
POLITICAL SIGN: A sign which relates to a candidate seeking elective office and/or which contains expressions on political issues and/or other
noncommercial individual speech.
PORTABLE SIGN: Any sign designed to be moved from place to place.
PROJECTING SIGN: Any sign which is attached to a building or other structure and extends by more than twelve inches (12") beyond the line of the
building or structure or that portion of the building or structure to which it is attached. Projecting signs are not permitted.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 188/366
PUBLIC AREA: A. The right of way of any area owned by, or dedicated to, or offered for dedication to the state of Illinois, any county or the village of
Inverness which is used for a highway, street, road or sidewalk; or
B. The right of way of any area dedicated or offered for dedication for highway, street, or road purposes; or
C. Any automobile parking area owned by or subject to a lease agreement in favor of the village of Inverness.
D. Any other public property.
REAL ESTATE SIGN: Any sign which is used to offer for sale, lease, or rent property or to advertise an open house for such sale, lease or rental.
ROOF SIGN: Any sign erected, constructed and maintained upon or over the roof of any building, with the principal support on the roof structure. A
sign which is attached to a mansard roof and protrudes, wholly or partially, above the lowest point of the roof of the building or structure to which the
mansard roof is attached shall be considered a roof sign. Roof signs are not permitted.
SIGN: Every name, identification, description, announcement, billboard, declaration, demonstration, display, object, flag, pennant, illustration,
canopy, awning, clock or insignia, and structure supporting any of the same, affixed directly or indirectly to or upon the exterior of any building or
outdoor structure, or erected or maintained upon land, which direct attention to a product, place, activity, person, institution, organization or
business.
The term "sign" shall not include any display of official, court or public office notices, nor shall it include the flag, emblem, or insignia of a nation,
governmental unit, school or religious group.
The term "sign" shall include:
A. "Flashing sign", as defined in this section.
B. "Ground sign", as defined in this section.
C. "Illuminated sign", as defined in this section.
D. "Projecting sign", as defined in this section.
E. "Roof sign", as defined in this section.
F. "Temporary sign", as defined in this section.
G. "Wall sign", as defined in this section.
TEMPORARY SIGN: Includes any sign, banner, pennant, streamer, valance or other advertising display constructed of plastic, cloth, canvas, light
fabric, cardboard, wallboard or other light materials, with or without frames, intended to be displayed for a short period of time only, and shall also
include subdivision advertising signs of heavier material.
VEHICLE SIGN: An advertising or business sign attached to an operable or inoperable motor vehicle, van, trailer which is parked or placed in
position where it is displayed to the public.
WALL SIGN: Any sign which is placed against a building or other structure and attached to the exterior front, rear or side wall of any building or
other structure, or painted on a wall of a building. A sign attached to a mansard roof and not protruding, wholly or partially, above the lowest point of
the roof of the building structure to which the mansard roof is attached shall be considered a wall sign. (Ord. 93-485, 7-13-1993; amd. Ord. 2008-
859, 1-8-2008)
5-5-2: PERMITS AND COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, repair, alter, relocate, change and/or maintain or commence to erect, repair, alter, relocate,
change and/or maintain any sign without first securing a sign permit and paying the appropriate fee as required by this chapter. It shall also be
unlawful for any person to violate, disobey, omit, neglect or refuse to comply with or to resist or obstruct the enforcement of any of the provisions of
this chapter. All illuminated signs shall, in addition, be subject to all the applicable electrical provisions of the ordinances of the village and the permit
fees required thereunder. No permit shall be required for changing letters or the message on any sign which includes a changeable copy panel or
for repainting of any existing sign. (Ord. 93-485, 7-13-1993)
5-5-3: APPLICATION FOR PERMITS:
Applications for erection permits shall be made upon forms provided by the village and shall contain or have attached thereto the following
information:
A. Name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
B. Location of building, structure or lot to which or upon which the sign is to be attached or erected.
C. Position of the sign in relation to nearby buildings or structures.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 189/366
D. Two (2) blueprints or ink drawings of the plans and specifications and methods of construction and attachment to the building, other structure or
the ground.
E. If reasonably required by the building inspector, by reason of location, size or safety, a copy of stress sheets and calculations showing that the
sign and supports are designed for dead load and wind pressure in any direction as required by this chapter and all other applicable provisions
of this code.
F. Name of person erecting the sign.
G. Written consent of the owner of the building, structure or land to which or on which the sign is to be erected or satisfactory evidence that the
applicant has permission pursuant to a current lease.
H. An electrical permit if required by the electrical provisions of this code.
I. Evidence of insurance as required by this chapter.
J. Such other information as the building officer shall require to show full compliance with this code and all applicable state, county and municipal
regulations. (Ord. 93-485, 7-13-1993)
5-5-4: INSURANCE REQUIREMENT:
Subject to the provisions of this chapter, every applicant for a permit for a sign which will extend over a public street or which is located as to be able
to topple upon or drop upon the same, before the permit is granted, shall file with the building officer, a liability insurance policy or certificate of
insurance issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state and reasonably acceptable to the building officer with limits of
liability of not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for property damage and three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for
personal injuries. The village, its officers, agents and employees shall be named as additional parties insured. Such liability insurance policy shall be
maintained in force throughout the life of the permit, and if at any time it shall not be in full force, the permit shall be revoked by the building officer.
(Ord. 93-485, 7-13-1993)
5-5-5: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; TIME LIMITATION:
The building officer shall examine the plans, specifications and other data submitted with the application for erection permit, and the premises upon
which it is proposed to erect the sign, and shall issue an erection permit only if the proposed structure is in compliance with all the requirements of
this chapter, all other applicable provisions of this code and the permit fee has been paid. If the work authorized under an erection permit has not
been completed within six (6) months after date of issuance, the said permit shall become null and void. (Ord. 93-485, 7-13-1993)
5-5-6: PERMIT FEES:
The fees to be charged for permits issued for the erection, construction or alteration of any sign, canopy, awning or clock regulated by this chapter
shall be as follows, but there shall be no fee for a permit issued to a church, civic organization or school:
A. Nonilluminated signs: Thirty five dollars ($35.00) per square foot of gross surface area of each face thereof.
B. Canopies and awnings: Thirty five dollars ($35.00).
C. Illuminated signs and clocks: Thirty five dollars ($35.00). (Ord. 93-485, 7-13-1993)
5-5-7: REVOCATION OR TERMINATION OF PERMITS:
All permits issued under the provisions of this chapter and all permits issued prior to the effective date of this chapter are revocable at any time by
the building officer if the building officer finds noncompliance with this chapter or any other provision of this code which is not corrected within twenty
(20) days after written notice by the building officer to the permittee.
Upon the termination or revocation of the permit the permittee shall remove the sign and if the permittee shall fail, neglect or refuse to do so, the
village may remove the same and charge the expenses to the permittee. (Ord. 93-485, 7-13-1993)
5-5-8: UNSAFE AND UNLAWFUL SIGNS:
If the building officer finds that any sign or other advertising structure regulated in this chapter or this zoning ordinance has been constructed or
erected or is being maintained in violation of the provisions of this chapter or this zoning ordinance, but no immediate peril to the safety of persons
or property exists and the sign or other advertising structure is not within a public right of way, the building officer shall give written notice of such
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 190/366
violation to the property owner or the owner of the sign, who shall immediately take such action as may be necessary so as to comply with the
provision of this chapter and/or this zoning ordinance. Where an immediate peril exits, or where any sign or other advertising structure (other than
governmental signs and/or signs regulating traffic as described in subsection 5-5-12B of this chapter) is located within any public area, any village
official or village employee shall have authority to immediately abate a violation of this chapter or this zoning ordinance and such sign or other
advertising structure may be removed summarily and without notice. (Ord. 2008-859, 1-8-2008)
5-5-9: REMOVAL OF CERTAIN SIGNS:
Any sign now or hereafter existing which advertises a business no longer being conducted or a product no longer being sold, shall be removed by
the permittee, or by the owner, agent or person having the beneficial use of the premises upon which such sign may be found, within twenty (20)
days after written notification from the building officer. Upon failure to comply with such notice, the building officer is authorized to remove such sign
at the expense of the permittee or the owner, agent or person having the beneficial use of the premises. (Ord. 93-485, 7-13-1993)
5-5-10: SIGNS NOT TO CONSTITUTE TRAFFIC HAZARD OR CAUSE GLARE:
A. No sign, otherwise allowable, shall be erected or maintained in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision, or as to distract the attention
of the driver of any vehicle by reason of the position, shape or color thereof.
B. No sign shall be erected or maintained in such a manner as to be likely to interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be confused with, any authorized
traffic sign, signal or device, or in such manner as to cause glare on any public area or on any residential property, or in such manner as to
interfere with visibility of drivers using any public area.
C. No sign shall make use of the words "stop", "go", "look", "slow", "danger", the international prohibition system or any other similar word, phrase,
symbol or character; and no sign shall employ any red, yellow, orange, green or other colored lamp or light in such a manner as to interfere with,
mislead or confuse traffic. (Ord. 93-485, 7-13-1993)
5-5-11: SIGN CONSTRUCTION:
A. Projections: No sign which is constructed on or at any public area, or within five feet (5') thereof, shall have nails, tacks or wires or other
hazardous projections protruding therefrom except electrical reflectors and devices which may extend over the top and in front of such sign.
B. Reflectors And Lights: Gooseneck reflectors and lights shall be permitted on ground signs and wall signs only; provided, however, that such
ground and wall signs and reflectors shall concentrate the illumination upon the area of the sign so as to prevent glare upon the street or
adjacent property. No sign which extends over a public area shall be wholly or partially illuminated by floodlights or spotlights.
C. Information Required On Or Near Sign: There shall be placed upon or near each sign hereafter erected, so as to be visible upon inspection by
the building inspector, a label, decal or tag to be provided by the village upon issuance of the erection permit, which shall include the date of
erection, the name of the permittee, the permit number, the voltage of any electrical apparatus used in connection therewith and such other
information as the village shall reasonably require.
D. Painting Required: The permittee of each sign shall paint said sign and all parts and supports thereof at the time of erection and at least every
two (2) years thereafter, unless the same are galvanized or otherwise treated to prevent rust or rotting or constructed of noncorrosive material.
E. Strength And Materials To Be Used: All signs shall be designed and constructed to withstand a wind pressure of not less than thirty (30) pounds
per square foot of area; and shall be constructed to receive dead loads as required in this code. All letters, figures, characters or representations
in cutout or irregular form, maintained in conjunction with, attached to, or superimposed upon any sign shall be safely and securely built or
attached to the sign structure. All wall signs shall be safely and securely attached to the building wall by means of metal anchors, bolts, or
expansion screws not less than three-eighths inch (3/8") in diameter embedded in said wall at least three inches (3"); provided, however, that
such signs may rest in or be bolted to heavy metal brackets or saddles set not over six feet (6') apart, each of which shall be securely fixed to the
wall as hereinbefore provided. No wall signs shall be secured with wire, strips of wood or nails.
F. Glass; Limitations: Any glass forming a part of any sign shall be safety glass and a minimum of one-fourth inch (1/4") in thickness.
G. Electrical Wiring: Where electrical wiring and connections are to be used, the building officer shall examine the plans and specifications
respecting all wiring and connections, and shall issue a permit only if the same comply with the electrical provisions of this code and all
applicable state regulations.
H. Illumination:
1. The maximum lighting shall be one thousand two hundred (1,200) lumens reflecting from a white background as measured at the surface of
this sign.
2. Each illuminated sign shall be equipped with a safety shutoff switch.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 191/366
3. After completion of installation and before the sign is illuminated for regular use, the said sign or other advertising structure shall be inspected
to determine that it complies with the approved plans and specifications and to determine that the direction of the lighting does not interfere
with or affect the vision of drivers on any nearby road, street or highway.
4. The only illuminated signs permitted in any A-1 residential zoning district are governmental signs and subdivision signs complying with
subsections 5-5-12A3 and 5-5-12C respectively of this chapter, unless a zoning variation or special use permit has heretofore or is hereafter
granted to authorize such illuminated sign.
I. Obstructions: No sign shall be erected, relocated or maintained in such a manner that free ingress or egress from any door, window or fire escape
is prevented. No sign of any kind shall be attached to any standpipe or fire escape, or be attached in a manner which will interfere with any
opening required for ventilation. (Ord. 93-485, 7-13-1993)
5-5-12: EXEMPTIONS FROM CERTAIN SIGN REGULATIONS:
The following signs are exempt from this chapter provided that, and only if, they comply with the provisions of this section and sections 5-5-8, 5-5-9,
5-5-10, 5-5-13, and 5-5-19 of this chapter.
A. Exempt Temporary Signs, Generally: Exempt temporary signs shall include, but not be limited to, construction signs, community event signs,
garage sale or rummage sale signs, real estate "for sale" and "for rent" signs, real estate open house signs, and political signs. All exempt
temporary signs shall be subject to the following regulations, regardless of their content or purpose:
1. Such signs shall not be located in any public area, unless they are governmental signs or signs regulating traffic as described in subsection B
of this section.
2. Such signs shall be located at least thirty feet (30') from the edge of the pavement of any adjacent street.
3. Such signs shall not advertise any business, occupation, or activity which constitutes a violation of these zoning regulations.
4. Such signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet in surface area on each of two (2) display surfaces and shall not exceed six feet (6') in height
above grade.
5. Such signs shall not be illuminated.
6. Such signs shall be limited in number to one on each lot or zoning parcel, except that such limitation shall not apply to political signs.
7. Such signs shall be removed within three (3) days after the event advertised or referred to in such signage. For example, and not by way of
limitation, construction signs located on a lot denoting the architect, engineer, contractor, and/or tradesmen involved in the project shall be
removed three (3) business days after the construction is completed; political signs shall be removed within three (3) days after the occurrence
of an election or other event referred to; real estate signs shall be removed within three (3) days after the sale of the property in question has
closed. However, when such exempt temporary signs which advertise a particular event at a particular time, date and location within the
village, including, by way of example and not by way of limitation, real estate open house signs, community event signs, and garage or
rummage sale signs, shall be removed within three (3) hours after the conclusion of the event in question to avoid any unnecessary
interference with vehicle traffic.
8. The attachment to such signs, or the related display of banners, pennants, streamers, balloons, and other prohibited signs shall not be
permitted.
B. Other Exempt Signs:
1. Flags: The flags, emblems or insignia of any nation or political subdivision or corporate flag, except when displayed in connection with a
commercial promotion.
2. Memorial Signs: Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings and date of erection when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of
bronze or other noncombustible materials.
3. Governmental Signs: Governmental signs shall include: traffic control signs, signals and devices; legal notices, identification signs for
governmental buildings, facilities, departments, divisions, services or structures; informational, warning and/or ordinance enforcement signs;
directional signs; railroad crossing signs; temporary emergency signs; and such other nonadvertising signs as may be approved by the village
board provided, however, subdivision, neighborhood and village entrance monuments shall be regulated as provided below.
4. Nameplates: Nameplates located on private property shall be exempt provided the sign does not exceed one square foot in area.
5. No Trespassing/No Dumping Signs: "No Trespassing" and/or "No Dumping" signs which do not exceed two (2) square feet in area and which
are posted only on private property by the owner, occupant, or the agent thereof, but no more than one such sign shall be posted on each fifty
feet (50') of lot boundary or frontage of the property in question.
6. Building Features: Integral decorative or architectural features of buildings, except letters, trademarks, moving parts and moving lights.
7. Signs Regulating Traffic: Signs directing, guiding, warning and/or otherwise regulating traffic and parking on private property, but bearing no
advertising matters.
C. Subdivision, Neighborhood And Village Entrance Monuments:
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 192/366
1. Display: Lettering on subdivision, neighborhood or village entrance monuments shall be not more than one foot (1') in height and shall only
indicate the name of the subdivision or neighborhood but must include the phrase "Inverness" in lettering not less than one-half (1/2) the height
of the largest lettering on the sign.
2. Gross Surface Area: No single subdivision, neighborhood or village entrance monument shall exceed one hundred twenty five (125) square
feet in its gross surface area on any one side.
3. Height: It shall be unlawful to erect any such subdivision, neighborhood or village entrance monument, the total height of which (not including
any lighting fixtures) is greater than six and one-half feet (61/2') above the centerline datum elevation of the highest street upon which the sign
faces. Lighting fixtures attached to any such monument shall not exceed three feet (3') in height.
4. Application:
a. Applications for construction of such a subdivision, neighborhood or village entrance monument shall be submitted to the building officer.
b. Applications shall include a scaled rendering of the proposed entrance monument and any signage, detailed specifications for any
illumination of the monument and lettering thereon, location survey and a list of construction materials.
c. The village may require alterations to the plans submitted if it is determined that such plans are not consistent with public safety. Such plans
shall comply with all applicable sign regulations as contained in this chapter but no other permit shall be required.
d. Upon review by the building officer, the application will be forwarded to the board of trustees for their consideration and approval or
disapproval, provided, however, that the board of trustees may refer the application to the plan commission for its recommendation, if the
board deems this advisable.
5. Ownership And Maintenance:
a. As a condition of constructing and installing any such subdivision, neighborhood or village entrance monument, a duly established
homeowners', property owners' or civic association shall own and maintain the monument; and shall execute an agreement reasonably
acceptable to the board of trustees providing for such maintenance.
b. If the association in question fails to execute such an agreement prior to the erection of such new monument, or relative to existing
monuments, within ninety (90) days after the effective date of this section, or if such association fails to maintain said monument in
accordance with such an agreement, after ten (10) days' written notice from the village, the building officer may:
(1) Cite the association for a violation of this chapter; and/or
(2) Cause such maintenance work as may be reasonably required or as was required by such agreement to be performed, and the
association shall be obligated to reimburse the village for all costs of such maintenance; and/or
(3) The village may cause such monument to be removed, and the association shall again be obligated to reimburse the village for all costs
of removal.
6. Location: No permanent subdivision, neighborhood or village identification monument shall hereafter be located on or maintained on any
public area within the village without a permit as provided by this section and without the express approval of the board of trustees as
expressed by motion or resolution, but the board of trustees shall not be obligated to grant such approval.
7. Illumination: Subdivision monuments shall be externally illuminated only and shall otherwise comply with subsection 5-5-11H of this chapter.
(Ord. 2008-859, 1-8-2008)
5-5-13: PROHIBITED SIGNS:
The following signs are prohibited, subject to the amortization provisions of this chapter:
A. Marquees.
B. Projecting signs.
C. Roof signs.
D. Temporary signs except as specifically allowed by this chapter.
E. Flashing signs.
F. Moving signs.
G. Tethered airborne signs or balloons.
H. Beacon lights.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 193/366
I. Portable signs.
J. Freestanding signs.
K. Poster boards.
L. Bench signs.
M. Billboards.
N. Roof signs.
O. Internally illuminated signs.
P. Streamers.
Q. Banners.
R. Pennants.
S. Valances.
T. Signs not advertising bona fide business conducted or a product sold on the premises where the signs are located.
U. Signs painted directly on a wall or walls, and vehicle signs.
V. Any sign(s) located within any public area, other than governmental signs and signs regulating traffic as described in subsection 5-5-12B of this
chapter, and subdivision, neighborhood, and village entrance monuments in compliance with subsection 5-5-12C of this chapter. (Ord. 2008-859,
1-8-2008)
5-5-14: COMPLIANCE WITH ALL APPLICABLE PROVISIONS:
All signs shall be subject to such further restrictions as provided by all other applicable provisions of this chapter and all other applicable provisions
of this code. (Ord. 93-485, 7-13-1993)
5-5-15: AMORTIZATION OF NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
A. If the owner of a nonconforming sign shall discontinue the activity advertised at the place where the sign is located, the sign shall be taken down
at the expense of the owner within ten (10) calendar days after such discontinuance. Such sign shall not be erected elsewhere unless a permit is
issued for the new installation pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
B. Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, all signs which become nonconforming by the provisions of this chapter or this zoning ordinance,
excluding any such nonconforming signs which have heretofore been or are hereafter authorized by a variation or by a special use permit, shall
be removed, altered or repaired so as to conform with the provisions of this chapter or this zoning ordinance by five (5) years from the date the
last building permit or sign permit was issued for such sign or prior to January 1, 1998, whichever is earlier, except that signs existing prior to the
effective date hereof, which were then illegal for any reason or which were not lawfully established for any reason, shall be removed on or before
September 1, 1993. (Ord. 93-485, 7-13-1993)
5-5-16: MISCELLANEOUS ADVERTISING OBJECTS PROHIBITED:
No person shall place on or suspend from the exterior of any building or structure, any goods, wares or merchandise. (Ord. 93-485, 7-13-1993)
5-5-17: OBSCENE MATTER PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to display upon any sign or other advertising structure any obscene, indecent or immoral matter. (Ord. 93-485, 7-
13-1993)
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 194/366
5-5-18: OBSTRUCTIONS TO DOORS, WINDOWS OR FIRE ESCAPES:
No sign shall be erected, relocated or maintained so as to prevent free ingress or egress to and from any door, window or fire escape. No sign shall
be attached to a standpipe or fire escape. (Ord. 93-485, 7-13-1993)
5-5-19: LOCATION GENERALLY:
A. No sign shall cover wholly or partially any opening, nor project beyond the ends or top of the wall to which it is attached.
B. No sign(s) shall be located within any public area, other than governmental signs and signs regulating traffic as defined herein, and subdivision,
neighborhood, and village entrance monuments in compliance with subsection 5-5-12C of this chapter. (Ord. 2008-859, 1-8-2008)
5-5-20: HEIGHT:
A. It shall be unlawful to erect any ground sign whose total height is greater than twenty feet (20') above the centerline datum elevation of the street
upon which the sign faces.
B. No ground sign shall be located within eight feet (8') of any electric power line, service drops or line conductors, or in any location where the
building officer finds a reasonable danger that an electric power line would come in contact with the sign.
C. No ground sign shall be nearer than six feet (6') to any sign, building or structure on adjoining premises and shall not be nearer the street than
the building line established by this zoning ordinance.
D. No sign, except a sign exempted by section 5-5-12 of this chapter, shall be erected in any residential zoning district as defined in this zoning
ordinance. (Ord. 93-485, 7-13-1993)
5-5-21: SIZE AND NUMBER OF GROUND SIGNS:
Each lot or parcel of land under one ownership or use may have not more than one ground sign, with a maximum of two (2) display surfaces, except
that any lot or parcel with a frontage of three hundred fifty feet (350') or more may have two (2) ground signs located not less than two hundred fifty
feet (250') apart. The maximum size of each display area shall be based upon lot frontage as follows:
Lot Frontage Maximum Size Of Each Display Surface Area
50 feet or less 25 square feet
Over 50 feet but not more than 100 feet 25 square feet plus 1 square foot of sign area for each 5 feet, or major fraction thereof, of lot
frontage
Over 100 feet but not more than 250 feet
35 square feet plus 2 square feet of sign area for each 5 feet, or major fraction thereof, of lot
frontage
Over 250 feet 100 square feet, which is the maximum allowed
Where two (2) ground signs are permitted on one lot or parcel, the maximum size of each display area of each sign shall be as set forth in the
foregoing table and the combined display area of each side of two (2) signs shall not exceed the total permitted for two (2) signs on lots or parcels
under separate ownership or use.
In the case of a corner lot, either street (but not both) may be designated for the purposes of frontage, providing the sign faces the street designated
for frontage purposes. (Ord. 93-485, 7-13-1993)
5-5-22: PREMISES TO BE FREE OF WEEDS AND CLEAN:
All ground signs and the premises surrounding the same shall be maintained by the owner thereof in a clean, sanitary and inoffensive condition, and
free and clear of all obnoxious substances, rubbish and weeds. (Ord. 93-485, 7-13-1993)
5-5-23: SIZE OF WALL SIGNS:
The maximum size of a wall sign shall be:
A. Twenty five percent (25%) of the square foot area of the wall to which attached or on which painted; or
B. The maximum size allowed for a ground sign on the same site, whichever is smaller. (Ord. 93-485, 7-13-1993)
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 195/366
5-5-24: NUMBER OF WALL SIGNS:
Not more than one wall sign shall be permitted on the wall of any building except:
A. One sign shall be permitted on each wall of a corner lot; and
B. Where a building is occupied by separate persons or businesses, one sign shall be permitted for and to each such occupant or business. (Ord.
93-485, 7-13-1993)
5-5-25: HEIGHT OF WALL SIGNS:
No wall signs shall protrude or extend above the lowest point of the roof of the building or structure to which the wall sign is attached. That portion of
a mansard roof which is no higher than the lowest point of the roof of the building or structure to which the mansard roof is attached shall be
considered part of a wall and not a roof; the other portion of a mansard roof shall be considered a roof and not part of a wall. (Ord. 93-485, 7-13-
1993)
5-5-26: PROJECTING SIGNS PROHIBITED:
All projecting signs as defined in this chapter are hereby prohibited, subject to the amortization provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 93-485, 7-13-1993)
5-5-27: TEMPORARY SIGNS, PENNANTS, BANNERS OR STREAMERS PROHIBITED:
A. No pennants, banners or streamers shall be permitted in the village.
B. All temporary signs, except as permitted by subsection 5-5-12A of this chapter, shall be prohibited. (Ord. 93-485, 7-13-1993)
5-5-28: CANOPIES AND AWNINGS:
A. Application: This chapter shall apply only to canopies and awnings which are over a public area or include advertising, language or symbols
which direct attention to an object, product, place, activity, person, institution, organization or business.
B. Height: All canopies and awnings shall be constructed and erected so that the lowest portion of the projecting frame shall be not less than seven
feet six inches (7'6"), and the lowest portion of the extending skirt shall be not less than six feet eight inches (6'8"), above the grade of a public
area.
C. Setback From Curb Line: No canopy or awning shall be closer than eighteen inches (18") to the curb of any adjacent street.
D. Width: No canopy shall extend more than two feet (2') from each side of the entrance of the building to which it is attached.
E. Advertising: No advertising shall be placed on any canopy or awning, except that the name of the owner and the business, industry or pursuit
conducted within the premises may be painted or otherwise permanently placed thereon.
F. Permits: Permits for all canopies and awnings shall be required as provided for signs and all canopies and awnings shall be inspected as required
for other signs which extend over a public area.
G. Insurance: Insurance requirements provided for in this chapter apply to canopies and awnings. (Ord. 93-485, 7-13-1993)
5-5-29: CLOCKS:
A. Application: This chapter shall apply to clocks or other timepieces erected on the exterior of any building, or structure which includes advertising
or language or symbols which direct attention to an object, product, place, activity, person, institution, organization or business. No flashing or
digital clocks are permitted except on approval of the village board.
B. Construction: All clocks shall be constructed of incombustible material, including the frames, braces and supports thereof.
1. Regulation Of Size Of Dial: The dial of such clocks shall be not more than forty two inches (42") in diameter.
2. Glass: Any glass forming a part of a clock or the sign thereon shall be safety glass, or plate glass at least one-fourth inch (1/4") thick, or an
approved plastic securely held in place.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 196/366
3. Cover Or Service Opening To Be Secured: Any cover or service opening of a street clock shall be securely fastened thereto by metal hinges.
C. Location: Clocks supported on any building or structure shall not be less than seven and one-half feet (71/2') above the sidewalk, and shall not
project from the face or wall of the building or structure by more than twelve inches (12"). No clocks shall be erected on any public area.
D. Clocks Erected On Walls: All clocks erected on the exterior of any building or structure shall comply with the requirements set forth in provisions
on wall signs.
E. Advertising Limited: No advertising shall be placed upon any clock, other than the name of the owners, or a reference to the business, industry or
pursuit conducted within the premises to which said clock is attached.
F. Insurance: Insurance requirements provided for in this chapter shall apply to clocks. (Ord. 93-485, 7-13-1993)
Chapter 6
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS
5-6-1: LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
Planned unit developments may be permitted in any zoning district as a form of special use, subject to the provisions of this Chapter and subject to
the objectives and conditions set forth in Section 5-1-6 of this Zoning Title (definition of "planned development"). (1983 Code)
5-6-2: MIXTURE OF LAND USES:
A planned unit development may include a mixture of the land uses permitted in the applicable zoning district and may include variations from such
uses if compatible with the permitted uses of the district. (1983 Code)
5-6-3: STANDARDS:
The Board of Trustees shall not grant a planned unit development unless the Board shall find:
A. That the planned unit development is in harmony with the general intent of this Zoning Title.
B. That the planned unit development will be on a tract of land under common ownership or unified control.
C. That the uses permitted in the planned unit development shall be compatible to each other and not detrimental to the use and enjoyment of
nearby properties. The requirements of this subsection C shall be deemed met if the permitted uses are so designed, located and proposed to
be operated so that the public health, safety and welfare will be protected and such uses will not cause appreciable injury or damage to other
property.
D. That the establishment, maintenance or operation of the planned unit development will not impede the normal and orderly development and
improvement of surrounding properties.
E. That adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and other necessary facilities have been or will be provided.
F. That adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress and egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the public
streets. (1983 Code)
5-6-4: EXCEPTIONS FROM STRICT REQUIREMENTS:
A planned unit development need not conform to the strict requirements of the Zoning Title including, but not limited to, bulk regulations, setbacks,
lot size and coverage requirements and yard requirements, provided that the standards set forth for planned unit developments are met. (1983
Code)
5-6-5: PRIVATE STREETS:
A planned unit development may contain private streets at the discretion of the Village Board. Such streets, as well as retention areas and other
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 197/366
improvements, may be included in the gross area available in computing the allowable dwelling units on the particular tract of land. (1983 Code)
5-6-6: PROCEDURE:
A planned unit development shall be processed as follows:
A. Application: Any person owning or having an interest in a tract of land may file an application for a planned unit development on that land. (1983
Code)
B. Site Plan: Such application shall be filed with the Zoning Enforcement Officer and shall be accompanied by a preliminary site plan and/or written
statement describing the general concept of the proposed planned unit development.
Not later than at the public hearing provided for herein, the applicant shall present a more detailed site plan showing: (Ord. 92-468, 12-8-1992)
1. The size and location of buildings proposed for the development.
2. Means of ingress and egress to and from the site.
3. The number and location of parking spaces on the site.
4. The size and location of streets, sidewalks and utility lines to be located within the planned unit development.
5. The size and location of all permanent open space proposed for the site.
6. Such other information as the Plan Commission may require.
C. Hearing On Application: Upon receipt of the application, the Plan Commission shall hold a public hearing after notice is given in the manner
required for applications to rezone property. Such hearing may be adjourned or continued from time to time by the Plan Commission.
D. Authorization: Within thirty (30) days after concluding said hearing, the Plan Commission shall report to the President and Board of Trustees its
findings and recommendations, including additional conditions it may deem necessary for the protection of the public interest. The Board of
Trustees may grant or deny the application. If granted, the planned unit development shall become effective only upon adoption of an ordinance
duly passed by the President and Board of Trustees. (1983 Code)
5-6-7: DEVELOPMENT IN CONFORMITY TO PLAN:
Construction and development shall take place only in substantial conformity with the planned unit development approved by ordinance. (1983
Code)
5-6-8: WHEN A SPECIAL USE PERMIT FOR A PLANNED DEVELOPMENT IS REQUIRED:
All "subdivisions" of property, as that term is defined in Section 6-2-4 of this Code, which exceed eighty thousand (80,000) square feet in area shall
require approval in the form of a special use permit for planned development. (Ord. 96-564, 4-9-1996)
5-6-9: REVOCATION OF SPECIAL USE PERMIT:
In any case where a special use has been established within one year after the date of granting thereof, then, without further action by the Plan
Commission or the corporate authorities, the special use or authorization thereof shall be null and void and if in connection with such planned
development, the property was rezoned from one zoning district to a different zoning district, then the zoning classification shall automatically revert
to that existing prior to the grant of a special use. For the purpose of this Zoning Title a special use is established if a building permit for the project
or part thereof is secured within one year from the effective date hereof, granting the special use; provided, however, that if construction on a special
use is discontinued for a period of one year or more, or if progress on any stage of a planned development falls behind the schedule for construction
(if any is approved as part of the Village ordinance approving the special use) by more than one year, then the uncompleted portions of the planned
development will be subject to review by the corporate authorities, who will have the authority to revoke the special use permit for the uncompleted
portions. (1983 Code)
Chapter 7
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS AND ANTENNAS
5-7-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish standards for the siting of wireless communications towers and antennas.
The goals of this Chapter are to: a) protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse impacts of towers and antennas; b) encourage
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 198/366
the location of towers in nonresidential areas; c) minimize the total number of towers throughout the community; d) strongly encourage the joint use
of new and existing tower sites as a primary option rather than construction of additional single-use towers; e) encourage users of towers and
antennas to locate them, to the extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the community is minimal; f) encourage users of towers and
antennas to configure them in a way that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers and antennas through careful design, siting, landscape
screening, and innovative camouflaging techniques; g) consider issues of public health and safety relative to communication towers; and h) avoid
potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure through engineering and careful siting of tower structures. In furtherance of these goals,
the Village of Inverness (hereinafter "the Village") shall give due consideration to the Village's Official Comprehensive Plan, Zoning Map, existing
land uses, and environmentally sensitive areas in approving sites for the location of towers and antennas. (Ord. 97-599, 9-9-1997)
5-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth below:
ALTERNATIVE TOWER STRUCTURE: Manmade trees, clock towers, bell steeples, light poles and similar alternative-design mounting structures
that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers.
ANTENNA: Any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on a tower, building or structure and used in communications that radiate or
capture electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunications signals or
other communication signals.
BACKHAUL NETWORK: The lines that connect a provider's towers/cell sites to one or more cellular telephone switching offices, and/or long
distance providers, or the public switched telephone network.
FAA: The Federal Aviation Administration.
FCC: The Federal Communications Commission.
HEIGHT: When referring to a tower or other structure, the distance measured from the finished grade of the parcel to the highest point on the tower
or other structure, including the base pad and any antenna.
PRE-EXISTING TOWERS AND PRE-EXISTING ANTENNAS: Any tower or antenna for which a building permit or special use permit has been
properly issued prior to the effective date of this Chapter, but as of this date there are no pre-existing towers within the Village of Inverness.
TOWER: Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas for telephone, radio and
similar communication purposes, including self-supporting lattice towers, guyed towers, or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television
transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower structures, and the like. The term
includes the structure and any support thereto. (Ord. 97-599, 9-9-1997)
5-7-3: APPLICABILITY:
A. New Towers And Antennas: All new towers or antennas in the Village shall be subject to these regulations, except as provided in subsections B
through D, inclusive, of this Section.
B. Amateur Radio Station Operators/Receive Only Antennas: This Chapter shall not govern any tower, or the installation of any antenna, that is
under thirty five feet (35') in height and is owned and operated by a federally-licensed amateur radio station operator or is used exclusively for
receive only antennas.
C. Pre-Existing Antennas: Pre-existing antennas for which a building permit has been properly issued or for which a special use permit or variation
has been granted shall not be required to meet the requirements of this Chapter, other than the requirements of subsections 5-7-4F and G of this
Chapter.
D. AM Array: For purposes of implementing this Chapter, an AM array, consisting of one or more tower units and supporting ground system which
functions as one AM broadcasting antenna, shall be considered one tower. Measurements for setbacks and separation distances shall be
measured from the outer perimeter of the towers included in the AM array. Additional tower units may be added within the perimeter of the AM
array by right. (Ord. 97-599, 9-9-1997)
5-7-4: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. Principal Or Accessory Use: Antennas and towers may be considered either principal or accessory uses. A different existing use of an existing
structure on the same lot shall not preclude the installation of an antenna or tower on such lot.
B. Lot Size: For purposes of determining whether the installation of a tower or antenna complies with district development regulations, including, but
not limited to, setback requirements, and other such requirements, the dimensions of the entire lot shall control, even though the antennas or
towers may be located on leased parcels within such lot.
C. Inventory Of Existing Sites: Each applicant for an antenna and/or tower shall provide to the Zoning Enforcement Officer an inventory of its
existing towers, antennas, or sites approved for towers or antennas, that are either within the jurisdiction of the Village or within one mile of the
border thereof, including specific information about the location, height, and design of each tower. The Zoning Enforcement Officer may share
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 199/366
such information with other applicants applying for administrative approvals or special use permits under this Chapter or other organizations
seeking to locate antennas within the jurisdiction of the Village, provided, however that the Zoning Enforcement Officer is not, by sharing such
information, in any way representing or warranting that such sites are available or suitable.
D. Aesthetics: Towers and antennas shall meet the following requirements:
1. Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted a neutral color so as to
reduce visual obtrusiveness.
2. At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening, and
landscaping that will blend them into the natural setting and surrounding buildings.
3. If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a
neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related
equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible.
E. Lighting: Towers shall not be artificially illuminated, unless required by the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the lighting
alternatives and design chosen must cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views.
F. State Or Federal Requirements: All towers must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of
the State or Federal government with the authority to regulate towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the
owners of the towers and antennas governed by this Chapter shall bring such towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards
and regulations within six (6) months of the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a different compliance schedule is mandated
by the controlling State or Federal agency. Failure to bring towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations
shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at the owner's expense.
G. Building Codes; Safety Standards: To ensure the structural integrity of towers, the owner and operator of a tower shall ensure that it is
maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable State or local building codes and the applicable standards for towers that are
published by the Electronic Industries Association, as amended from time to time. If, upon inspection, the Village concludes that a tower fails to
comply with such codes and standards and constitutes a danger to persons or property, and unless there is an imminent peril to such persons or
property, then upon notice being provided to the owner of the tower, the owner shall have ten (10) days to bring such tower into compliance with
such standards. Failure to bring such tower into compliance within said ten (10) days shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or
antenna at the owner's expense.
H. Measurement: For purposes of measurement, tower setbacks and separation distances shall be calculated and applied to facilities located in the
Village irrespective of Municipal and County jurisdictional boundaries.
I. Not Essential Services: Towers and antennas shall be regulated pursuant to this Chapter. Towers and antennas shall not be exempt from this
Zoning Ordinance nor shall they be permitted as essential services, as public utilities, or as private utilities.
J. Franchises: Owners and operators of any towers or antennas within the Village shall certify that all franchises required by law for the construction
and/or operation of a wireless communication system within the Village have been obtained and shall file a copy of all required franchises with
the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
K. Signs: No signs shall be allowed on an antenna or tower.
L. Buildings And Support Equipment: Buildings and support equipment associated with antennas or towers shall comply with the requirements of
Section 5-7-8 of this Chapter.
M. Multiple Antenna/Tower Plan: The users of towers and antennas are encouraged to submit a single application for approval of multiple towers
and/or antenna sites. Applications for approval of multiple sites shall be given priority in the review process. (Ord. 97-599, 9-9-1997)
5-7-5: PERMITTED USES:
A. General: The uses listed in this Section are deemed to be permitted uses and shall not require administrative approval or a special use permit.
B. Permitted Uses: Antennas or towers located on property owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by the Village other than on a Village street or
right of way shall be permitted uses, but only if a license or lease authorizing the location and maintenance of such antenna and/or tower has
been approved by the corporate authorities of the Village. (Ord. 97-599, 9-9-1997)
5-7-6: ADMINISTRATIVELY APPROVED USES:
A. General: The following provisions shall govern the issuance of administrative approvals for towers and antennas.
1. The Zoning Enforcement Officer may administratively approve only those uses specified in this Section.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 200/366
2. Each applicant for administrative approval shall apply to the Zoning Enforcement Officer providing the information set forth in subsection 5-7-
7B1 and 3 of this Chapter and a nonrefundable fee as established by the President and Board of Trustees of the Village to reimburse the
Village for the costs of reviewing the application.
3. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall review the application for administrative approval and determine if the proposed use complies with
Section 5-7-4, and subsection 5-7-7B4 and 5 of this Chapter.
4. The Zoning Enforcement Officer should respond to each such application within sixty (60) days after receiving it by either approving or
denying the application.
5. If an administrative approval is denied, the applicant shall file an application for a special use permit pursuant to Section 5-7-7 of this Chapter
prior to filing any appeal that may otherwise be available under this Zoning Ordinance.
B. List Of Administratively Approved Uses: The following uses may be approved by the Zoning Enforcement Officer after conducting an
administrative review:
1. Locating a new tower or antenna, including the placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with said
tower or antenna, in the B-2 Zoning District, but only if a license or lease authorizing the location and maintenance of such antenna and/or
tower has been approved by the corporate authorities of the public entity owning such property.
2. Locating antennas on existing structures or towers consistent with the terms of subsection B2a and b of this Section.
a. Antennas On Existing Structures: Any antenna which is not attached to a tower may be approved by the Zoning Enforcement Officer as an
accessory use to any commercial, professional, institutional, or multi-family structure of eight (8) or more dwelling units, provided:
(1) The antenna does not exceed the maximum permitted height of the structure as authorized by this Zoning Ordinance and/or by any other
applicable ordinances of the Village.
(2) The antenna complies with all applicable FCC and FAA regulations; and
(3) The antenna complies with all applicable building codes.
b. Co-Location: The co-location of one or more antennas on a tower which has already been authorized by a special use permit granted in
accordance with the provisions of this Chapter provided that such co-location shall meet the following conditions:
(1) Visual Impacts: There shall be no adverse visual impacts associated with such co-location of antennas;
(2) Tower Modification: Any tower which is modified or reconstructed to accommodate the co-location of an additional antenna shall be of
the same tower type as the existing tower or such tower shall be replaced with a monopole;
(3) Height:
(A) A tower authorized by a special use permit granted in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter may be modified or rebuilt to a
taller height, not to exceed ten percent (10%) over the tower's existing height, to accommodate the co-location of one or more
additional antennas.
(B) The height change referred to in subsection B2b(3)(A) of this Section may only occur one time per tower.
(C) The additional height referred to in subsection B2b(3)(A) of this Section shall not require an additional distance separation as set forth
in Section 5-7-7 of this Chapter. The tower's premodification height shall be used to calculate such distance separations.
3. Installing a cable microcell network through the use of multiple low-powered transmitters/receivers attached to existing wireline systems, such
as conventional cable or telephone wires, or similar technology that does not require the use of towers, provided all necessary franchises have
been obtained to authorize the establishment and maintenance of such a network within the Village. (Ord. 97-599, 9-9-1997)
5-7-7: SPECIAL USE PERMITS:
A. General: The following provisions shall govern the issuance of special use permits for towers or antennas by the Plan Commission:
1. If the tower or antenna is not a permitted use under Section 5-7-5 of this Chapter or permitted to be approved administratively pursuant to
Section 5-7-6 of this Chapter, then a special use permit granted by an ordinance approved by the corporate authorities of the Village shall be
required for the construction of a tower or the placement of an antenna in any zoning district.
2. Applications for special use permits under this Section shall be subject to the procedures and requirements of Chapter 6 (relative to special
uses and planned developments) of the Zoning Ordinance, except as otherwise modified in this Section.
3. In recommending the grant of a special use permit, the Plan Commission may recommend the imposition of such conditions to the extent the
Plan Commission concludes such conditions are necessary to minimize any adverse effect of the proposed tower on adjoining properties.
4. Any information of an engineering nature that the applicant submits, whether civil, mechanical, or electrical, shall be certified by a licensed
professional engineer.
5. An applicant for a special use permit shall submit the information described in this Section and such fees and deposits as otherwise required
by the Village Code.
B. Towers:
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 201/366
1. Information Required: In addition to any information required for applications for special use permits pursuant to Chapter 6 of the Zoning
Ordinance, applicants for a special use permit for a tower shall submit the following information:
a. A scaled site plan clearly indicating the location, type and height of the proposed tower, on-site land uses and zoning, adjacent land uses
and zoning (including when adjacent to other municipalities), the Official Comprehensive Plan recommended classification of the site and all
properties within the applicable separation distances set forth in subsection 5-7-7B5 of this Section, adjacent roadways, proposed means of
access, setbacks from property lines, elevation drawings of the proposed tower and any other structures, topography, parking, and other
information deemed by the Zoning Enforcement Officer to be necessary to assess compliance with this Chapter.
b. Legal description of the parent tract and leased parcel (if applicable).
c. The setback distance between the proposed tower and the nearest residential unit, platted residentially zoned properties, and unplatted
residentially zoned properties.
d. The separation distance from other towers described in the inventory of existing sites submitted pursuant to subsection 5-7-4C of this
Chapter shall be shown on an updated site plan or map. The applicant shall also identify the type of construction of the existing tower(s) and
the owner/operator of the existing tower(s), if known.
e. A landscape plan showing specific landscape materials.
f. Method of fencing, and finished color and, if applicable, the method of camouflage and illumination.
g. A description of the applicant's compliance with Section 5-7-4 and subsection 5-7-7B4 and 5 of this Chapter and all applicable Federal,
State or local laws.
h. A notarized statement by the applicant as to whether construction of the tower will accommodate co-location of additional antennas for
future users.
i. Identification of the entities providing the backhaul network for the tower(s) described in the application and other cellular sites owned or
operated by the applicant in the Village.
j. A description of the suitability of the use of existing towers, other structures and alternative technology not requiring the use of towers or
structures to provide the services intended to be provided through the use of the proposed new tower.
k. A description of the feasible location(s) of future towers or antennas within the Village based upon existing physical, engineering,
technological or geographical limitations in the event the proposed tower is erected.
2. Factors Considered In Granting Special Use Permits For Towers: In addition to any standards for consideration of special use permit
applications pursuant to Chapter 6 of the Zoning Ordinance, the Plan Commission and the corporate authorities of the Village ("the Village
Board") should consider the following factors in determining whether to issue a special use permit, although the Village Board may waive or
reduce the burden on the applicant of one or more of these criteria if the Village Board concludes that the goals of this Chapter are better
served thereby:
a. Height of the proposed tower;
b. Proximity of the tower to residential structures and residential district boundaries;
c. Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties;
d. Surrounding topography;
e. Surrounding tree coverage and foliage;
f. Design of the tower, with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness;
g. Proposed ingress and egress; and
h. Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures, or alternative technologies not requiring the use of towers or structures, as
discussed in subsection 5-7-7B3 of this Chapter.
3. Availability Of Suitable Existing Towers, Other Structures, Or Alternative Technology: No new tower shall be permitted unless the applicant
demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the Village Board that no existing tower, structure or alternative technology that does not
require the use of towers or structures can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. An applicant shall submit information requested
by the Plan Commission or requested by the Village Board related to the availability of suitable existing towers, other structures or alternative
technology. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing tower, structure or alternative technology can accommodate the applicant's
proposed antenna may consist of any of the following:
a. No existing towers or structures are located within the geographic area which meet applicant's engineering requirements.
b. Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to meet applicant's engineering requirements.
c. Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment.
d. The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with the antennas on the existing towers or structures, or the
antennas on the existing towers or structures would cause interference with the applicant's proposed antenna.
e. The fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the owner in order to share an existing tower or structure or to adapt an existing tower
or structure for sharing are unreasonable.
f. The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render existing towers and structures unsuitable.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 202/366
g. The applicant demonstrates that an alternative technology that does not require the use of towers or structures, such as a cable microcell
network using multiple low-powered transmitters/receivers attached to a wireline system, is unsuitable, or the costs of alternative technology
are unreasonable.
4. Setbacks: In addition to those setbacks otherwise required by this Zoning Ordinance, the following additional setback requirements shall apply
to all towers for which a special use permit is required; provided, however, that the Village Board may vary or reduce these setback
requirements as part of the ordinance granting the special use permit if the goals of this Chapter would be better served thereby:
a. Towers must be set back a distance equal to at least seventy five percent (75%) of the height of the tower from any adjoining lot or property
line.
b. Guys and accessory buildings must satisfy the minimum zoning district setback requirements.
5. Separation: The following separation requirements shall apply to all towers and antennas for which a special use permit is required by this
Chapter; provided, however, that the Village Board may vary or reduce these standard separation requirements as part of the ordinance
granting the required special use permit if the goals of this Chapter would be better served thereby:
a. Separation From Residentially Zoned Lands:
(1) Tower separation shall be measured from the base of the tower to the lot or property line of any residentially zoned land as specified in
Table 1 below.
(2) Separation requirements for towers shall comply with the minimum standards established in Table 1 below.
Table 1
Off-Site Use/Designated Area Separation Distance
Residentially zoned lands 200 feet or 200% height of tower, whichever is greater
b. Separation Distances Between Towers: Separation distances between towers shall be applicable for and measured between the proposed
tower and pre-existing towers. The separation distances shall be measured by drawing or following a straight line between the base of the
existing tower and the proposed base, pursuant to a site plan, of the proposed tower. The separation distances (listed in linear feet) shall be
as shown in Table 2 below.
Table 2
Existing Towers - Types
Lattice Guyed
Monopole 75
Feet In Height
Or Greater
Monopole
Less Than 75
Feet In Height
Lattice 5,000 5,000 1,500 750
Guyed 5,000 5,000 1,500 750
Monopole 75 feet in
height or greater 1,500 1,500 1,500 750
Monopole less than
75 feet in height 750 750 750 750
6. Security Fencing: Towers shall be enclosed by security fencing not less than six feet (6') in height and shall also be equipped with appropriate
anti-climbing devices; provided, however, that the Village Board may waive such requirements, as it deems appropriate.
7. Landscaping: The following requirements shall govern the landscaping surrounding towers for which a special use permit is required;
provided, however, that the Village Board may waive such requirements if the goals of this Chapter would be better served thereby.
a. Tower facilities shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant materials that effectively screens the view of the tower compound from property
used for residences. The standard buffer shall consist of a landscaped strip at least four feet (4') wide outside the perimeter of the
compound.
b. In locations where the visual impact of the tower would be minimal, the landscaping requirement may be reduced or waived.
c. Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In some cases, such as
towers sited on large, wooded lots, natural growth around the property perimeter may be sufficient buffer.
8. Co-Location Of Public Service Antennas: As a condition of the acceptance of a special use permit granted for a tower or antenna pursuant to
the authority of this Chapter, the applicant for such special use permit shall agree to provide the necessary and appropriate space on the
applicant's tower for the co-location of not less than one antenna serving public service uses, such as, but not limited to, fire protection, and
emergency services and/or police services. Such necessary and appropriate space shall also include, if reasonably available, coaxial cable
connections on the tower and from the tower to any cabinet space within the interior of the premises occupied by the applicant's facilities of
the site, but only if such co-location is reasonably possible without interfering with the applicant's intended use of the tower in question. No
amendment to such existing special use permit shall be required in order to authorize the co-location of such public antenna facilities on the
tower or antenna in question. (Ord. 97-599, 9-9-1997)
5-7-8: EQUIPMENT STORAGE CABINETS OR STRUCTURES; SCREENING:
The equipment cabinets or structures used in association with antennas shall comply with the following:
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 203/366
A. Size: A cabinet or structure for equipment storage located on the ground shall not contain more than two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor
area or be more than fifteen feet (15') in height.
B. Roof Cabinet Requirements: If the equipment structure or cabinet is located on the roof of a building, the area of the equipment structure and
other equipment and structures shall not occupy more than ten percent (10%) of the roof area and shall not exceed the maximum height
permitted for the building on which the cabinet or equipment structure is located.
C. Building Code Compliance: Equipment storage buildings and cabinets shall comply with all applicable building codes.
D. Location: In any event, no tower, antennas, or any related equipment cabinet or structure shall be located in any front, side or rear yard as
required by this Zoning Ordinance.
E. Screening: Any antenna and/or tower and any related equipment, cabinet or structure shall be screened by an evergreen hedge with an ultimate
height of at least twelve feet (12') and an initial planted height of at least sixty inches (60").
F. Residential Property Screening: Any antenna and/or tower and any related equipment structures and cabinets shall be screened from view of all
residential properties which abut or are directly across the street from the structure or cabinet by a solid fence eight feet (8') in height and an
evergreen hedge with an ultimate height of twelve feet (12') and an initial planted height of at least sixty inches (60").
G. Modification Of Building Size Requirements: The size limitations of this Section may be increased by the Zoning Enforcement Officer in the case
of administratively approved uses by as much as fifty percent (50%) or by the Village Board, to the extent the Village Board deems necessary, in
the case of uses permitted by special use, in order to encourage co-location of antennas. (Ord. 97-599, 9-9-1997)
5-7-9: REMOVAL OF ABANDONED ANTENNAS AND TOWERS:
Any antenna or tower that is not operated for a continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such
antenna or tower shall remove the same within ninety (90) days of receipt of notice from the Village notifying the owner of such abandonment.
Failure to remove an abandoned antenna or tower within said ninety (90) days shall be grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at the
owner's expense pursuant to the order of a court of competent jurisdiction. If there are two (2) or more users of a single tower, then this provision
shall not become effective until all users cease using the tower for a continuous twelve (12) month period. (Ord. 97-599, 9-9-1997)
Chapter 8
NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND USES
5-8-1: CONTINUANCE OF USE:
Any lawfully established or existing use of a building, other structure or land existing at the effective date of this title, or of amendments thereto, or
on the date of annexation thereof to the village, that does not conform to the use regulations for the district in which it is located, shall be deemed to
be a legal nonconforming use and may be continued provided there is no physical change other than necessary maintenance and repair, except as
otherwise permitted herein. A building or other structure for a nonconforming use under construction on the date of adoption of this title (February
14, 1963) or on the date of adoption of a later amendment creating the nonconformity or on the date of annexation thereof shall be completed within
one year. (1983 Code)
5-8-2: DISCONTINUANCE OF USE:
Whenever the use of any part of any building, other structure or land occupied is changed to or replaced by a use conforming to the provisions of
this title, such premises shall not thereafter be used or occupied by a nonconforming use. Whenever a nonconforming use of such building, other
structure or land, or part thereof, has been discontinued for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months, or whenever there is evident a clear intent
on the part of the owner to abandon a nonconforming use, such use shall not, after being discontinued or abandoned, be reestablished, and the use
of the premises thereafter shall be in conformity with the regulations of this zoning title. Where no building is involved, discontinuance of a
nonconforming use for a period of six (6) months shall constitute abandonment. (1983 Code)
5-8-3: CHANGE OF USE:
A nonconforming use of a building, other structure or land or part thereof, may be changed to a use of the same or of a more restricted character,
but may not thereafter be changed to any less restricted use, more intensive or lower class of use.
No part of any building, other structure or land occupied by a nonconforming use which is changed to or replaced by a use conforming to the
provisions of this zoning title shall thereafter be used or occupied for a nonconforming use. Once changed to a conforming use, no such building,
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 204/366
other structure or land shall be permitted to revert to a nonconforming use. A nonconforming use shall not be substituted or added to another
nonconforming use. (1983 Code)
5-8-4: REPAIRS, ALTERATIONS:
Normal maintenance of a building, other structure or land containing a nonconforming use may be performed, including necessary nonstructural
repairs and incidental alterations which do not extend or intensify the nonconforming use.
No structural alterations shall be made in such a building, other structure, or land containing a nonconforming use except as hereinafter provided or
except in the following situations:
A. When the alteration is required by law.
B. When the alteration will actually result in eliminating the nonconforming use, i.e., the entire building, other structure or land shall thereafter be
devoted to a conforming use, and will be in compliance with and conforming to all the regulations applicable to the district in which it is located.
C. The entire area of such structural alteration, enlargement, extension, or remodeling shall be in compliance with and conform to the requirements
of the regulations applicable to the zoning district in which the building or other structure is located.
D. The building or other structure is remodeled structurally but without enlarging or extending the existing nonconforming building's exterior
dimensions and without enlarging, extending, or increasing the degree of the nonconforming use in any manner. (1983 Code)
5-8-5: DAMAGE AND DESTRUCTION:
If a building or other structure containing a nonconforming use is damaged or destroyed by any means to the extent of fifty percent (50%) or more of
its replacement value at that time, the building or other structure may be rebuilt or used thereafter only for a conforming use and in compliance with
the provisions of this title. In the event the damage or destruction is less than fifty percent (50%) of its replacement value, based upon prevailing
costs, the building may then be restored to its original condition and the occupancy or use of such building may be continued which existed at the
time of such partial destruction. In either event, restoration or repair of the building or other structure must be started within a period of one year and
diligently prosecuted to completion. (1983 Code)
5-8-6: LOTS OF RECORD:
A. If two (2) or more contiguous lots of record (or combination of lots of record or portions of lots of record) are in single ownership or unified control
on December 12, 1978, and if all or part of the lots do not meet the requirements for width or area as established by this zoning title, the lots
shall be considered an undivided parcel for the purpose of this zoning title. No portion of said parcel shall be used or sold which does not meet
lot width and area requirements established by this zoning title, nor shall any division of the parcel be made which leaves remaining any lot or
lots with width or area below the requirements stated herein.
B. Any lot or parcel of land which is not subject to the restrictions set forth in subsection A of this section (i.e., any lot not part of 2 or more
contiguous lots of record or combination of lots of record or portions of lots of record which are in single ownership or unified control on
December 12, 1978), which was of record on said date or on the date of annexation thereof, and which does not meet the requirements for
minimum lot width and area may be utilized for a permitted use, but except as provided in subsection C of this section, shall meet the other
requirements of this zoning title.
C. If the area of such a nonconforming lot of record, which is not subject to the restrictions set forth in said subsection A of this section, is less than
forty thousand (40,000) square feet, the yards, setbacks and lot width of said lot may be not less than seventy five percent (75%) of the minimum
yards, setbacks and lot width otherwise required by this zoning title.
D. Any use of any nonconforming lot or parcel shall, in any event, meet the requirements of the health and sanitation title of this code and the
requirements of all other ordinances, rules and regulations.
E. Nothing herein shall prevent the conveyance of any parcel or any portion of any parcel to an adjoining owner, if after said conveyance, the portion
of said parcel not so conveyed (in the event of a conveyance of a portion of a parcel) meets width and area requirements of this zoning title.
F. For the purpose of this section, single ownership or unified control of separate lots of record includes ownership by a spouse or child or by land
trust of which there is a common beneficial owner, or a land trust as to which a child or spouse is a beneficial owner.
G. The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to the required minimum lot area for a school, as provided by section 5-3-1 of this title. (Ord.
06-823, 4-11-2006)
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 205/366
Chapter 9
VARIATIONS AND AMENDMENTS
5-9-1: VARIATIONS; APPEALS:
A. An application for a variation of the regulations of this zoning title or a petition for an appeal from a decision of the zoning enforcement officer
made pursuant to this title shall be made by the property owner and by other interested parties to the zoning board of appeals on a form
provided by the village, and shall be accompanied by such fees and/or deposit as required by the village. Such application or petition shall be
made in writing stating the grounds for such appeal or the nature of the variation requested and the cause for the variation, including those
exception conditions peculiar to the petitioner's property or its environment which, in his opinion, cause the strict application of the regulations of
this zoning title to result in practical difficulties and particular hardship.
B. The zoning board of appeals shall consider the case at a public hearing, not less than fifteen (15) days' notice of which shall have been given as
prescribed by statute, and shall determine whether or not the facts are such as to justify an appeal or to warrant a variation from this zoning title.
If the zoning board of appeals determines, by a concurring vote of not less than four (4) members, that practical difficulties and particular
hardships do in fact exist, and that the proposed variation or some modification of it will not:
1. Reduce or increase unreasonably the minimum or maximum areas or dimensions;
2. Impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property;
3. Increase the congestion in public streets unreasonably;
4. Increase the hazard of fire;
5. Create an adverse drainage condition on any adjacent property;
6. Endanger the public health or safety;
7. Diminish or impair the values of property within the surrounding area;
8. Or, in any other respect, impair the public health, safety, comfort, morals and welfare of the people;
it shall submit such findings and a recommendation that the board of trustees grant the variation; otherwise the zoning board of appeals may
recommend denial of the application. Any proposed variation or appeal which fails to receive the approval of the zoning board of appeals shall
not be passed except by the favorable vote of four (4) members of the board of trustees. The corporate authorities shall consider the
recommendation and shall make the final decision. No variation or appeal shall be granted except by ordinance.
C. No new application for a zoning variation or petition for an appeal by the same party and for the same property for the same variation or for one
substantially similar to any application or petition which has previously been denied by the board of trustees within the preceding twelve (12)
months shall be the subject of a hearing before the zoning board of appeals, unless the board of trustees first expressly finds that new facts exist
which were not previously existing at the time of the hearing on the earlier application or petition. (Ord. 2007-846, 3-13-2007)
5-9-2: APPEALS TO COURT:
After the filing of any decision or variation of the corporate authorities, any person or persons jointly or severally aggrieved by such decision or
variation, or any officer, department, board or bureau of the county may appeal to a court of record in the manner prescribed by statute. (1983
Code)
5-9-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any owner, the plan commission or the board of trustees may petition for amendment in the text of this zoning title and/or the zoning map which is
part hereof. No amendment shall be made by the board of trustees without a public hearing as provided by statute having first been held before the
plan commission. The plan commission shall hold such a public hearing and submit its recommendations to the board of trustees within sixty (60)
days.
The board of trustees may adopt or deny any proposed amendment without further public hearing. If the report of the plan commission does not
recommend the approval of the proposed amendment, the amendment shall not be passed except by a favorable vote of at least four (4) members
of the board of trustees. (1983 Code)
5-9-4: NOTICE TO PROPERTY OWNERS IN THE VICINITY:
The petitioner for any variation, for an appeal from a decision of the zoning enforcement officer, special use, special use for a planned development,
or zoning map or zoning text amendment shall file with the village administrator an affidavit identifying the owners of all property, whether under the
jurisdiction of a municipality or within an unincorporated area, within five hundred feet (500'), excluding rights of way of streets, in each direction
from all points on the perimeter of the property which is the subject of their petition, and said affidavit shall in any event include at least the five (5)
nearest property owners within the village; provided, however, that for the purpose of this section, ownership may be determined on the basis of the
last available tax records of the county. The village administrator shall send written notice by U.S. mail, at the petitioner's expense, not less than ten
(10) days prior to the initial date of the public hearing thereon, to those persons identified in said affidavit. The zoning board of appeals, the plan
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 206/366
commission and the corporate authorities may inquire into the adequacy of such affidavit. However, the zoning board of appeals, the plan
commission and the corporate authorities may rely on such affidavit which appears regular on its face and the failure to mail notice to each and
every owner of neighboring property as herein provided shall not invalidate any action taken by the village on any such petition or application. (Ord.
2007-846, 3-13-2007)
Chapter 10
ENFORCEMENT, PENALTIES
5-10-1: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
This Zoning Title shall be administered and enforced by the Village President who shall be the Zoning Enforcement Officer. Proper authorities of the
Village or any person affected may institute any appropriate action or proceeding against a violator as provided by statute. Any person or the
agents, employees or contractors of such who violate, disobey, omit, neglect or refuse to comply with, or who resist enforcement of any of the
provisions of this Zoning Title shall be subject to a fine of not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense, and a separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 96-564, 4-9-1996)
Title 6
OFFICIAL COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
Footnotes - Click any footnote link to go back to its reference.
Footnote 1: The Village Zoning Ordinance has been inserted in this Code for convenience only and is not part of this Code.
Chapter 1
OFFICIAL COMPREHENSIVE PLAN1
6-1-1: OFFICIAL COMPREHENSIVE PLAN ADOPTED:
The Official Comprehensive Plan for public improvements and for the guidance of the present and future development of the Village and its environs
which has been prepared and recommended to the Board of Trustees by the Village of Inverness Plan Commission with the aid of Camiros, Ltd. and
dated March 10, 1981 (a copy of which is on file with the Village Clerk) is hereby adopted and made the Official Comprehensive Plan of the Village
of Inverness, for public improvements and for the guidance of the present and future development of the Village of Inverness and its environ (Ord.
81-73-97.5, 3/20/81). Included in the Plan and hereby incorporated therein by reference are the following:
A. Subdivision Regulations, Chapters 2, 3 and 4 of Title 6 of this Code.
B. Flood and Stormwater Management Regulations, Title 7 of this Code.
C. Health and Sanitation Regulations, Title 9 of this Code.
D. The Official Map relative to property within the Village and contiguous unincorporated territory within one and one-half (11/2) miles of the Village,
which is designated as the current "Official Comprehensive Plan Map and Land Use Policy Plan", Village of Inverness, as contained in the
aforesaid Official Comprehensive Plan.
6-1-2: INTERPRETATION:
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this Official Comprehensive Plan, such provisions shall, in every instance, be held to be the minimum
reasonable requirements adopted for the promotion of public health, safety and welfare.
6-1-3: RECORDING OF PLATS:
After passage hereof, no map or plat of any subdivision presented for record affecting land within the corporate limits of the Village or in contiguous
territory within one and one-half (11/2) miles from such limits shall be entitled to be recorded or shall be valid unless the subdivision thereon shall
provide for lot sizes, streets and public grounds in conformity with the requirements applicable thereto in the Official Comprehensive Plan.
6-1-4: PENALTIES AND SEPARABILITY:
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 207/366
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Plan shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in an
amount not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00). A separate offense shall be deemed committed
upon each day such violation shall be permitted to continue, and shall be punishable as such hereunder. If any portion of this Plan is deemed or
found invalid, it shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof.
Chapter 2
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
6-2-1: TITLE:
This Title may be cited as the Subdivision Regulations of the Village of Inverness.
6-2-2: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
No plat of subdivision of land within the Village or within one and one-half (11/2) miles of the corporate limits thereof may be filed for record unless
the same shall comply with the provisions of this Title. This Title shall be part of the Official Comprehensive Plan of the Village.
6-2-3: VARIATIONS:
The President and Board of Trustees may vary the requirements of this Title where practical difficulties or particular hardships make it impractical to
comply with all of the terms hereof.
6-2-4: DEFINITIONS:
ACCEPTED PUBLIC STREET: Any street duly accepted by the Board of Trustees for maintenance by the Village.
ALLEY: A public right of way, not less than twenty feet (20') nor more than forty feet (40') wide, designed to provide access to the rear or side of
properties whose principal frontage is on some other street.
APPROVED STREET: Any street, whether public or private, meeting standards and specifications of the Village.
BUILDING LINE: A line within a lot or other parcel of land, so designated on the plat of the proposed subdivision.
COLLECTOR or SECONDARY STREETS: Those existing streets designated as such on the Official Comprehensive Plan of the Village, and those
streets proposed as collector streets in new subdivisions, as shown on the Official Comprehensive Plan, for the purpose of providing arteries for the
access of traffic from several minor streets to a major street.
COMMISSION: In this Title, the word "Commission" shall refer to the Plan Commission of the Village.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The Official Comprehensive Plan of the Village of Inverness prepared by the Plan Commission and adopted by the
Board of Trustees.
CROSSWALKWAYS: A strip of land dedicated to public use and located across a block to provide pedestrian access to adjacent areas.
CUL-DE-SAC: A street accessible from only one direction whose terminal end is broadened into a circular vehicle turn around.
EASEMENT: A grant by a property owner for the use of a strip of land by the general public, a corporation or a certain person or persons for a
specific purpose or purposes.
FINAL PLAT: The drawings and documents described in Chapter 3 of this Title.
FRONTAGE: The length of the front property line of the lot, lots or tract of land abutting a public street, road or highway.
GENERAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN: That part of the Official Comprehensive Plan of the Village which defines the existing or proposed primary and
secondary streets and roads in and around the Village.
GRADE: The slope of a road, street or other public way, given as a percent and shown on street profile plans as required herein.
IMPROVEMENT, PUBLIC: Any sanitary or storm sewer, drainage ditch, water main, roadway, parkway, sidewalk, pedestrian way, planting strip, offstreet
parking area or other facility for which the Village or some other public body will assume the responsibility for maintenance and operation.
LOT: A portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended for transfer of ownership or for building development.
MAJOR STREET: See Primary Street.
MINOR STREET: A street intended primarily as access to abutting properties.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 208/366
OWNER: Any person, group of persons, firm or firms, corporation or corporations, or any other legal entity having legal title to the land sought to be
subdivided under this Title.
PARKWAY: An unpaved strip of land situated within the street.
PEDESTRIAN WAY: A right of way across or within a block for use by pedestrian traffic, whether designated as a pedestrian way, crosswalk or
however otherwise designated.
PLAN COMMISSION: See Commission.
PLAT: A map or drawing on which the subdivider's plan of the subdivision is presented and which he submits for approval.
PRELIMINARY PLAN: The drawings and documents described in Chapter 3 of this Title first submitted of the proposed subdivision and subject to
changes and corrections.
PRIMARY STREET: Primary street or major street means a street of considerable continuity which serves or is intended to serve as a major traffic
artery between the various sections of the Inverness area, as shown on the General Development Plan as part of the Official Plan.
PUBLIC STREET: All primary, secondary and minor streets which are shown on the subdivision plat and which are to be dedicated for public use.
RIGHT OF WAY: A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a road, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission lines, oil or gas pipe line,
water main, sanitary or storm sewer main or for another special use. Right of way, on all future subdivisions, shall be exclusive of the lots adjoining
lots or parcels, and the dimensions of the right of way shall not be included in the adjoining lots or parcels. Rights of way intended for roads or any
other public use which will ultimately require maintenance by the Village or some other public body shall be dedicated to public use by the maker of
the plat which establishes the right of way.
ROADWAY: That portion of the street which is paved for vehicular traffic.
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM, INDIVIDUAL: A septic tank seepage tile sewage disposal system, or any other sewage treatment device approved
by the Village Engineer serving only one lot or building site.
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM, CENTRAL: A system of sanitary sewers that discharges either into an interceptor sewer or an approved sewage
treatment plant.
STREET: In this Title, the word "street" refers to the entire width of the street right of way or easement, and shall not be considered as the width of
the pavement only. See Right of Way.
STREET PLAN: See General Development Plan.
SUBDIVIDER: Any person who undertakes the subdivision of land as defined herein.
SUBDIVISION: A described tract of land which is to be, or has been, divided into two (2) or more lots or parcels. The term "subdivision" includes
resubdivision, and where it is appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land subdivided.
A. For the purposes of these regulations, a subdivision of land is, or includes:
1. The division or subdivision of land into parcels or tracts of less than five (5) acres in size or which involves any new streets or easements
of access;
2. The division of lots or blocks of less than one acre in any recorded subdivision which involves any new streets or easements of access;
3. The conveyance of parcels of land or interests therein for use as a right of way for railroads or other public utility facilities and other pipe
lines which involves any new streets or easements of access;
4. The conveyance of land owned by a railroad or other public utility which involves any new streets or easements of access;
5. The sale or exchange of parcels or tracts of land following the division into no more than two (2) parts of a particular parcel or tract of land
existing on July 17, 1959 and involving any new streets or easements of access;
6. The division of land, for single-family residential purposes, into one or more additional tracts, sites, or parcels of five (5) acres or more in
area. In the event the owner of forty (40) or more acres of land within the jurisdiction of this Title proposes to create one additional building
site of less than five (5) acres, he may do so without coming under the definition of "subdivision", as defined in this Title, provided that he
shall obtain approval by the Plan Commission of a plan for the building sites or parcels contiguous to the one being developed, showing lot
layout, circulinear road layout, and easements; provided, however, that not more than one additional building site shall be created in any
twenty four (24) month period under the foregoing exception to the definition of subdivision;
7. The division of land for single-family residential purposes into tracts of five (5) acres or more where the proposed lot frontage is less than
three hundred feet (300');
8. The dedication of a public road, highway, or street or the establishment of any new easement of access whether public or private, through
a tract of land regardless of area;
9. Any sale or division of land for which a plat is required by Statute;
10. Any resubdivision of land heretofore subdivided or platted.
B. For the purpose of these regulations, a subdivision of land is or includes any condominium development, any planned development and any
other residential, commercial or industrial development of two (2) or more principal buildings on one or more lots, tracts or parcels of land
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 209/366
which affects, involves or relates to facilities (present or proposed) protecting the public health, safety and welfare or which affects, involves or
relates to the need for such facilities in the future. For the purpose of this subparagraph:
1. "Facilities" include but are not limited to public streets, alleys, and ways for public utilities, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, street lights, parks,
playgrounds, school grounds or other public grounds, storm water drainage, water supply and distribution, sanitary sewers, or sewage
collection and treatment.
2. "Principal buildings" means buildings in which the primary activity of property is conducted and excludes permitted buildings which are
ancillary to residential uses, such as garages, greenhouses, and gazebos.
C. For the purposes of these regulations, the term "subdivision" shall not include:
1. The sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining and contiguous land;
2. The conveyance of parcels of land or interests therein for use as a right of way for railroads or other public utility facilities and other pipe
lines which does not involve any new streets or easements of access;
3. The conveyance of land owned by a railroad or other public utility which does not involve any new streets or easements of access;
4. The conveyance of land for highway or other public purposes or grants of conveyances relating to the dedication of land for public use or
instruments relating to the vacation of land impressed with a public use;
5. Conveyances made to correct descriptions in prior conveyances.
THROUGH LOT: Any lot having frontage on two (2) approximately parallel streets. (1983 Code)
Chapter 3
REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS AND DESIGN STANDARDS
6-3-1: BLOCK DESIGN:
The length of a residential block may vary within reasonable limitations based upon traffic design, drainage, topography, soil conditions, and related
factors. (1983 Code)
6-3-2: LOT DESIGN AND STANDARDS:
A. Compliance With Zoning Title: Lots proposed for residential use shall be designed and platted in accordance with all requirements of the Zoning
Title of this Village except to the extent that the standards of this Chapter are more restrictive.
B. Standards to be Observed:
1. All side lines shall be at right angles to the straight street lines, or radial to curved street lines.
2. The minimum area and width of residential lots at the building line shall be as follows:
a. All lots for which a preliminary plat has not been approved prior to December 13, 1994 shall contain an area of not less than forty three
thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet and shall have a minimum width of one hundred forty feet (140').
b. All lots containing an area of two (2) acres or more, but less than three (3) acres shall have a minimum width of two hundred feet (200').
c. All lots containing an area of three (3) acres or more, but less than five (5) acres shall have a minimum width of two hundred fifty feet (250').
d. All lots containing an area of five (5) acres or more shall have a minimum width of three hundred feet (300').
3. Where said lots front upon a cul-de-sac, or curved road or street having a radius of two hundred feet (200') or less, the minimum width as
given in subsection B2 above may be measured at the building line. The width at the street right of way shall not be less than one-third (1/3) of
the required minimum width as given in subsection B2 above.
4. In every case there shall be a building site on each and every lot complying with all applicable provisions of this Code and the Village Zoning
Title.
5. All lots shall have a width and depth entirely adequate to provide such yards and setbacks as required by the Zoning Title.
6. Every lot shall abut on or have adequate access to a street or road which has been dedicated to public use or which has acquired that status
through long usage as a public thoroughfare. In exceptional circumstances the Plan Commission may approve not more than two (2) lots on a
private right of way, provided proper showing is made that such access is adequate and not detrimental to future planning of adjacent land.
This applies only to single-family residential lots.
7. Through lots shall not be permitted. This does not apply in the case of lots which back to a primary street.
C. Building Lines: Building lines in compliance with the Zoning Title shall be shown on all plats of subdivision within the jurisdiction of this Village.
(Ord. 94-537, 12-13-94)
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 210/366
6-3-3: STREETS:
A. Conformance to General Development Plan: The subdivision of land, including the arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of
all streets, alleys or other land to be dedicated for public use shall conform to the General Development Plan of the Village as approved and
adopted by the Village Board. Consideration shall be given to their relation to existing and planned streets, to topographic and soil conditions, to
public safety and convenience, to their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of land to be served by such streets and to the provisions of
Section 6-3-1 above.
B. Minimum Right of Way and Pavement Widths:
1. The minimum widths of rights of way, and respective pavement widths, for streets to be dedicated or established after the effective date
hereof, within the Village or its environs under the jurisdiction of this Title, shall conform to the following schedule:
Classification Width of Right of Way
Minimum Pavement
Width (Edge to Edge)
Primary streets
or major streets
80' or 100', located in accordance with General Development Plan 24'
Collector or
secondary streets
66' to 80', located in accordance with General Development Plan 20'
Minor streets 66' 20'
Cul-de-sac termini 50' radius 20'
Crosswalkways 10'
Drainage easements As approved by the Village Engineer
Utility easements 10' minimum
Village easements As approved by the Village Engineer
C. Design Standards:
1. Minor streets shall be so laid out that their use by through traffic will be discouraged.
2. Clear visibility, measured along the center line of the street shall be provided for at least three hundred feet (300') on all primary streets; two
hundred feet (200') on all secondary streets; and at least one hundred feet (100') on all other streets.
3. All street intersections and confluences must give clear evidence of being conducive to safe traffic flow.
4. Alleys:
a. Alleys must be provided in commercial and industrial districts unless provisions are made for service access such as off-street loading,
unloading and parking consistent with and adequate for the uses proposed.
b. Alleys shall be prohibited in residential areas.
c. The width of an alley shall not be less than twenty feet (20') nor more than forty feet (40').
5. Each cul-de-sac shall have a terminus of nearly circular shape with a minimum diameter of one hundred feet (100'); the pavement shall have
a minimum diameter of fifty feet (50'). There shall be no center islands.
6. Half streets shall be prohibited. No strip or area shall be reserved along any portion of a street, half street or alley which will prevent adjacent
property owners access thereto.
7. No street names may be used which will duplicate or be confused with the names of existing streets, provided that existing street names shall
be used on all continuations of existing streets.
8. If the tract of land proposed to be subdivided or any part thereof lies adjacent to a highway over which the Illinois Department of
Transportation or Cook County has jurisdiction with respect to maintenance and upkeep thereof, and an entrance or entrances are desired
from such highway to lots, streets, roadways or alleys in such proposed subdivision, the subdivider shall submit to the Village Engineer a
written permit from the appropriate authority granting him permission to obtain and construct such an entrance or entrances.
9. Landmarks, large trees or natural or man-made structures of unusual or unique beauty or historical interest shall be preserved.
10. Wherever possible, driveways, private streets or minor streets shall not enter directly onto primary streets. (1983 Code)
D. Street Standards and Specifications:
1. Standard Street Cross Section: A standard street cross section shall consist of the pavement width herein specified with a minimum six foot
(6') shoulder on each side, consisting of permanent seeding or sodding in accordance with the Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction of the State of Illinois (SSRBC), Current Edition, or such shoulders shall otherwise be improved in a manner specifically
approved, in writing, by the Village Board. All seed shall be properly fertilized and maintained until acceptance of the subject streets by the
corporate authorities.
Ditches shall normally have a four foot horizontal to a one foot vertical (4:1) cross slope and shall have a minimum width of four feet (4').
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 211/366
Maximum depth of ditches below center line of road grade shall be twenty four inches (24") unless otherwise specified by the Village Engineer.
The pavement crown at the center line shall be three inches (3") above the edge of the pavement.
Back slopes, where necessary to meet existing grades, shall be a three foot horizontal to one foot vertical (3:1) slope and shall be extended to
meet existing ground lines.
Street cross sections shall be standard in all locations with the exceptions of the actual pavement width and ditch sections as hereinbefore
specified. Cross-sectional areas of ditches may vary to accommodate design storm flows and topographical conditions along the back slopes.
(Ord. 93-483, 6-8-93)
2. Excavation: Excavated materials shall be placed in locations not offensive to the subdivision and shall not be placed in the vicinity of a
proposed building site. All subgrade material and construction methods shall be in accordance with SSRBC, Current Edition.
3. Pavement:
a. Base Course: The base course requirements for all minor streets shall consist of a minimum of ten inches (10") compacted thickness for
crushed stone (CA-6), or other equivalent designs approved by the Village Engineer; pozzolanic and cement stabilized base courses shall
not be allowed. The above designs are based on a minimum IBR value of 3.0. If the lowest IBR value is lower than 3.0, the subgrade shall
be removed and replaced with suitable material in a manner which will provide a stabilized subgrade whose compacted density is ninety five
percent (95%) modified proctor. Major and collector streets shall be designed using the Manual of Instructions for Structural Design of
Flexible Pavement prepared by the Department of Transportation, Division of Highways, State of Illinois, dated January, 1976. Whenever a
roadway is intended to serve a future unit of subdivision, a special pavement design may be required by the Village Engineer.
No base course work shall be constructed until after the subgrade has been inspected and approved by the Village Engineer. No binder and
surface course work shall be started until the base course work has been so inspected and approved. The Village Engineer may require
proof-rolling, compaction testing or other evidence to demonstrate acceptable construction.
b. Binder and Surface Courses: The binder course shall consist of a bituminous plant mix material (Class I) with a minimum compacted
thickness of one and one-half (11/2"). The surface course shall consist of a bituminous plant mix material (Class I) with a minimum
compacted thickness of one inch (1").
4. Street Plans: Engineering plans and specifications for all street improvements being proposed within the Village of Inverness shall be
prepared by a Registered Professional Engineer and shall conform to the following regulations:
a. No centerline street grade shall be less than five-tenths percent (0.5%) nor more than eight percent (8.0%).
b. The minimum ditch slope shall be one percent (1.0%). Ditch flow velocities shall not exceed four feet (4') per second. Ditch checks or other
approved dissipators shall be used to maintain acceptable velocities.
c. No sharp curves or right angles shall be permitted for the length of any street.
d. All corner radii of pavement shall have minimum radius of twenty five feet (25').
e. No street intersections shall be made at less than seventy degrees (70°) and shall be made at ninety degrees (90°) unless existing
conditions warrant a change not in excess of the seventy degrees (70°) aforementioned.
f. All plans shall indicate elevations based on United States Geological Survey sea level datum and with sufficient information on existing
improvements or conditions. All drainage ditches, storm sewers and driveway culverts shall be designed on the basis of a storm event
whose return frequency is twenty five (25) years, for all durations up to twenty four (24) hours.
g. All engineering plans and specifications shall be submitted to the Village Engineer and the Board of Trustees of the Village for approval
before any construction can be instituted.
h. After engineering plans and specifications have been approved by the Village Engineer and the Village Board, no revisions shall be allowed
without express permission of the Village Board upon the advice of the Village Engineer.
i. All materials used on street projects shall be of the style, type and size previously mentioned and the materials shall be subject to inspection
by the Village and its authorized representatives. The site must remain open for investigation by all authorized Village officials.
5. Acceptance: Before return or release of any security posted with the Village, the subdivider shall obtain a statement from the Village Engineer
stating that all construction has been substantially completed in accordance with plans and specifications submitted and have been completed
in accordance with the applicable standards and shall obtain final approval of the Board of Trustees.
The acceptance of completed streets by the Village in no way relieves the subdivider of responsibility for negligent or careless acts. The
acceptance of the streets, however, does constitute an official recognition by the Village of its responsibility for the maintenance of the streets
from the date of acceptance. All streets shall then become the property of the Village and no further work shall be done by the subdivider
unless specific authorization is given by the appropriate Village authority.
6. Indemnification of the Village: During the construction of the improvements and until the Village Board has accepted said improvements by
ordinance or resolution, the Village shall not be responsible for any liability incurred and the owner and contractor shall agree to hold harmless
and indemnify the Village from all liability arising out of or resulting from the construction of such improvements.
6-3-4: STORM DRAINAGE:
The road construction program in every new subdivision shall include such grading and such drainage systems as required for the proper drainage
of surface water through the entire subdivision in accordance with Title 7 of this Code. When open ditches are permitted for surface water drainage,
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 212/366
they shall not be more than four feet (4') below the established grade.
When lots are less than forty thousand (40,000) square feet in area, storm sewers shall be required which discharge into natural and/or artificial
drainage channels.
6-3-5: UTILITIES:
All electric service lines, both primary (carrying line voltage) and secondary (carrying house voltage), and telephone lines shall be placed
underground in compliance with applicable orders, rules and regulations of the Illinois Commerce Commission now or hereafter effective. The owner
or subdivider of any property to be served from such underground installations shall be responsible for compliance with the rules and regulations
now and hereafter effective and filed with said Commission pursuant to the Illinois Public Utilities Act, of any public utility whose services will be
required with respect to the provision of such underground facilities. Transformer boxes shall be located so as not to be unsightly or hazardous to
the public. Cable TV lines and appurtenances shall be placed underground. No gas service facilities shall be placed above ground without written
consent of the corporate authorities. All such lines shall be placed in easements or dedicated public ways in a manner that will not conflict with any
other underground services or Village facilities.
6-3-6: EASEMENTS:
Easements shall be provided for sanitary utilities, electric, gas, telephone, and cable television, and surface drainage including all streams and
drainage courses.
6-3-7: MONUMENTS:
Permanent reference monuments shall be placed in such locations as are designated by the plat of subdivision. Such permanent reference
monuments shall be stone or reinforced concrete at least thirty six inches (36") in length and six inches (6") square with suitable center point and
shall be set flush with the ground and planted in such a manner that they will not be moved by frost.
A. Horizonal Control: Metal monuments one-half inch in diameter and twenty four inches in length (1/2" x 24") of galvanized or wrought iron shall be
placed in the ground at all lot corners, intersections of streets, intersections of streets and alleys with plat boundary lines. All monuments shall be
properly set in the ground before the streets and alleys are accepted for public maintenance. (1983 Code)
B. Vertical Control: All permanent reference monuments described herein shall serve as bench marks. The respective centerpoint elevations (USGS
Datum), as tied into the Village bench mark circuit, shall be shown on the record drawings of the subdivision improvements and shall be filed
with the Village Administrator. (Ord. 92-468, 12-8-92)
6-3-8: STREET NAME SIGNS:
Street name signs of a type approved by the Village Board shall be provided at all street intersections.
6-3-9: STREET TREES AND LANDSCAPING:
Street trees, where trees do not exist, shall be planted in the parkways no less than forty feet (40') apart nor more than sixty feet (60') apart
throughout the entire subdivision. Such trees shall be a minimum of two inches (2") in diameter measured twelve inches (12") above the ground and
shall be oak, honey locust, hard maples, or other species of shade trees as are acceptable to the Village Board.
6-3-10: CURBS, GUTTERS, SIDEWALKS AND STREET LIGHTS:
Curbs, gutters, sidewalks and street lights shall be installed throughout the subdivision where the lot size is less than forty thousand (40,000) square
feet.
6-3-11: WATER SUPPLY:
A central water supply system shall be required when the lot size shall be less than forty thousand (40,000) square feet. All details of the system
shall be subject to review by the Plan Commission and the Village Board.
6-3-12: SEWAGE DISPOSAL:
No individual sewage disposal system shall be permitted on lots of less than forty thousand (40,000) square feet where the property is served by an
individual water system. In the event that soils or topographic conditions on single-family residential lots of forty thousand (40,000) square feet in
area will not permit the use of individual sewage disposal systems; larger lot sizes as required shall be utilized.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 213/366
On all premises where sanitary sewer mains are not available, individual sewage disposal systems shall be installed in accordance with the
following specifications:
A. Private Sewage Disposal Licensing Act and Code published by the State of Illinois Department of Public Health, as amended from time to time,
and
B. Regulations regarding water supply and sewage disposal, enacted by Cook County Department of Health, as amended from time to time; and
C. Chapter 4, Title 9 of this Code, Health and Sanitation Regulations.
6-3-13: PUBLIC OPEN SPACES AND SITES:
A. Whenever a tract to be subdivided includes a proposed site for a park, playground, school or other public use, such space shall be suitably
incorporated by the developer into his subdivision plan after proper determination by the Board of Trustees and the appropriate public agency as
to its desirability.
B. Acquisition of Land for Public Use: The Board of Trustees shall consider all tentative subdivision plans and adopted or proposed studies related
thereto, to determine the need for acquisition for public use any of the land included in the said tentative subdivision plan for: highway or street
rights of way; public school and public sites; parks, playgrounds or other recreation areas; or other public purposes, as provided by law.
6-3-14: REFUSAL OF AREAS NOT SUITABLE FOR PUBLIC USE:
Whenever a tentative plan includes a proposed dedication of land to public use and the Board of Trustees finds that such land is not required or not
suitable for public use, the Board of Trustees may refuse to approve such proposed dedication, and may require the rearrangement of lots in the
proposed subdivision to include such land.
Chapter 4
PROCEDURE AND REQUIREMENTS
6-4-1: PROCEDURE FOR FILING PRELIMINARY PLATS:
A. Filing:
1. Any owner of land which is within the corporate limits of the Village or within one and one-half (11/2) miles of such corporate limits on
unincorporated land, wishing to subdivide the same or wishing to dedicate streets, alleys or other lands for public use, shall first submit to the
Village four (4) copies of the preliminary plat and all other information as required.
2. The application shall specify the intent of the subdivider with respect to land use, drainage, sewage disposal, water supply and street
improvement proposed by the subdivider, those deed restrictions which exist or are to be placed on the property to be subdivided and the
expected date of the development.
3. The Village Board shall, by motion, refer to the preliminary plat to the Plan Commission and shall, at the same time, instruct the Village
Engineer to review the subdivider's preliminary plats for the design and construction of streets and such other public improvements as are
required by this Title and other applicable provisions of this Inverness Code. The Plan Commission shall, within thirty (30) days after decision,
submit its written recommendations for approval or disapproval to the Village Board.
4. The preliminary plats shall be referred to the Plan Commission at least ten (10) days prior to the regular meeting of the Commission to receive
action thereon at that meeting.
5. At the time of filing an application for approval of the Plan, the application shall be accompanied by a certified check or money order in the
amount as determined by the Village Board of Trustees payable to the Village for deposit into the appropriate Village account. Said amount is
to cover the cost of reviewing the proposed plan and other administrative costs incident thereto.
B. The preliminary plat shall contain the following:
1. Proposed name of the subdivision.
2. Location by legal description.
3. Names and addresses of developer and the preparer of the plat.
4. Scale of the plat one inch to one hundred feet (1" = 100') or larger.
5. Date.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 214/366
6. North point.
7. Boundary line of proposed subdivision indicated by solid heavy line and the total approximate acreage encompassed thereby.
8. Location, widths and names of all existing or prior platted streets or other public ways, railroad and utility rights of way, parks and other public
open spaces, existing buildings and structures, and of permanent easements and section and corporate limits within or adjacent to the tract.
9. Existing sewers, water mains, storm water drainage tiles or systems, wells, springs, culverts, septic systems (including seepage fields) or
other underground facilities within the tract or adjacent to the tract, indicating pipe sizes, grades, manholes and exact locations, and storm and
sanitary sewer outfalls.
10. Boundary lines of adjacent tracts of unsubdivided or subdivided land, showing ownership where possible.
11. Existing zoning of proposed subdivision and adjacent tracts.
12. Contours at two foot (2') intervals corresponding to USGS datum. One foot (1') intervals will be required in flat areas as determined by the
village engineer.
13. Layout of streets, widths of rights of way and also the widths of easements.
14. Layout, number, dimension and areas of lots.
15. Parcels of land intended to be dedicated temporarily or permanently for public use or set aside for use of property owners in the subdivision.
16. Building setback lines, showing dimensions.
17. Easements shall be provided for any and all public utilities and duly franchised cable television companies. Proper continuity for the utilities
from block to block shall be maintained.
18. Location, size and approximate grades of any proposed sanitary or storm sewers.
19. Proposed street grades.
20. Proposed location of water, gas, electric and telephone facilities.
21. Such other information as required by title 7 of this code.
22. Preliminary plans for a comprehensive drainage plan in preliminary form as required by title 7 of this code.
C. Qualifications: The following qualifications shall govern approval of the preliminary plat:
1. The approval of a preliminary plat by the plan commission and the village board shall be tentative only, indicating merely the general
acceptability of the layout as submitted.
2. The plan commission may recommend or the village board may require such changes or revisions as are necessary in the best interests of
the village and its residents.
3. Subsequent review and approval by the village engineer, the village board and the appropriate county officials, where necessary, shall be
required of the detailed engineering plans and specifications pertaining to water supply, flood storm water management, sewage and sewage
disposal, gas, electric, and cable television service, street lighting, fire hydrants, grading, gradients and roadway widths and the construction of
streets prior to the approval of any final plat by the village.
4. The approval of a preliminary plat by the plan commission is strictly tentative, involving merely the general acceptability of the layout
submitted. This approval shall be effective for a maximum period of twelve (12) months, unless upon application of the developer, the village
board grants an extension. If the final plat has not been recorded within this time limit, the preliminary plan must again be submitted for
approval. (1983 Code)
6-4-2: APPROVAL OF FINAL PLAT:
A. Filing:
1. After approval of the preliminary plat by the village board and the fulfillment of the requirements of these regulations and other applicable
requirements of this code, the original of the proposed final plat of subdivision and twenty five (25) copies thereof shall be submitted for
approval.
2. Action must be taken by the village board within sixty (60) days after the final plat has been submitted for approval.
3. Upon approval of the village board, the subdivider shall record the final plat with the county recorder within six (6) months. If not recorded
within six (6) months, the approval shall be null and void.
4. A copy of the approved preliminary plan signed by the village president and the village clerk shall be retained in the village administrator's
office. One copy of the final plat, signed by the village president and village clerk, shall be delivered to the subdivider to proceed with the
preparation of the final plat and plans and specifications for the improvements required in this title.
B. Contents: The final plat and accompanying documents shall contain the following:
1. Name of subdivision.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 215/366
2. Location by township, section, and range, or by other legal description.
3. Names of owners and certification by a licensed surveyor.
4. Scale of one inch to one hundred feet (1" = 100') (shown graphically).
5. Date.
6. North point.
7. Boundary of plat, based on an accurate traverse with angles and lineal dimensions.
8. Exact location, width and name of all streets within and adjoining the plat and the exact location and widths of any walkways. Streets that are
obviously in alignment with others already existing and named shall bear the names of the existing streets. All street names shall have the
final approval of the village board.
9. Before any final plat of subdivision shall be approved and recorded, the subdivider shall furnish profiles of all streets and alleys in the
proposed subdivision drawn to a horizontal scale of fifty feet to one inch (50' = 1") and vertical scale of five feet to one inch (5' = 1").
10. True angles and distances to the nearest established street lines or official monuments (which shall be accurately described in the plat), but
in no event shall less than three (3) such monuments be shown.
11. Municipal township, county and section lines accurately tied to the lines of the subdivision by distances and angles.
12. Radii, internal angles, points and curvatures, tangent bearings and lengths of all arcs.
13. All easements provided for drainage, access, utilities and cable television service.
14. All lot numbers and lines with accurate dimensions in feet and hundredths.
15. All lot corners and corners of the subdivision shall be marked by a galvanized or wrought iron pipe at least twenty four inches long and onehalf
inch in diameter (24" x 1/2"). Pipes are to be driven into the ground so that the tops are flush with the finished grade.
16. Accurate outlines and legal descriptions of any areas to be dedicated or reserved for public use, with the purposes indicated thereon, and of
any area to be reserved by deed restriction for the common use of all property owners.
17. Building setback lines accurately shown with dimensions.
18. Protective covenants and restrictions which meet with the approval of the village president and board of trustees shall be lettered on the final
plat or incorporated therein by reference.
19. Certification by a registered land surveyor to the effect that the plat represents a survey made by him and that monuments and markers
shown thereon exist as located and that all dimensional and geodetic details are correct.
20. Notarized certification by owner or owners, and by mortgage holders, if any, of the adoption of the plat and the dedication of streets and other
public areas.
21. Certifications showing that all taxes and special assessments due on the property to be subdivided have been paid in full.
22. Form for the approval of the village president and attestation by the village clerk with space for signatures.
23. Approval by signatures of such other appropriate village, county, and state officials as required by law.
24. Approval by signature of the plan commission chairman and secretary, provided, however, that such approval of the final plat shall not be
deemed to constitute or effect an acceptance by the public of the dedication of any street or other proposed public way or space shown on the
plat.
25. Bench marks of elevations as required by the village engineer.
26. Flood protection elevations as required by title 7 of this code. (Ord. 2003-766, 11-11-2003)
6-4-3: DOCUMENTATION:
The final plat to be filed of record shall be accompanied by the following:
A. Final plans and specifications for such improvements required by this title and other applicable provisions of this code and other ordinances of
the village.
B. Agreement executed by the owner and the subdivider wherein they agree to make and install the improvements required by this title and other
applicable provisions of this code and other ordinances of the village in accordance with the plans and specifications accompanying the final
plat.
C. A letter of credit in the amount approved by the village engineer of the costs of such improvements conditioned upon the installation of the
required improvements within two (2) years of the approval of the final plat. The amount of such letter of credit shall be one hundred twenty five
percent (125%) of the approved estimate of costs. (1983 Code)
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 216/366
6-4-4: INSPECTION AT SUBDIVIDER'S EXPENSE:
All public improvements proposed to be made under the provisions of this title shall be inspected during the course of construction by the village
engineer. All fees and costs connected with such inspection and in reviewing the plans and specifications for such improvements shall be paid for by
the subdivider. (1983 Code)
6-4-5: VACATION:
A. Vacation Of Plats Of Subdivision: In cases where an application is made to the board of trustees to vacate any subdivision, or part thereof, prior
to the sale of any lot in the subdivision, the board may, by ordinance order the vacation of all or part of the said subdivision. When lots have been
sold, the plat may be vacated, provided that all of the owners of lots in said plat join in the execution of said application.
B. Vacation Of Streets, Alleys, Or Public Places: In all cases where application for vacation of any subdivision, street, alley or part thereof, is made
to the board of trustees, such application shall be referred to the plan commission for a public hearing. The plan commission is authorized and
directed to make the following determinations concerning the requested vacation:
1. Is the title in the applicant's name as set forth in the application?
2. Does the vacation conform to the general development plan approved by the board?
3. What amount of benefit shall accrue to the applicant as a result of the proposed vacation?
4. Is the vacation in the public interest? (1983 Code)
C. Plat Of Vacated Areas; Lots; Approve:
1. If the vacation is recommended by the plan commission, the applicant shall provide a plat of the area to be vacated as prepared by a licensed
surveyor. The applicant shall also pay to the village collector, by certified check, an amount equal to the amount of benefit accruing to the
applicant as a result of the vacation as determined by the plan commission under subsection B3 of this section. The board of trustees may
then approve the vacation by ordinance, passage requiring a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the board of trustees. The ordinance shall recite the
following:
a. A specific description of the street, alley, public place, or part thereof, vacated.
b. Passage is subject to the payment of the compensation fixed therein.
c. Passage is subject to the filing of a certified copy of the ordinance, along with the plat thereof, in which the vacated portion is clearly shown
and marked "hereby vacated" with the county recorder of deeds within sixty (60) days of the date thereof.
d. That the board of trustees has determined that the public interest will be served by the vacation.
2. When the ordinance and plat are presented to the recorder of deeds, there shall be, in addition, the receipt of the village collector showing
payment of the compensation fixed therein. Receipt shall likewise be filed for record. (Ord. 92-468, 12-8-1992)
6-4-6: OCCUPANCY PERMIT:
No occupancy permit shall be granted by the village for the use of any structure within any subdivision until all required utility facilities have been
installed in order to service the property. (1983 Code)
6-4-7: OFFICIAL PLAN:
The village of Inverness official comprehensive plan as described in chapter 1 of this title is hereby made part of these regulations and no plat of
subdivision within the village or within any unincorporated area within one and one-half (11/2) miles of the corporate limits of the village shall be filed
for record or have any validity unless said plat of subdivision complies with said plan. (1983 Code)
6-4-8: EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL:
The provisions of title 4, chapter 8 of this code, relative to erosion and sedimentation control, shall apply to all subdivisions as well as to actions not
constituting subdivision of property. (1983 Code)
6-4-9: RESUBDIVISION PROHIBITED:
Notwithstanding anything contained in this code to the contrary, after the initial subdivision of any lot, by the recording or registration of the
respective final plat of subdivision or of the respective plat of survey for any such lot with the recorder of deeds or registrar of titles for Cook County,
Illinois, no such lot shall, after May 19, 1990, be further divided or subdivided and no part of any such lot less than the whole thereof shall, after the
aforesaid date, be separated or conveyed separately or used except as appurtenant to and part of the remainder of said lot, provided, however, the
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 217/366
foregoing prohibitions related to the further division, subdivision, or conveyance of part of a lot less than the whole shall not apply to a plat of
consolidation which meets the following requirements:
A. Such plat of consolidation either reduces the number of existing lots of record, or reduces the number of zoning lots, or such plat adjusts a
common lot line between previously recorded lots or previously existing portion(s) of lots and such lots or portions of lots are all held in common
ownership; and
B. Each such lot created by or resulting from such plat of consolidation is not less than forty three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet
in area, each such lot has an average lot width of not less than one hundred forty feet (140'), and each such lot shall, in addition, comply with the
standards set forth in subsection 6-3-2B of this title.
C. Neither the number of lots of record nor the number of zoning lots shall be increased as a result of such plat of consolidation; and
D. Such plat of consolidation shall be approved by the board of trustees and then executed by the village president and village clerk in order to
indicate such approval by the board of trustees, and after such approval, the approved plat of consolidation shall then be recorded with the office
of the Cook County recorder of deeds. No review or approval of such plat of consolidation by the plan commission shall be required unless
specifically directed by the board of trustees. The notice required by section 6-4-10 of this chapter shall not be applicable to a plat of
consolidation as described in this section. (Ord. 2003-750, 6-10-2003)
6-4-10: NOTICE TO PROPERTY OWNERS IN THE VICINITY:
The petitioner for approval of a preliminary plat or final plat of subdivision shall file with the village administrator an affidavit identifying the owners of
all property, whether under the jurisdiction of a municipality or within an unincorporated area, within five hundred feet (500'), excluding rights of way
of streets, in each direction from all points on the perimeter of the property which is the subject of their petition, and said affidavit shall in any event
include at least the five (5) nearest property owners within the village; provided, however, that for the purpose of this section, ownership may be
determined on the basis of the last available tax records of the county. The village administrator shall send written notice by U.S. mail, at the
petitioner's expense, not less than ten (10) days prior to the initial date of the public meeting of the plan commission thereon, to those persons
identified in said affidavit. The plan commission and the corporate authorities may inquire into the adequacy of such affidavit. However, the plan
commission and the corporate authorities may rely on such affidavit which appears regular on its face, and the failure to provide notice to each and
every owner of neighboring property as herein provided shall not invalidate any action taken by the plan commission or by the corporate authorities
of the village on any such petition. (Ord. 2003-750, 6-10-2003)
Title 7
FLOOD AND STORMWATER MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS
Footnotes - Click any footnote link to go back to its reference.
Footnote 1: The Village Zoning Ordinance has been inserted in this Code for convenience only and is not part of this Code.
Chapter 1
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS AND FLOOD PRONE AREAS
7-1-100: INDEX:
7-1-100: Index
7-1-200: Purpose
7-1-300: Definitions
7-1-400: How to Use this Chapter
7-1-500: Duties of Enforcement Officer
7-1-600: Base Flood Elevation
7-1-700: Occupation and Use of Flood Fringe and Flood Prone Areas
7-1-800: Occupation and Use of Identified Floodways
7-1-900: Occupation and Use of Special Flood Hazard or Flood Prone Areas Where Floodways are Not Identified
7-1-1000: Permitting Requirements Applicable to All Flood Plain Areas
7-1-1100: Other Development Requirements
7-1-1200: Variances
7-1-1300: Disclaimer of Liability
7-1-1400: Penalty
7-1-1500: Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
7-1-1600: Separability
7-1-1700: Effective Date
7-1-200: PURPOSE:
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 218/366
This Chapter is enacted pursuant to the police power granted to this Village by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2-1, 5/11-12-12, 5/11-30-8 and 5/11-
31-2.
A. Purpose: The purpose of this Title is:
1. To diminish threats to public health and safety resulting from floodwaters and from excess stormwater runoff;
2. Reduce economic losses to individuals and the community at large;
3. Protect, conserve and promote the orderly development of land suited for this purpose;
4. To conserve open space, wetland and water resources;
5. Prevent victimizations and fraud;
6. To meet the requirements of 615 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/18g, "An Act in relation to the regulation of the rivers, lakes and streams of the
State of Illinois, approved June 10, 1911", as amended;
7. To maintain this Village's eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program;
8. To assure that new development does not increase the flood or drainage hazards to others, or create unstable conditions susceptible to
erosion;
9. To protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from flood damage;
10. To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control projects, repairs to flood damaged public facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and
relief operations;
11. To make federally subsidized flood insurance available for property in the Village by fulfilling the requirements of the National Flood Insurance
Program;
12. To comply with the rules and regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program codified as 44 CFR 59-79, as amended;
13. To preserve the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of watercourses and flood plains and to protect water quality and aquatic habitats;
and
14. To preserve the natural characteristics of stream corridors in order to moderate flood and stormwater impacts, improve water quality, reduce
soil erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat, provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance community and
economic development.
B. Regulation by Title: The provisions of this Title further regulate, guide and control:
1. The use, subdivision, layout and improvement of lands located in flood prone areas.
2. The excavating, filling and grading of lots and other land parcels or areas located in flood prone areas and the storing of certain materials
thereon.
3. The location, construction and elevation of buildings and other structures or parts and appurtenances thereof, and of individual disposal
systems, sanitary and storm sewers and appurtenances located in flood prone areas.
4. The drainage of building sites, lots, roadways and open space areas within the flood prone areas adjacent to subdivisions and planned
developments1.
5. The design, construction and maintenance of stormwater drainage facilities and systems.
C. Other Regulations: Before commencing any of the work regulated by this title an applicant shall comply with the requirements set forth in other
applicable provisions of this code and other ordinances of this village with respect to the submission and approval of preliminary and final
subdivision plats, improvement plans, site development permits, building permits, inspections, appeals and similar matters, along with those set
forth in this title and as may be required by federal or state laws and the regulations of any department of the state, and other governmental
agencies having jurisdiction. Where provisions of this title are more restrictive than other requirements, this title shall apply. (Ord. 93-498, 11-9-
1993)
7-1-300: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this title, the following definitions are adopted:
ACT: "An Act in relation to the regulation of the rivers, lakes and streams of the State of Illinois", 615 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5 et seq.
APPLICANT: Any person, firm, corporation or agency which submits an application.
APPROPRIATE USE: Only uses of the regulatory floodway that are permissible and will be considered for permit issuance. The only uses that will
be allowed are as specified in section 7-1-800 of this chapter.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD: The land which is subject to a one percent (1%) chance of flooding annually. This area may also be
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 219/366
identified as that which is subject to the 100-year flood. The areas are designated as special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year flood
and as other flood areas on the maps provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) probability of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. The base flood is also known as
the 100-year frequency flood event. Application of the base flood elevation at any location is as defined in section 7-1-600 of this chapter.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION: The highest water surface elevation of the base flood.
BUILDING: A structure that is principally aboveground and is enclosed by walls and a roof. The term includes a gas or liquid storage tank, a
manufactured home, mobile home or a prefabricated building. This term also includes recreational vehicles and travel trailers to be installed on a
site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days.
CAPACITY OF A STORM DRAINAGE FACILITY: The maximum ability of a storm drainage facility to convey stormwater flows without causing
substantial damage to public or private property, and in the case of a pipe, without surcharging.
CHANNEL: A natural or artificial open watercourse with definite bed and banks which periodically or continuously contains moving water, or which
forms a connecting link between two (2) bodies of water.
CHANNEL MODIFICATION: Alteration of a channel by changing the physical dimensions or materials of its bed or banks. Channel modification
includes damming, riprapping or other armoring, widening, deepening, straightening, relocating, lining and significant removal of bottom or wood
vegetation. Channel modification does not include the clearing of dead or dying vegetation, debris or trash from the channel. Channelization is a
severe form of channel modification typically involving a relocation of the existing channel (e.g., straightening).
COMPENSATORY STORAGE: An artificially excavated, hydraulically equivalent volume of storage within the SFHA used to balance the loss of
natural flood storage capacity when artificial fill or structures are placed within the flood plain. The uncompensated loss of natural flood plain storage
can increase off-site floodwater elevations and flows.
CONDITIONAL APPROVAL OF A REGULATORY FLOODWAY MAP CHANGE: Preconstruction approval by DWR and the Federal Emergency
Management Agency of a proposed change to the floodway map. This preconstruction approval, pursuant to this title, gives assurances to the
property owner that once an appropriate use is constructed according to permitted plans, the floodway map can be changed, as previously agreed,
upon review and acceptance of as-built plans.
CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (CLOMR): A letter which indicates that the Federal Emergency Management Agency will revise base
flood elevations, flood insurance rate zones, flood boundaries or floodway as shown on an effective Flood Hazard Boundary Map or Flood
Insurance Rate Map, once the as-built plans are submitted and approved.
CONDUIT: Any channel, pipe, sewer or culvert used for the conveyance or movement of water, whether open or closed.
CONTROL STRUCTURE: A structure designed to control the rate of flow that passes through the structure, given a specific upstream and
downstream water surface elevation.
DWR: Illinois Department of Transportation, Division of Water Resources.
DAM: All obstructions, wall embankments or barriers, together with their abutments and appurtenant works, if any, constructed for the purpose of
storing or diverting water or creating a pool. Underground water storage tanks are not included.
DETENTION BASIN: A facility constructed or modified to restrict the flow of stormwater to a prescribed maximum rate, and to concurrently detain
the excess waters that accumulate behind the outlet.
DETENTION STORAGE: The temporary detaining or storage of stormwater in storage basins, parks, open space or other areas under
predetermined and controlled conditions, with the rate of drainage therefrom regulated by appropriately installed devices.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to real estate, including:
A. Construction, reconstruction, repair or placement of a building or any addition to a building.
B. Installing a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer on a site for more than one
hundred eighty (180) days.
C. Drilling, mining, installing utilities, construction of roads, bridges or similar projects.
D. Demolition of a structure or redevelopment of a site.
E. Clearing of land as an adjunct of construction.
F. Construction or erection of levees, walls, fences, dams or culverts; channel modification; filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving, or other
nonagricultural alterations of the ground surface; storage of materials; deposit of solid or liquid waste.
G. Any other activity of man that might change the direction, height, or velocity of flood or surface water, including extensive vegetation removal.
Development does not include maintenance of existing buildings and facilities such as reroofing or resurfacing of roads when there is no increase in
elevation, or gardening, plowing and similar agricultural practices that do not involve filling, grading or construction of levees.
DISCHARGE: The rate of outflow of water from detention storage.
DRAINAGE AREA: The area from which water is carried off by a drainage system; a watershed or catchment area.
DRY BOTTOM DETENTION BASIN: A basin designed to be completely dewatered after having provided its planned detention of runoff during a
storm event.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 220/366
ELEVATION CERTIFICATES: A form published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency that is used to certify the elevation to which a
building has been elevated.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: Those village officials or employees designated by the village president of the village of Inverness to administer and
enforce the provisions of this title.
EROSION: The general process whereby soils are moved by flowing water or wave action.
EXCESS STORMWATER RUNOFF: The volume and rate of flow of stormwater discharged from an urbanized drainage area which is or will be in
excess of that volume and rate which pertained before urbanization.
EXEMPT ORGANIZATIONS: Organizations which are exempt from this title per the Illinois Compiled Statutes, including state, federal or local units
of government.
FEMA: Federal Emergency Management Agency and its regulations at 44 CFR 59-79 effective as of October 1, 1986. This incorporation does not
include any later editions or amendments.
FLOOD: The condition existing when the waters of any watercourse, pond or depression temporarily rise to a height above their normal levels and
overflow the boundaries within which they are ordinarily contained. It also includes the unusual rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters.
FLOOD FREQUENCY: A period of years, based on a statistical analysis, during which a flood of a stated magnitude may be expected to be equaled
or exceeded; the intensity/duration relationships described in Illinois State Water Survey Bulletin No. 70 shall govern hereinafter.
FLOOD FRINGE: The higher portion of the flood plain, immediately adjacent to and on either side of the floodway, occupied by quiescent or slow
moving waters during floods.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAPS (FIRM): A map prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency that depicts the special flood hazard
areas (SFHAs) within a community. This map includes insurance rate zones and flood plains and may or may not depict floodways.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS): An examination and evaluation of hydrologic and hydraulic data sponsored by FEMA to determine base flood
flows, elevations, areas and floodways. The FIS also determines flows, elevations and areas of floods having lesser and greater frequencies of
occurrence.
FLOOD OF RECORD: An actual historical flood event for which sufficient records are available to establish its extent. No uniform probability of
occurrence is associated with floods of record. However, the probability of occurrence may be determined for the event at specific locations.
FLOOD PROFILE: Graphical representations of the elevations of the water surface of the 100-year flood along certain watercourses in the village.
FLOOD PRONE AREA: Any area, including floodplains, which is subject to periodic inundation as a result of overbank flooding; accumulation of
storm water runoff in marshes, ponds, detention basins, drainage ditches and depressions, whether by design, as a result of alterations in the
drainage area, or by reason of naturally or artificially inadequate storm water drainage systems. A flood prone area may or may not have a
predetermined base flood elevation.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE): The elevation to which uses regulated by this title are required to be elevated or floodproofed. The
elevation of the base flood or 100-year frequency flood plus one foot (1') of freeboard at any given location in the SFHA.
FLOOD RETURN PERIOD: See definition of Flood Frequency.
FLOODPLAIN: That land typically adjacent to a body of water with ground surface elevations at or below the base flood or the 100-year frequency
flood elevation. Floodplains may also include detached special flood hazard areas, ponding areas, etc. The floodplain is also known as the special
flood hazard area (SFHA).
A. The floodplains are those lands within the jurisdiction of the village that are subject to inundation by the base flood or 100-year frequency
flood. The SFHAs of the village are generally identified as such on map number 17031C and panels 0020J, 0038J, 0039J, 0157J, 0176J,
0177J, 0178J and 0179J date August 19, 2008, of the countywide flood insurance rate map for Cook County prepared by the federal
emergency management agency.
B. The floodplains for those parts of unincorporated Cook County that are within the one and one-half (11/2) mile extraterritorial jurisdiction of the
village and may be annexed into the village are generally identified as such on map number 17031C and panel 0157J dated August 19, 2008,
of the countywide flood insurance rate map for Cook County prepared by the federal emergency management agency.
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE: A form published by the federal emergency management agency that is used to certify that a building has been
designed and constructed to be structurally dry floodproofed to the flood protection elevation.
FLOODWAY ENCROACHMENT LINES: The lateral boundaries of the floodway which separate it from the flood fringes.
FREEBOARD: An increment of elevation added to the base flood elevation to provide a factor of safety for uncertainties in calculations, unknown
localized conditions, wave actions and unpredictable effects such as may be caused by ice or debris jams.
HIGH WATER ELEVATION: The elevation of floodwaters of a flood of specified frequency or occurrence at any given point.
HYDROLOGIC AND HYDRAULIC CALCULATIONS: Engineering analyses which determine expected flood flows and flood elevations based on
land characteristics and rainfall events.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 221/366
HYDROSTATIC UPLIFT: The upward pressure exerted on floor slabs or an entire structure by standing water or ground water, which tends to float a
structure or crack the floor. It is based on the difference in elevation between the surface levels of the water. Hydrostatic pressure may also be
horizontal, imposing forces on walls causing them to crack or fail.
IDNR/OWR: Illinois Department of Natural Resources/Office of Water Resources.
LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA): Official determination by FEMA that a specific structure is not in a 100-year flood zone; amends the
effective Flood Hazard Boundary Map or FIRM.
LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR): Letter that revises base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevations, flood insurance rate zones, flood
boundaries or floodways as shown on an effective FHBM or FIRM.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designated for use with
or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term manufactured homes also includes park trailers, travel trailers
and other similar vehicles placed on-site for more than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots
for rent or sale.
MITIGATION: Includes those measures necessary to minimize the negative effects which flood plain development activities might have on the public
health, safety and welfare. Examples of mitigation include compensatory storage, soil erosion and sedimentation control, and channel restoration.
NGVD: National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929. Reference surface set by the National Geodetic Survey deduced from a continental adjustment of
all existing adjustments in 1929.
NATURAL: When used in reference to channels, means those channels formed by the existing surface topography of the earth prior to changes
made by man. A natural stream tends to follow a meandering path; its flood plain is not constrained by levees; the area near the bank has not been
cleared, mowed or cultivated; the stream flows over soil and geologic materials typical of the area with no substantial alteration of the course or
cross section of the stream caused by filling or excavating. A modified channel may regain some natural characteristics over time as the channel
meanders and vegetation is reestablished. Similarly, a modified channel may be restored to more natural conditions by man through regrading and
revegetation.
100-YEAR FLOOD: A flood magnitude with a one percent (1%) statistical chance of being equaled or exceeded during any year. A flood this large
would be reached once during a 100-year period, on the average. However, the occurrence of such an event does not diminish the chance of its
recurring again at any time.
100-YEAR STORM RUNOFF: The stormwater runoff from a rain event of specific intensity and duration having a one percent (1%) probability of
occurring in any one year. Illinois State Water Survey Bulletin No. 70 shall govern.
100-YEAR STORMS: Rainstorms of varying durations and intensities, having a one percent (1%) probability of recurring in any one year. The 100-
year, twenty four (24) hour rainfall event effective for the village as regulated in the Illinois state water survey publication no. 70 is 7.58 inches.
ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK (OHWM): The point on the bank or shore up to which the presence and action of surface water is so continuous
so as to leave a distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation or other
easily recognized characteristics.
PUD: A planned unit development, pursuant to the terms of the ordinance authorizing such form of development2.
PEAK FLOW: The maximum rate of flow of water at a given point in a channel or conduit resulting from a predetermined storm or flood.
PUBLIC FLOOD CONTROL PROJECT: A flood control project which will be operated and maintained by a public agency to reduce flood damages
to existing buildings and structures which includes a hydrologic and hydraulic study of the existing and proposed conditions of the watershed.
Nothing in this definition shall preclude the design, engineering, construction or financing, in whole or in part, of a flood control project by persons or
parties who are not public agencies.
PUBLICLY NAVIGABLE WATERS: All streams and lakes capable of being navigated by watercraft.
REGISTERED LAND SURVEYOR: A land surveyor registered in the state of Illinois, under the Illinois land surveyors act3.
REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER: An engineer registered in the state, under the Illinois professional engineering act4.
REGULATORY FLOODWAY OR DESIGNATED FLOODWAY: The channel, including on stream lakes, and that portion of the floodplain adjacent to
a stream or watercourse as designated by IDNR/OWR, which is needed to store and convey the existing 100-year frequency flood discharge with
no more than a 0.1 foot increase in stage due to the loss of flood conveyance or storage, and no more than a ten percent (10%) increase in
velocities.
A. The floodways are designated for Flint Creek, Salt Creek, Salt Creek (upper reach), tributary A of Salt Creek, tributary B of Salt Creek,
tributary C of Salt Creek, Poplar Creek, unnamed tributary 1 of Poplar Creek, unnamed tributary 2 of Poplar Creek, and unnamed tributary 3 of
Poplar Creek on map number 17031C and panels 0020J, 0038J, 0039J, 0157J, 0176J, 0177J, 0178J and 0179J dated August 19, 2008, of
the countywide flood insurance rate map for Cook County prepared by the federal emergency management agency.
B. The floodways for those parts of unincorporated Cook County that are within the one and one-half (11/2) mile extraterritorial jurisdiction of the
village and may be annexed into the village are designated for Flint Creek and Poplar Creek on map number 17031C and panel 0157J dated
August 19, 2008, of the countywide flood insurance rate map for Cook County prepared by the federal emergency management agency.
C. To locate the designated floodway boundary on any site, the designated floodway boundary should be scaled off the designated floodway
map and located on a site plan, using reference marks common to both maps. Where interpretation is needed to determine the exact location
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 222/366
of the designated floodway boundary, IDNR/OWR should be contacted for the interpretation.
REPAIR, REMODELING OR MAINTENANCE: Development activities which do not result in any increases in the outside dimensions of a building or
any changes to the dimensions of a structure.
RETENTION/DETENTION FACILITY: A retention facility stores storm water runoff without gravity release. A detention facility provides for storage of
storm water runoff and controlled release of this runoff during and after a flood or storm.
RIVERINE SFHA: Any SFHA subject to flooding from a river, creek, intermittent stream, ditch, on stream lake system or any other identified
channel. This term does not include areas subject to flooding from lakes, ponding areas, areas of sheet flow or other areas not subject to overbank
flooding.
RUNOFF: The water derived from melting snow or rain falling on the land surface, flowing over the surface of the ground or collected in channels or
conduits.
SEDIMENTATION: The processes that deposit soils, debris and other materials either on other ground surfaces or in bodies of water or
watercourses.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA): Any base flood area subject to flooding from a river, creek, intermittent stream, ditch or any other
identified channel or ponding and shown on a flood hazard boundary map or flood insurance rate map as special flood hazard areas inundated by
100-year flood and as other flood areas.
STORM SEWER: A closed conduit for conveying collected storm water.
STORM WATER DRAINAGE FACILITY: Any element in a storm water drainage system which is artificially made or improved.
STORM WATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM: All means, natural or artificial, used for conducting storm water to, through or from a drainage area to the
point of final outlet, including, but not limited to, any of the following: conduits and appurtenant features, canals, channels, ditches, streams, culverts,
streets and pumping stations.
STORM WATER RUNOFF: The waters derived from melting snow or rain falling within a tributary drainage basin, flowing over the surface of the
ground or collected in channels or conduits.
STRUCTURE: The results of a manmade change to the land constructed on or below the ground, including the construction, reconstruction or
placement of a building or any addition to a building; installing a manufactured home on a site; preparing a site for a manufactured home or
installing a travel trailer on a site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%)
of the market value of the structure either: a) before the improvement or repair is started, or b) if the structure has been damaged, and is being
restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration
of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the
structure. The term does not, however, include either: a) any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health,
sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, or b) any alteration of a structure listed on the
National Register of Historic Places or a state inventory of historic places.
TRANSITION SECTION: Reaches of the stream or floodway where water flows from a narrow cross section to a wide cross section or vice versa.
WATERCOURSE: Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch or other drainage course in or into which storm water runoff and floodwaters flow either
regularly or intermittently.
WET BOTTOM DETENTION BASIN: A basin designed to retain a permanent pool of water after having provided its planned detention of runoff
during a storm event. This type of facility is sometimes referred to as a retention basin because it is desired to retain all or some of the storm water
runoffs to augment other natural sources of supply, such as base stream flow or ground water contribution. (Ord. 93-498, 11-9-1993; amd. Ord. 00-
683, 10-10-2000; Ord. 2006-835, 10-10-2006; Ord. 2008-866, 5-13-2008)
7-1-400: HOW TO USE THIS CHAPTER:
A. Enforcement Officer Designated: The enforcement officer shall be responsible for fulfilling all of the duties listed in section 7-1-500 of this chapter.
The village president is hereby designated as the enforcement officer.
B. Fulfillment Of Duties:
1. To fulfill those duties, the enforcement officer first should use the criteria listed in section 7-1-600 of this chapter, to determine whether the
development site is located within a floodplain or in a flood prone area. Once it has been determined that a site is located within a floodplain,
the enforcement officer must determine whether the development site is within a flood fringe, a regulatory floodway or within an SFHA or
floodplain on which no floodway has been identified. If the site is within a flood prone area or flood fringe, the enforcement officer shall require
that the minimum requirements of section 7-1-700 of this chapter be met. If the site is within a floodway, the enforcement officer shall require
that the minimum requirements of section 7-1-800 of this chapter be met. If the site is located within an SFHA or floodplain for which no
detailed study has been completed and approved, the enforcement officer shall require that the minimum requirements of section 7-1-900 of
this chapter be met.
2. In addition, the general requirements of section 7-1-1000 of this chapter shall be met for all developments meeting the requirements of section
7-1-700, 7-1-800 or 7-1-900 of this chapter. The enforcement officer shall assure that all subdivision proposals shall meet the requirements of
section 7-1-1100 of this chapter.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 223/366
3. If a variance is to be granted for a proposal, the enforcement officer shall review the requirements of section 7-1-1200 of this chapter to make
sure they are met. In addition, the enforcement officer shall complete all notification requirements.
4. In order to assure that property owners obtain permits as required in this chapter, the enforcement officer may take any and all actions as
outlined in section 7-1-1400 of this chapter. (Ord. 93-498, 11-9-1993)
7-1-500: DUTIES OF THE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER:
The enforcement officer shall be responsible for the general administration and enforcement of this chapter which shall include the following:
A. Determining Floodplain Designation: Check all new development sites to determine whether they are in a special flood hazard area (SFHA). If
they are in an SFHA, determine whether they are in a floodway, flood fringe or in a floodplain on which a detailed study has not been conducted
which drains more than one square mile.
B. Professional Engineer Review: If the development site is within a floodway, floodplain or in a flood prone area on which a detailed study has not
been conducted which drains more than one square mile, then the permit shall be referred to a registered professional engineer (PE) under the
employ or contract of the village for review to ensure that the development meets the requirements of section 7-1-800 of this chapter. In the case
of an appropriate use, the PE shall state in writing that the development meets the requirements of section 7-1-800 of this chapter.
C. Dam Safety Requirements: Ensure that a DWR dam safety permit has been issued or a letter indicating no dam safety permit is required, if the
proposed development activity includes construction of a "dam" as defined in section 7-1-300 of this chapter. Regulated dams may include weirs,
restrictive culverts or impoundment structures.
D. Other Permit Requirements: Ensure that any and all required federal, state and local permits are received prior to the issuance of a flood plain
development permit.
E. Plan Review And Permit Issuance: Ensure that all development activities within the SFHAs of the jurisdiction of the village meet the requirements
of this chapter and issue a flood plain development permit in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and other regulations of this
community when the development meets the conditions of this chapter.
F. Inspection Review: Inspect all development projects before, during and after construction to assure proper elevation of the structure and to
ensure they comply with the provisions of this chapter.
G. Elevation And Floodproofing Certificates: Maintain in the permit files an elevation certificate certifying the elevation of the lowest floor (including
basement) of a residential or nonresidential building or the elevation to which a nonresidential building has been floodproofed, using a
floodproofing certificate, for all buildings subject to section 7-1-1000 of this chapter for public inspection and provide copies of same.
H. Records For Public Inspection: Maintain for public inspection and furnish upon request base flood data, SFHA and regulatory floodway maps,
official Inverness map of flood prone areas, copies of federal or state permit documents, variance documentation, conditional letter of map
revision, letter of map revision, letter of map amendment and as-built elevation and floodproofing or elevation and floodproofing certificates for all
buildings constructed subject to this chapter.
I. State Permits: Ensure that construction authorization has been granted by the Illinois Division of Water Resources, for all development projects
subject to sections 7-1-800 and 7-1-900 of this chapter, unless enforcement responsibility has been delegated to the village. Upon acceptance of
Ordinance 93-498 (codified herein) by DWR and FEMA, responsibility is hereby delegated to the village as per 92 Illinois Administrative Code
708 for construction in the regulatory floodway and flood plain when floodways have not been defined in sections 7-1-800 and 7-1-900 of this
chapter. However, the following review approvals are not delegated to the village and shall require review or permits from DWR:
1. Organizations which are exempt from this chapter, as per the Illinois Compiled Statutes;
2. Department of transportation projects, dams or impoundment structures as defined in section 7-1-300 of this chapter and all other state,
federal or local unit of government projects, including projects of the village and county, except for those projects meeting the requirements of
subsection 7-1-800I of this chapter;
3. An engineer's determination that an existing bridge or culvert crossing is not a source of flood damage and the analysis indicating the
proposed flood profile, per subsection 7-1-800E5 of this chapter;
4. An engineer's analysis of the flood profile due to subsection 7-1-800E4 of this chapter;
5. Alternative transition sections and hydraulically equivalent compensatory storage as indicated in subsections 7-1-800E1, E2 and E8 of this
chapter;
6. Permit issuance of structures within or over publicly navigable rivers, lakes and streams;
7. Any changes in the base flood elevation or floodway locations; and
8. Base flood elevation determinations where none now exist.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 224/366
J. Cooperation With Other Agencies: Cooperate with state and federal flood plain management agencies to improve base flood or 100-year
frequency flood and floodway data and to improve the administration of this chapter. Submit data to DWR and the Federal Emergency
Management Agency for proposed revisions of a regulatory map. Submit reports as required for the National Flood Insurance Program. Notify
the Federal Emergency Management Agency of any proposed amendments to this chapter.
K. Promulgate Regulations: Promulgate rules and regulations as necessary to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter, subject,
however, to the review and approval of DWR and FEMA for any chapter changes. (Ord. 93-498, 11-9-1993)
7-1-600: BASE FLOOD ELEVATION:
This chapter's protection standard is based on the flood insurance study for the village. If a base flood elevation or 100-year frequency flood
elevation is not available for a particular site, then the protection standard shall be according to the best existing data available in the Illinois state
water survey's floodplain information repository. When a party disagrees with the best available data, he/she may finance the detailed engineering
study needed to replace existing data with better data and submit it to DWR and FEMA. (Ord. 93-498, 11-9-1993)
A. Flint Creek, Salt Creek, Poplar Creek: The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for the SFHAs of Flint Creek, Salt Creek, tributary A
of Salt Creek, tributary B of Salt Creek, tributary C of Salt Creek, and Poplar Creek, unnamed tributary 1 of Poplar Creek, unnamed tributary 2 of
Poplar Creek, and unnamed tributary 3 of Poplar Creek shall be delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the countywide flood insurance
study for Cook County prepared by the federal emergency management agency dated August 19, 2008, and such amendments to such study
and maps as may be prepared from time to time.
B. Unincorporated Areas: The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for the SFHAs of those parts of unincorporated Cook County that
are within the one and one-half (11/2) mile extraterritorial jurisdiction and that may be annexed to the village shall be as delineated on the 100-
year flood profiles in the countywide flood insurance study for Cook County prepared by the federal emergency management agency dated
August 19, 2008, and such amendments or revisions to such study and maps as may be prepared from time to time. (Ord. 2008-866, 5-13-2008)
C. AH And AO Zones: The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for each SFHA delineated as an "AH zone" or "AO zone" shall be that
elevation (or depth) delineated on the flood insurance rate map of the village.
D. A Zone: The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for each of the remaining SFHAs delineated as an "A zone" on the flood insurance
rate map of the village shall be according to the best existing data available in the Illinois state water survey floodplain information repository.
When no base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation exists, the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for a riverine SFHA shall
be determined from a backwater model, such as HEC-II, WSP-2 or a dynamic model such as HIP. The flood flows used in the hydraulic models
shall be obtained from a hydrologic model, such as HEC-I TR-20, or HIP, or by techniques presented in various publications prepared by the
United States geological survey for estimating peak flood discharges. Flood flows should be based on anticipated future land use conditions in
the watershed as determined from adopted local and regional land use plans. Along any watercourse draining more than one square mile, the
above analyses shall be submitted to the Illinois state water survey floodplain information repository for filing. For a nonriverine SFHA, the base
flood elevation shall be the historic flood of record plus three feet (3'), unless calculated by a detailed engineering study and approved by the
Illinois state water survey.
E. Historical Flood Of Record: In the absence of specific information pertaining to the base flood, it is the intention of this title to provide protection in
the low lying areas of the village against the high waters of the historical flood of record. Anyone contemplating development of property which
adjoins flood prone areas, as indicated on the official village maps, shall retain the services of a professional engineer registered in the state to
determine the existing and proposed flood potential and shall submit a report of his findings to the enforcement officer for review.
F. Land Use Controls: This title is not intended to reduce or eliminate existing flooding, nor is it intended to impose a complete prohibition of
construction in base flood areas. On the contrary, these regulations are designed to guide and control development in such a manner as to
lessen the damaging effects of floods on developments proposed for the low lying areas of the village. (Ord. 93-498, 11-9-1993)
7-1-700: OCCUPATION AND USE OF FLOOD FRINGE AND FLOOD PRONE AREAS:
A. General Conditions, Criteria And Standards Which Shall Apply In Chapters 2, 3 And 4 Of This Title:
1. Floodwaters In Flood Fringe And Flood Prone Areas:
a. Encroachment And Development Of Flood Fringe And Flood Prone Areas: No encroachment, filling, excavation or development shall be
permitted in areas designated as flood prone on the official map of flood prone areas in the village of Inverness and vicinity and on the flood
insurance rate map, both as hereafter described, except under the following conditions:
b. Minor Encroachment: Minor encroachment and filling on floodplain fringe and flood prone areas and not exceeding one hundred (100) cubic
yards in volume, may be permitted only where, in the opinion of the enforcement officer, the impact on the environment, on ground water
recharge potential and on the safety, health and welfare of adjoining upstream and downstream property owners is insignificant; such minor
encroachments which might be allowed under this provision are the filling of small on site depressions to alleviate puddling; and fills or
excavations to facilitate the construction of storm water drainage system improvements, including roadway ditches, if protection is provided
against the base flood or 100-year frequency flood by proper elevation, and compensatory storage and other provisions of this Chapter are
met. No use will be permitted which adversely affects the capacity of drainage facilities or systems. Developments located within the flood
fringe shall meet the requirements of this Section, along with the requirements of Section 7-1-1000 of this Chapter.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 225/366
B. Site Development Permit: No person, firm, corporation or governmental body not exempted by State law shall commence any development in the
SFHA or in flood prone areas without first obtaining a site development permit from the Enforcement Officer.
1. Application for a site development permit shall be made on a form provided by the Enforcement Officer. The application shall be accompanied
by drawings of the site, drawn to scale, showing property line dimensions and legal description for the property and sealed by a licensed
engineer, existing grade elevations in M.S.L., 1929 adjustment datum of NGVD and all changes in grade resulting from excavation or filling;
the location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings. For all proposed buildings, the elevation of the lowest floor (including
basement) and lowest adjacent grade shall be shown on the submitted plans and the development will be subject to the requirements of
Section 7-1-1000 of this Chapter.
2. Upon receipt of a site development permit application, the Enforcement Officer shall compare the elevation of the site to the base flood or 100-
year frequency flood elevation. Any development located on land that can be shown to have been higher than the base flood elevation as of
the site's first Flood Insurance Rate Map identification is not in the SFHA and, therefore, not subject to the requirements of this Chapter. The
Building Official shall maintain documentation of the existing ground elevation at the development site and certification that this ground
elevation existed prior to the date of the site's first Flood Insurance Rate Map identification.
3. A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan for disturbed areas shall be submitted. This plan shall include a description of the sequence of
grading activities and the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also
include a description of final stabilization and revegetation measures, and the identification of a responsible party to ensure post-construction
maintenance.
4. The Enforcement Officer shall be responsible for obtaining from the applicant, copies of all other local, State and Federal permits, approvals or
permit-not-required letters that may be required for this type of activity. The Enforcement Officer shall not issue a permit unless all other local,
State and Federal permits have been obtained.
C. Preventing Increased Damages: No development in the flood fringe or in a flood prone area shall create a threat to public health and safety.
1. Elevating the Site: If fill is being used to elevate the site above the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation, the applicant shall submit
sufficient data and obtain a letter of map revision (LOMR) from FEMA for the purpose of removing the site from the flood plain.
2. Compensatory Storage: Whenever any portion of a flood plain or a flood prone area is authorized for use, the volume of space which will be
occupied by the authorized fill or structure below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation shall be compensated for and balanced
by an hydraulically equivalent volume of excavation taken from below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation. The excavation
volume shall be at least equal to 1.5 times the volume of storage lost due to the fill or structure. In the case of streams and watercourses, such
excavation shall be made opposite or adjacent to the areas so filled or occupied. All flood plain storage lost below the existing 10-year flood
elevation shall be replaced below the 10-year flood elevation. All flood plain storage lost above the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be
replaced above the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All such excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse.
(Ord. 93-498, 11-9-93)
7-1-800: OCCUPATION AND USE OF IDENTIFIED FLOODWAYS:
This Section applies to proposed development, redevelopment, site modification or building modification within a regulatory floodway. The regulatory
floodway for Salt Creek shall be as delineated on the regulatory floodway maps designated by DWR and referenced in Section 7-1-300 of this
Chapter. Only those uses and structures will be permitted which meet the criteria in this Section. All floodway modifications shall be the minimum
necessary to accomplish the purpose of the project. The development shall also meet the requirements of Section 7-1-1000 of this Chapter.
A. Site Development Permit: No person, firm, corporation or governmental body not exempted by State law shall commence any development in a
floodway without first obtaining a site development permit from the Enforcement Officer.
B. Application; Contents: Application for a site development permit shall be made on a form provided by the Enforcement Officer. The application
shall include the following information:
1. Name and address of applicant;
2. Site location (including legal description) of the property, drawn to scale, on the regulatory floodway map, indicating whether it is proposed to
be in an incorporated or unincorporated area;
3. Name of stream or body of water affected;
4. Description of proposed activity;
5. Statement of purpose of proposed activity;
6. Anticipated dates of initiation and completion of activity;
7. Name and mailing address of the owner of the subject property if different from the applicant;
8. Signature of applicant or the applicant's agent;
9. If the application is a corporation, the president or other authorized officer shall sign the application form;
10. If the applicant is a partnership, each partner shall sign the application form; and
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 226/366
11. If the applicant is a land trust, the trust officer shall sign the name of the trustee by him/her as trust officer. A disclosure affidavit shall be filed
with the application, identifying each beneficiary of the trust by name and address and defining the respective interests therein.
12. Plans of the proposed activity shall be provided which include as a minimum:
a. A vicinity map showing the site of the activity, name of the waterway, boundary lines, names of roads in the vicinity of the site, graphic or
numerical scale and north arrow;
b. A plan view of the project and engineering study reach showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the
structure or work, elevations in mean sea level (1929 adjustment) datum of NGVD, adjacent property lines and ownership, drainage and
flood control easements, location of any channels and any existing or future access roads, distance between proposed activity and
navigation channel (when the proposed construction is near a commercially navigable body of water), regulatory floodway limit, flood plain
limit, specifications and dimensions of any proposed channel modifications, location and orientation of cross sections, north arrow and a
graphic or numerical scale;
c. Cross section views of the project and engineering study reach showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of
the work as shown in plan view, existing and proposed elevations, normal water elevation, 10-year frequency flood elevation, 100-year
frequency flood elevation and graphic or numerical scales (horizontal and vertical);
d. A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan for disturbed areas. This plan shall include a description of the sequence of grading activities
and the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a
description of final stabilization and revegetation measures, and the identification of a responsible party to ensure post-construction
maintenance;
e. A copy of the regulatory floodway map, marked to reflect any proposed change in the regulatory floodway location.
13. Any and all other local, State and Federal permits or approval letters that may be required for this type of development;
14. Engineering calculations and supporting data shall be submitted showing that the proposed work will meet the permit criteria of subsection D
of this Section.
15. If the regulatory floodway delineation, base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation will change due to the proposed project, the
application will not be considered complete until DWR has indicated conditional approval of the regulatory floodway map change. No
structures may be built until a letter of map revision has been approved by FEMA.
16. The application for a structure shall be accompanied by drawings of the site, drawn to scale, showing property line dimensions and existing
ground elevations and all changes in grade resulting from any proposed excavation or filling, and flood plain and floodway limits; sealed by a
registered professional engineer, licensed architect or registered land surveyor; the location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to
buildings; and the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all proposed buildings subject to the requirements of Section 7-1-1000
of this Chapter;
17. If the proposed project involves a channel modification, the application shall submit the following information:
a. A discussion of the purpose of and need for the proposed work;
b. A discussion of the feasibility of using alternative locations or methods to accomplish the purpose of the proposed work;
c. An analysis of the extent and permanence of the impacts the project would have on the physical conditions of the body of water affected;
d. An analysis of the extent and permanence of the impacts each feasible alternative identified in subsection E4c of this Section would have
on the physical conditions of the body of water affected;
e. An analysis of the impacts of the proposed project, considering cumulative effects on the physical conditions of the body of water affected.
C. Copies of Permits: The Enforcement Officer shall be responsible for obtaining from the applicant copies of all other local, State and Federal
permits and approvals that may be required for this type of activity. The Enforcement Officer shall not issue the development permit unless all
required Federal and State permits have been obtained. A registered professional engineer, under the employ or contract of the Village shall
review and approve applications reviewed under this Section.
D. Preventing Increased Damages and a List of Appropriate Uses: The only development in a floodway which will be allowed are appropriate uses,
which will not cause a rise in the base flood elevation, and which will not create a damaging or potentially damaging increase in flood heights or
velocity or be a threat to public health and safety and welfare or impair the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of the floodway or channel.
Construction impacts shall be minimized by appropriate mitigation methods as called for in this Chapter. Only those appropriate uses listed in 92
Illinois Administrative Code 708 will be allowed. Appropriate uses do not include the construction or placement of any new structures, fill, building
additions, buildings on stilts, excavation or channel modifications done to accommodate otherwise nonappropriate uses in the floodway, fencing
(including landscaping or planting designed to act as a fence) and storage of materials except as specifically defined above as an appropriate
use. The approved appropriate uses are as follows:
1. Flood control structures, dikes, dams and other public works or private improvements relating to the control of drainage, flooding, erosion or
water quality or habitat for fish and wildlife;
2. Structures or facilities relating to the use of, or requiring access to, the water or shoreline, such as pumping and treatment facilities, and
facilities and improvements related to recreational boating, commercial shipping and other functionally water dependent uses;
3. Storm and sanitary sewer outfalls;
4. Underground and overhead utilities;
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 227/366
5. Recreational facilities such as playing fields and trail systems including any related fencing (at least 50 percent open when viewed from any
one direction) built parallel to the direction of flood flows, and including open air pavilions;
6. Bridges, culverts, roadways, sidewalks, railways, runways and taxiways and any modification thereto;
7. Parking lots and any modifications thereto (where depth of flooding at the 100-year frequency flood event will not exceed 1.0 inch) and aircraft
parking aprons built at or below ground elevation;
8. Regulatory floodway regrading, without fill, to create a positive nonerosive slope toward a watercourse;
9. Floodproofing activities to protect previously existing lawful structures including the construction of watertight window wells, elevating
structures or construction of flood walls around residential, commercial or industrial principal structures where the outside toe of the flood wall
shall be no more than ten feet (10') away from the exterior wall of the existing structure, and, which are not considered substantial
improvements to the structure;
10. In the case of damaged or replacement buildings, reconstruction or repairs made to a building that are valued at less than fifty percent (50%)
of the market value of the building before it was damaged or replaced, and which do not increase the outside dimensions of the building;
11. Additions to existing buildings above the BFE that do not increase the building's footprint and are valued at less than fifty percent (50%) of
the market value of the building.
E. Construction of Appropriate Uses: Within the regulatory floodway as identified on the regulatory floodway maps designated by DWR, the
construction of an appropriate use, will be considered permissible; provided, that the proposed project meets the following engineering and
mitigation criteria and is so stated in writing with supporting plans, calculations and data by a registered professional engineer and provided that
any structure meets the protection requirements of Section 7-1-1000 of this Chapter:
1. Preservation of Flood Conveyance, so as Not to Increase Flood Stages Upstream: For appropriate uses other than bridge or culvert
crossings, on-stream structures or dams, all effective regulatory floodway conveyance lost due to the project will be replaced for all flood
events up to and including the 100-year frequency flood. In calculating effective regulatory floodway conveyance, the following factors shall be
taken into consideration:
a. Regulatory floodway conveyance,
"K" =
1.486
AR2/3
n
where "n" is Manning's roughness factor, "A" is the effective area of the cross section, and "R" is the ratio of the area to the wetted
perimeter. (See Open Channel Hydraulics, Ven Te Chow, 1959, McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York).
b. The same Manning's "n" value shall be used for both existing and proposed conditions unless a recorded maintenance agreement with a
Federal, State or local unit of government can assure the proposed conditions will be maintained or the land cover is changing from a
vegetative to a nonvegetative land cover.
c. Transition sections shall be provided and used in calculations of effective regulatory floodway conveyance. The following expansion and
contraction ratios shall be used unless an applicant's engineer can prove to DWR through engineering calculations or model tests that more
abrupt transitions may be used with the same efficiency:
(1) When water is flowing from a narrow section to a wider section, the water should be assumed to expand no faster than at a rate of one
foot horizontal for every four feet of the flooded stream's length (1':4').
(2) When water is flowing from a wide section to a narrow section, the water should be assumed to contract no faster than at a rate of one
foot horizontal for every one foot of the flooded stream's length (1':1').
(3) When expanding or contracting flows in a vertical direction, a minimum of one foot vertical transition for every ten feet of stream length
shall be used (1':10').
(4) Transition sections shall be provided between cross sections with rapid expansions and contractions and when meeting the regulatory
floodway delineation on adjacent properties.
(5) All cross sections used in the calculations shall be located perpendicular to flood flows.
2. Preservation of Floodway Storage so as Not to Increase Downstream Flooding: Compensatory storage shall be provided for any regulatory
floodway storage lost due to the proposed work from the volume of fill or structures placed and the impact of any related flood control projects.
Compensatory storage for fill or structures shall be equal to at least 1.5 times the volume of flood plain storage lost. Artificially created storage
lost due to a reduction in head loss behind a bridge shall not be required to be replaced. The compensatory regulatory floodway storage shall
be placed between the proposed normal water elevation and the proposed 100-year flood elevation. All regulatory floodway storage lost below
the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced below the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All regulatory floodway storage lost above
the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced above the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All such excavations shall be constructed to
drain freely and openly to the watercourse. If the compensatory storage will not be placed at the location of the proposed construction, the
applicant's engineer shall demonstrate to DWR through a determination of flood discharges and water surface elevations that the
compensatory storage is hydraulically equivalent. Finally, there shall be no reduction in floodway surface area as a result of a floodway
modification, unless such modification is necessary to reduce flooding at existing structure.
3. Preservation of Floodway Velocities so as Not to Increase Stream Erosion of Flood Heights: For all appropriate uses, except bridges or
culverts or on-stream structures, the proposed work will not result in an increase in the average channel or regulatory floodway velocities or
stage for all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency event. However, in the case of bridges or culverts or on-stream structures
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 228/366
built for the purpose of backing up water in the stream during normal or flood flows, velocities may be increased at the structure site if scour,
erosion and sedimentation will be avoided by the use of rip-rap or other design measures.
4. Construction of New Bridges or Culvert Crossings and Roadway Approaches: The proposed structure shall not result in an increase of
upstream flood stages greater than 0.1 foot when compared to the existing conditions for all flood events up to and including the 100-year
frequency event; or the upstream flood stage increases will be contained within the channel banks (or within existing vertical extensions of the
channel banks) such as within the design protection grade of existing levees or flood walls or within recorded flood easements. If the proposed
construction will increase upstream flood stages greater than 0.1 feet, the developer must contact DWR, Dam Safety Section for a dam safety
permit or waiver.
a. The engineering analysis of upstream flood stages must be calculated using the flood study flows, and corresponding flood elevations for
tailwater conditions for the flood study specified in Section 7-1-600 of this Chapter. Culverts must be analyzed using the U.S. DOT, FHWA
Hydraulic Chart for the Selection of Highway Culverts. Bridges must be analyzed using the U.S. DOT/Federal Highway Administration
Hydraulics of Bridge Waterways calculation procedures.
b. Lost floodway storage must be compensated for per subsection E2 of this Section.
c. Velocity increases must be mitigated per subsection E3 of this Section.
d. If the crossing is proposed over a public water that is used for recreational or commercial navigation, a Department of Transportation permit
must be received.
e. The hydraulic analysis for the backwater caused by the bridge showing the existing condition and proposed regulatory profile must be
submitted to DWR for concurrence that a CLOMR is not required by subsection D of this Section.
f. All excavations for the construction of the crossing shall be designed per subsection E8 of this Section.
5. Reconstruction or Modification of Existing Bridges, Culverts and Approach Roads:
a. The bridge or culvert and roadway approach reconstruction or modification shall be constructed with no more than 0.1 foot increase in
backwater over the existing flood profile for all flood frequencies up to and including the 100-year event, if the existing structure is not a
source of flood damage.
b. If the existing bridge or culvert and roadway approach is a source of flood damage to buildings or structures in the upstream flood plain, the
applicant's engineer shall evaluate the feasibility of redesigning the structure to reduce the existing backwater, taking into consideration the
effects on flood stages on upstream and downstream properties.
c. The determination as to whether or not the existing crossing is a source of flood damage and should be redesigned must be prepared in
accordance with the Department of Transportation Rules 92 Illinois Administrative Code 708 (Floodway Construction in Northeastern Illinois)
and submitted to the Division for review and concurrence before a permit is issued.
6. On-Stream Structures Built for the Purpose of Backing Up Water: Any increase in upstream flood stages greater than 0.0 foot when compared
to the existing conditions, for all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency event shall be contained within the channel banks (or
within existing vertical extensions of the channel banks) such as within the design protection grade of existing levees or flood walls or within
recorded flood easements. A permit or letter indicating a permit is not required must be obtained from DWR, Dam Safety Section for a dam
safety permit or waiver for any structure built for the purpose of backing up water in the stream during normal or flood flow. All dams and
impoundment structures as defined in Section 7-1-300 of this Chapter shall meet the permitting requirements of 92 Illinois Administrative Code
702 (Construction and Maintenance of Dams). If the proposed activity involves a modification of the channel or floodway to accommodate an
impoundment, it shall be demonstrated that:
a. The impoundment is determined to be in the public interest by providing flood control, public recreation or regional stormwater detention;
b. Impoundment design should include gradual bank slopes, appropriate bank stabilization measures and a pre-sedimentation basin.
c. The project otherwise complies with the requirements of this Section.
7. Flood Proofing of Existing Habitable, Residential and Commercial Structures: If construction is required beyond the outside dimensions of the
existing building, the outside perimeter of the floodproofing construction shall be placed no further than ten feet (10') from the outside of the
building. Compensation of lost storage and conveyance will not be required for floodproofing activities.
8. Excavation in the Floodway: When excavation is proposed in the design of bridges and culvert openings, including the modifications to and
replacement of existing bridge and culvert structures, or to compensate for lost conveyances for other appropriate uses, transition sections
shall be provided for the excavation. The following expansion and contraction ratios shall be used unless an applicant's engineer can prove to
DWR through engineering calculations or model tests that more abrupt transitions may be used with the same efficiency:
a. When water is flowing from a narrow section to a wider section, the water should be assumed to expand no faster than at a rate of one foot
horizontal for every four feet of the flooded stream's length (1':4');
b. When water is flowing from a wide section to a narrow section, the water should be assumed to contract no faster than at a rate of one foot
horizontal for every one foot of the flooded stream's length (1':1');
c. When expanding or contracting flows in a vertical direction, a minimum of one foot vertical transition for every ten feet of stream length shall
be used (1':10'); and
d. Erosion/scour protection shall be provided inland upstream and downstream of the transition sections.
9. Channel Modification: If the proposed activity involves a channel modification, it shall be demonstrated that;
a. There are no practicable alternatives to the activity which would accomplish its purpose with less impact to the natural conditions of the
body of water affected. Possible alternatives include levees, bank stabilization, floodproofing of existing structures, removal of structures
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 229/366
from the flood plain, clearing the channel, high flow channel.
b. The activity has been planned and designed and will be constructed in a way which will minimize its adverse impacts on the natural
conditions of the body of water affected, consistent with the following criteria:
(1) The physical characteristics of the modified channel shall match as closely as possible those of the existing channel in length, cross
section, slope and sinuosity. If the existing channel has been previously modified, restoration of more natural physical conditions should
be incorporated into channel modification design, where practical.
(2) Hydraulically effective transitions shall be provided at both the upstream and downstream ends of the project, designed such that they
will prevent erosion.
(3) One-sided construction of a channel shall be used when feasible. Removal of streamside (riparian) vegetation should be limited to one
side of the channel, where possible, to preserve the shading and stabilization effects of the vegetation.
(4) Clearing of vegetation shall be limited to that which is essential for construction of the channel.
(5) Channel banks shall be constructed with a side slope no steeper than three to one (3:1) horizontal to vertical, wherever practicable.
Natural vegetation and gradual side slopes are the preferred methods for bank stabilization. Where high velocities or sharp bends
necessitate the use of alternative stabilization measures, natural rock or rip-rap are preferred materials. Artificial materials such as
concrete, gabions or construction rubble should be avoided unless there are no practicable alternatives.
(6) All disturbed areas associated with the modification shall be seeded or otherwise stabilized as soon as possible upon completion of
construction. Erosion blanket or an equivalent material shall be required to stabilize disturbed channel banks prior to establishment of the
vegetative cover.
(7) A sediment basin shall be installed at the downstream end of the modification to reduce sedimentation and degradation of downstream
water quality.
(8) New or relocated channels should be built in the dry and all items of construction, including vegetation, should be completed prior to
diversion of water into the new channel.
(9) There shall be no increases in stage or velocity as the channel enters or leaves the project site for any frequency flood unless
necessitated by a public flood control project or unless such an increase is justified as part of a habitat improvement or erosion control
project.
(10) Unless the modification is for a public flood control project, there shall be no reduction in the volume of floodwater storage outside the
floodway as a result of the modification.
c. The project otherwise complies with the requirements of this Section.
10. Seeding and Stabilization Plan: For all activities located in a floodway, a seeding and stabilization plan shall be submitted by the applicant.
11. Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Measures: For all activities in the floodway, including grading, filling and excavation, in which there is
potential for erosion of exposed soil, soil erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be employed consistent with the following criteria:
a. The construction area shall be minimized to preserve the maximum vegetation possible. Construction shall be scheduled to minimize the
time soil is exposed and unprotected. In no case shall the existing natural vegetation be destroyed, removed or disturbed more than fifteen
(15) days prior to the initiation of improvements.
b. Temporary and/or permanent soil stabilization shall be applied to denuded areas as soon as possible. As a minimum, soil stabilization shall
be provided within fifteen (15) days after final grade is reached on any portion of the site, and within fifteen (15) days to denuded areas
which may not be at final grade but will remain undisturbed for longer than sixty (60) days.
c. Sedimentation control measures shall be installed before any significant grading or filling is initiated on the site to prevent the movement of
eroded sediments off site or into the channel. Potential sediment control devices include filter fences, straw bale fences, check dams,
diversion ditches and sediment basins.
d. A vegetated buffer strip of least twenty five feet (25') in width shall be preserved and/or reestablished, where possible, along existing
channels5. Construction vehicle use of channels shall be minimized. Temporary stream crossing shall be constructed, where necessary, to
minimize erosion. Necessary construction in or along channels shall be reestablished immediately.
e. Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be designed and implemented consistent with "Procedures and Standards for Urban
Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control in Illinois" (1988) also known as the "Green Book" and "Standards and Specifications for Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control" (EPA, 1987).
12. Public Flood Control Projects: For public flood control projects, the permitting requirements of this Section will be considered met if the
applicant can demonstrate to DWR through hydraulic and hydrologic calculations that the proposed project will not singularly or cumulatively
result in increased flood heights outside the project right of way or easements for all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency
event.
13. General Criteria for Analysis of Flood Elevations:
a. The flood profiles, flows and floodway data in the regulatory floodway study, referenced in Section 7-1-600 of this Chapter must be used for
analysis of the base conditions. If the study data appears to be in error or conditions have changed, DWR shall be contacted for approval
and concurrence on the appropriate base conditions data to use.
b. If the 100-year regulatory flood plain elevation at the site of the proposed construction is affected by backwater from a downstream
receiving stream with a larger drainage area, the proposed construction shall be shown to meet the requirements of this section for the 100-
year frequency flood elevations of the regulatory floodway conditions and conditions with the receiving stream at normal water elevations.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 230/366
c. If the applicant learns from DWR, local governments, or a private owner that a downstream restrictive bridge or culvert is scheduled to be
removed, reconstructed, modified or a regional flood control project is scheduled to be built, removed, constructed or modified within the
next five (5) years, the proposed construction shall be analyzed and shown to meet the requirements of this Section for both the existing
conditions and the expected flood profile conditions when the bridge, culvert or flood control project is built.
14. Conditional Letter of Map Revision: If the appropriate use would result in a change in the regulatory floodway location or the 100-year
frequency flood elevation, the applicant shall submit to DWR and to FEMA all the information, calculations and documents necessary to be
issued a conditional regulatory floodway map revision and receive from DWR a conditional approval of the regulatory floodway change before
a permit is issued. However, the final regulatory floodway map will not be changed by DWR until as-built plans or record drawings are
submitted and accepted by FEMA and DWR. In the case of nongovernment projects, the Municipality in incorporated areas and the County in
unincorporated areas shall concur with the proposed conditional regulatory floodway map revision before DWR approval can be given. No
filling, grading, dredging or excavating shall take place until a conditional approval is issued. No further development activities shall take place
until a final letter of map revision (LOMR) is issued by FEMA and DWR.
15. Professional Engineer's Supervision: All engineering analyses shall be performed by or under the supervision of a registered professional
engineer.
16. Activities in Floodway: For all activities in the floodway involving construction within twenty five feet (25') of the channel, the following criteria
shall be met:
a. A natural vegetation buffer strip shall be preserved within at least twenty five feet (25') of the ordinary high water mark of the channel.
b. Where it is impossible to protect this buffer strip during the construction of an appropriate use, a vegetated buffer strip shall be established
upon completion of construction.
c. The use of native riparian vegetation is preferred in the buffer strip. Access through this buffer strip shall be provided, when necessary, for
stream maintenance purposes.
17. Construction: After receipt of conditional approval of the regulatory floodway change and issuance of a permit and a conditional letter of map
revision, construction as necessary to change the regulatory floodway designation may proceed but no buildings or structures or other
construction that is not an appropriate use may be placed in that area until the regulatory floodway map is changed and a final letter of map
revision is received. The regulatory floodway map will be revised upon acceptance and concurrence by DWR and FEMA of the as-built plans.
F. State Review: For those projects listed below located in a regulatory floodway, the following criteria shall be submitted to DWR for their review
and concurrence prior to the issuance of a permit:
1. DWR will review an engineer's analysis of the flood profile due to a proposed bridge pursuant to subsection E4 of this Section.
2. DWR will review an engineer's determination that an existing bridge or culvert crossing is not a source of flood damage and the analysis
indicating the proposed flood profile, pursuant to subsection E5 of this Section.
3. The DWR will review alternative transition sections and hydraulically equivalent storage pursuant to subsections E1, E2 and E8 of this
Section.
4. The DWR will review and approve, prior to the start of construction, any Department projects, dams (as defined in Section 7-1-300 of this
Chapter) and all other State, Federal or local units of government projects, including projects of the Municipality or County.
G. Other Permits: In addition to the other requirements of this Chapter, a development permit for a site located in a floodway shall not be issued
unless the applicant first obtains a permit or written documentation that a permit is not required from DWR, issued pursuant to 615 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/5 et seq. No permit from DWR shall be required if the Division has delegated this responsibility to the Village.
H. Dam Safety Permits: Any work involving the construction, modification or removal of a dam as defined in Section 7-1-300 of this Chapter per 92
Illinois Administrative Code 702 (Rules for Construction of Dams) shall obtain an Illinois Division of Water Resources dam safety permit prior to
the start of construction of a dam. If the Enforcement Officer finds a dam that does not have a DWR permit, the Enforcement Officer shall
immediately notify the Dam Safety Section of the Division of Water Resources. If the Enforcement Officer finds a dam which is believed to be in
unsafe condition, the Enforcement Officer shall immediately notify the owner of the dam, DWR, Dam Safety Section in Springfield and the Illinois
Emergency Services and Disaster Agency (ESDA).
I. Activities that Do Not Require a Registered Professional Engineer's Review: The following activities may be permitted without a registered
professional engineer's review. Such activities shall still meet the other requirements of this Chapter, including the mitigation requirements.
1. Underground and overhead utilities that:
a. Do not result in any increase in existing ground elevations, or
b. Do not require the placement of aboveground structures in the floodway, or
c. In the case of underground stream crossings, the top of the pipe or encasement is buried a minimum of three feet (3') below the existing
stream bed, and
d. In the case of overhead utilities, no supporting towers are placed in the watercourse and are designed in such a fashion as not to catch
debris.
2. Storm and sanitary sewer outfalls that:
a. Do not extend riverward or lakeward of the existing adjacent natural bank slope, and
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 231/366
b. Do not result in an increase in ground elevation, and
c. Are designed so as not to cause stream erosion at the outfall location.
3. Construction of sidewalks, athletic fields (excluding fences), properly anchored playground equipment and patios at grade.
4. Construction of shoreline and streambank protection that:
a. Does not exceed one thousand feet (1,000' )in length.
b. Materials are not placed higher than the existing top of bank.
c. Materials are placed so as not to reduce the cross- sectional area of the stream channel or bank of the lake.
d. Vegetative stabilization and gradual side slopes are the preferred mitigation methods for existing erosion problems. Where high channel
velocities, sharp bends or wave action necessitate the use of alternative stabilization measures, natural rock or rip-rap are preferred
materials. Artificial materials such as concrete, construction rubble, and gabions should be avoided unless there are no practicable
alternatives.
5. Temporary stream crossings in which:
a. The approach roads will be 0.5' (1/2 foot) or less above natural grade.
b. The crossing will allow stream flow to pass without backing up the water above the stream bank vegetation line or above any drainage tile
or outfall invert.
c. The top of the roadway fill in the channel will be at least two feet (2') below the top of the lowest bank. Any fill in the channel shall be
nonerosive material, such as rip-rap or gravel.
d. All disturbed stream banks will be seeded or otherwise stabilized as soon as possible upon installation and again upon removal of
construction.
e. The access road and temporary crossings will be removed within one year after authorization. (Ord. 93-498, 11-9-93)
7-1-900: OCCUPATION AND USE OF SFHA OR FLOOD PRONE AREAS WHERE FLOODWAYS ARE NOT IDENTIFIED:
In SFHA, flood plains or flood prone areas, where no floodways have been identified and no base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevations have
been established by FEMA, and draining more than a square mile, no development shall be permitted unless the cumulative effect of the proposals,
when combined with all other existing and anticipated uses and structures, shall not significantly impede or increase the flow and passage of the
floodwaters nor significantly increase the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation.
A. Site Development Permit: No person, firm, corporation or governmental body, not exempted by State law, shall commence any development in a
SFHA, flood plains or flood prone areas without first obtaining a site development permit from the Enforcement Officer. Application for a
development permit shall be made on a form provided by the Enforcement Officer. The application shall be accompanied by drawings of the site,
drawn to scale showing property line dimensions; and existing grade elevations and all changes in grade resulting from excavation or filling,
sealed by a licensed engineer; the location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings; and the elevation of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all proposed buildings subject to the requirements of Section 7-1-1000 of this Chapter.
The application for a site development permit shall also include the following information:
1. A detailed description of the proposed activity, its purpose, and intended use;
2. Site location (including legal description) of the property, drawn to scale, on the regulatory floodway maps, indicating whether it is proposed to
be in an incorporated or unincorporated area;
3. Anticipated dates of initiation and completion of activity;
4. Plans of the proposed activity shall be provided which include as a minimum:
a. A vicinity map showing the site of the activity, name of the waterway, boundary lines, names of roads in the vicinity of the site, graphic or
numerical scale, and north arrow;
b. A plan review of the project and engineering study reach showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the
structure or work, elevations in mean sea level (1929 adjustment) datum of NGVD, adjacent property lines and ownership, drainage and
flood control easements, distance between proposed activity and navigation channel (when the proposed construction is near a
commercially navigable body of water), flood plain limit, location and orientation of cross sections, north arrow, and a graphical or numerical
scale;
c. Cross section views of the project and engineering study reach showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of
the work, as shown in plan view, existing and proposed elevations, normal water elevation, 10-year frequency flood elevation, 100-year
frequency flood elevation, and graphical or numerical scales (horizontal and vertical); and
d. A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan for disturbed areas. This plan shall include a description of the sequence of grading activities
and the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a
description of final stabilization and revegetation measures, and the identification of a responsible party to ensure post-construction
maintenance.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 232/366
5. Engineering calculations and supporting data shall be submitted showing that the proposed work will meet the criteria of this Section.
6. Any and all other local, State and Federal permits or approvals that may be required for this type of development.
B. Flood Elevation Information: Based on the best available existing data according to the Illinois State Water Survey's Flood Plain Information
Repository, the Enforcement Officer shall compare the elevation of the site to the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation. Should no
elevation information exist for the site, the developer's engineer shall calculate the elevation according to subsection 7-1-600D of this Chapter.
Any development located on land that can be shown to have been higher than the base flood elevation as of the site's first Flood Insurance Rate
Map Identification is not in the SFHA and, therefore, not subject to the requirements of this Chapter. The Building Official shall maintain
documentation of the existing ground elevation at the development site and certification that this ground elevation existed prior to the date of the
site's first Flood Insurance Rate Map identification.
C. Copies of Permits: The Enforcement Officer shall be responsible for obtaining from the applicant copies of all other local, State and Federal
permits, approvals or permit-not-required letters that may be required for this type of activity. The Enforcement Officer shall not issue the
development permit unless all required local, State and Federal permits have been obtained.
D. Preventing Increased Damages: No development in the SFHA, where a floodway has not been determined shall create a damaging or potentially
damaging increase in flood heights or velocity or threat to public health, safety and welfare or impair the natural hydrologic and hydraulic
functions of the floodway or channel, or impair existing water quality or aquatic habitat. Construction impacts shall be minimized by appropriate
mitigation methods as called for in this Chapter.
E. SFHA Standards: Within all riverine SFHAs where the floodway has not been determined, the following standards shall apply:
1. Engineering Requirements: The developer shall have a registered professional engineer state in writing and show through supporting plans,
calculations and data that the project meets the engineering requirements of subsection 7-1-800E1 through E12 for the entire flood plain as
calculated under the provisions of subsection 7-1-600D of this Chapter. As an alternative, the developer should have an engineering study
performed to determine a floodway and submit that engineering study to DWR for acceptance as a regulatory floodway. Upon acceptance of
their floodway by the Department, the developer shall then demonstrate that the project meets the requirements of Section 7-1-800 of this
Chapter for the regulatory floodway. The floodway shall be defined according to the definition in Section 7-1-300 of this Chapter.
2. DWR Permit: A development permit shall not be issued unless the applicant first obtains a permit from DWR or written documentation that a
permit is not required from DWR.
3. Village Responsibility: No permit from DWR shall be required if the Division has delegated permit responsibility to the Village per 92 Illinois
Administrative Code, part 708 for regulatory floodways, per DWR statewide permit entitled "Construction in Flood Plains with No Designated
Floodways in Northeastern Illinois".
4. Dam Safety Permits: Any work involving the construction, modification or removal of a dam or an on-stream structure to impound water as
defined in Section 7-1-300 of this Chapter shall obtain an Illinois Division of Water Resources dam safety permit or letter indicating a permit is
not required prior to the start of construction of a dam. If the Enforcement Officer finds a dam that does not have a DWR permit, the
Enforcement Officer shall immediately notify the Dam Safety Section of the Division of Water Resources. If the Enforcement Officer finds a
dam which is believed to be in unsafe condition, the Enforcement Officer shall immediately notify the owner of the dam and the Illinois
Emergency Services and Disaster Agency (ESDA) and the DWR, Dam Safety Section in Springfield.
5. Activities Permitted without Review: The following activities may be permitted without a registered professional engineer's review or
calculation of a base flood elevation and regulatory floodway. Such activities shall still meet the other requirements of this Chapter:
a. Underground and overhead utilities that:
(1) Do not result in any increase in existing ground elevations, or
(2) Do not require the placement of aboveground structures in the floodway, or
(3) In the case of underground stream crossings, the top of the pipe or encasement is buried a minimum of three feet (3') below the existing
stream bed, and
(4) In the case of overhead utilities, no supporting towers are placed in the watercourse and are designed in such a fashion as not to catch
debris.
b. Storm and sanitary sewer outfalls that:
(1) Do not extend riverward or lakeward of the existing adjacent natural bank slope, and
(2) Do not result in an increase in ground elevation, and
(3) Are designed so as not to cause stream bank erosion at the outfall location.
c. Construction of shoreline and stream bed protection that:
(1) Does not exceed one thousand feet (1,000') in length or two (2) cubic yards per lineal foot of stream bed.
(2) Materials are not placed higher than the existing top of bank.
(3) Materials are placed so as not to reduce the cross- sectional area of the stream channel by more than ten percent (10%).
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 233/366
(4) Vegetative stabilization and gradual side slopes are the preferred mitigation methods for existing erosion problems. Where high channel
velocities, sharp bends or wave action necessitate the use of alternative stabilization measures, natural rock or rip-rap are preferred
materials. Artificial materials such as concrete, construction rubble and gabions should be avoided unless there are no practicable
alternatives.
d. Temporary stream crossings in which:
(1) The approach roads will be 0.5' (1/2 foot) or less above natural grade.
(2) The crossing will allow stream flow to pass without backing up the water above the stream bank vegetation line or above any drainage
tile or outfall invert.
(3) The top of the roadway fill in the channel will be at least two feet (2') below the top of the lowest bank. Any fill in the channel shall be
nonerosive material, such as rip-rap or gravel.
(4) All disturbed stream banks will be seeded or otherwise stabilized as soon as possible upon installation and again upon removal of
construction.
(5) The access road and temporary crossings will be removed within one year after authorization.
e. The construction of light poles, sign posts and similar structures;
f. The construction of sidewalks, driveways, athletic fields (excluding fences), patios and similar surfaces which are built at grade;
g. The construction of properly anchored, unwalled, open structures such as playground equipment, pavilions and carports built at or below
existing grade that would not obstruct the flow of floodwaters;
h. The placement of properly anchored buildings not exceeding seventy (70) square feet in size, nor ten feet (10') in any one dimension (e.g.,
animal shelters and tool sheds);
i. The construction of additions to existing buildings which do not increase the first floor area by more than twenty percent (20%), which are
located on the upstream or downstream side of the existing building, and which do not extend beyond the sides of the existing building that
are parallel to the flow of floodwaters;
j. Minor maintenance dredging of a stream channel where:
(1) The affected length of stream is less than one thousand feet (1,000'),
(2) The work is confined to reestablishing flows in natural stream channels, or
(3) The cross-sectional area of the dredged channel conforms to that of the natural channel upstream and downstream of the site.
k. The flood carrying capacity within any altered or relocated watercourse shall be maintained.
F. Compensatory Storage: Whenever any portion of a flood plain is authorized for use, the volume of space which will be occupied by the authorized
fill or structure below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation shall be compensated for and balanced by an hydraulically equivalent
volume of excavation taken from below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation. The excavation volume shall be at least equal to
the volume of storage lost due to the fill or structure. In the case of streams and watercourses, such excavation shall be made opposite or
adjacent to the areas so filled or occupied. All flood plain storage lost below the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced below the
proposed 10-year flood elevation. All flood plain storage lost above the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced above the proposed 10-
year flood elevation. All such excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse. (Ord. 93-498, 11-9-1993)
7-1-1000: PERMITTING REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE TO ALL FLOOD PLAIN AREAS:
In addition to the requirements found in section 7-1-700, 7-1-800 or 7-1-900 of this chapter for development in flood fringes, regulatory floodways,
and SFHA or flood plains where no floodways have been identified, the following requirements shall be met:
A. Public Health Standards:
1. No developments in the SFHA shall include locating or storing chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, animal wastes, fertilizers, flammable
liquids, pollutants, or other hazardous or toxic materials below the FPE.
2. New and replacement water supply systems, sanitary sewer lines may be permitted; provided, all manholes or other aboveground openings
located below the FPE are watertight. Individual disposal systems and domestic wells shall not be permitted in any flood fringe or flood prone
area. (Ord. 00-683, 10-10-2000)
B. Carrying Capacity And Notification: For all projects involving channel modification, fill, or stream maintenance (including levees), the flood
carrying capacity of the watercourse shall be maintained. In addition, the village shall notify adjacent communities in writing thirty (30) days prior
to the issuance of a permit for the alteration or relocation of the watercourse.
C. Protecting Buildings:
1. All buildings located within a 100-year flood plain also known as an SFHA, shall be protected from flood damage below the flood protection
elevation. However, existing buildings located within a regulatory floodway shall also meet the more restrictive appropriate use standards
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 234/366
included in section 7-1-800 of this chapter. This building protection criteria applies to the following situations:
a. Construction or placement of a new building;
b. A structural alteration to an existing building that either increases the first floor area by more than twenty percent (20%) or the building's
market value by more than fifty percent (50%);
c. Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured home on an existing site. This building protection requirement does
not apply to returning a mobile home to the same site it lawfully occupied before it was removed to avoid flood damage; and
d. Installing a travel trailer on a site far more than one hundred eighty (180) days.
2. This building protection requirement may be met by one of the following methods:
a. A residential or nonresidential building, when allowed, may be constructed on permanent landfill in accordance with the following:
(1) The lowest floor, (including basement) shall be at or above the flood protection elevation.
(2) The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than one foot (1') deep before compaction and should extend at least ten feet (10') beyond
the foundation of the building before sloping below the flood protection elevation. The top of the fill shall be above the flood protection
elevation. However, the ten foot (10') minimum may be waived if a structural engineer certifies an alternative method to protect the
building from damages due to hydrostatic pressures. The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour. The fill shall not adversely
affect the flow or surface drainage from or onto neighboring properties.
b. A residential or nonresidential building may be elevated in accordance with the following:
(1) The building or improvements shall be elevated on crawlspace, stilts, piles, walls or other foundation that is permanently open to
floodwaters and not subject to damage by hydrostatic pressures of the base flood or 100-year frequency flood. The permanent openings
shall be no more than one foot (1') above grade, and consists of a minimum of two (2) openings. The openings must have a total net area
of not less than one square inch for every one square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding below the base flood elevation.
(2) The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored and aligned in relation to flood flows and adjoining structures also as to
minimize exposure to known hydrodynamic forces such as current, waves, ice and floating debris.
(3) All areas below the flood protection elevation shall be constructed of materials resistant to flood damage. The lowest floor (including
basement) and all electrical, heating, ventilating, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and utility meters shall be located at or above
the flood protection elevation. Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines, submersible pumps, and other waterproofed service
facilities may be located below the flood protection elevation.
(4) No area below the flood protection elevation shall be used for storage of items or materials.
(5) Manufactured homes and travel trailers to be installed on a site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days, shall be elevated to or
above the flood protection elevation; and shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by being tied down in
accordance with the Rules and Regulations for the Illinois Mobile Home Tie-Down Act issued pursuant to 77 Illinois Administrative Code
870.
D. Nonresidential Buildings: Only a nonresidential building may be structurally dry floodproofed (in lieu of elevation); provided, that a registered
professional engineer shall certify that the building has been structurally dry floodproofed below the flood protection elevation, the structure and
attendant utility facilities are watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the base flood or 100-year frequency flood. The building design
shall take into account flood velocities, duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy, and impacts from
debris or ice. Floodproofing measures shall be operable without human intervention and without an outside source of electricity (levees, berms,
floodwalls and similar works are not considered floodproofing for the purpose of this subsection).
E. Nonconforming Structures: Nonconforming structures located in a regulatory floodway may remain in use, but may not be enlarged, replaced or
structurally altered. A nonconforming structure damaged by flood, fire, wind or other natural or manmade disaster may be restored unless the
damage exceeds fifty percent (50%) of its market value before it was damaged, in which case it shall conform to this chapter. (Ord. 93-498, 11-9-
1993)
7-1-1100: OTHER DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS:
The board of trustees shall take into account flood hazards, to the extent that they are known, in all official actions related to land management, use
and development.
A. Review Of Proposed Developments: New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation agreements, and planned unit developments
(PUDs) within the SFHA shall be reviewed to assure that the proposed developments are consistent with sections 7-1-700, 7-1-800, 7-1-900 and
7-1-1000 of this chapter and the need to minimize flood damage. Plats or plans for new subdivisions and planned unit developments shall
include a signed statement by a registered professional engineer that the plat or plans account for changes in the drainage of surface waters in
accordance with the Plat Act6.
B. Flood Data: Proposals for new subdivisions, manufactured home parks, planned unit developments and additions to manufactured home parks
and additions to subdivisions shall include base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation data and floodway delineations. Where this
information is not available from an existing study filed with the Illinois State Water Survey, the applicant's engineer shall be responsible for
calculating the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation per subsection 7-1-600D of this chapter and the floodway delineation per the
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 235/366
definition in section 7-1-300 of this chapter and submitting it to the State Water Survey and DWR for review and approval as best available
regulatory data.
C. Layout Regulations: Streets, blocks, lots, parks and other public grounds shall be located and laid out in such a manner as to preserve and utilize
natural streams and channels. Wherever possible, the floodplains shall be included within parks or other public grounds.
D. Compliance Required: The board of trustees shall not approve any planned unit developments or plat of subdivision located outside the
corporate limits unless agreement or plat is in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 93-498, 11-9-1993)
E. Maps And Profiles:
1. Village Maps: The official maps which depict the floodplains, floodways, floodway fringes, floodway encroachment lines, and flood prone
areas, available for inspection in the offices of the village, are hereby made part of this title, and are incorporated herein and are identified as
follows:
a. The official map of flood prone areas in the village of Inverness and vicinity, as prepared by Site Planning and Civil Engineering Corporation,
dated May 1, 1981, revised on May 19, 1981, September 3, 1981, and on January 31, 1984, and as amended from time to time hereafter.
b. The following flood insurance rate map (FIRM):
Map number 17031C and panels 0020J, 0038J, 0039J, 0157J, 0176J, 0177J, 0178J and 0179J dated August 19, 2008, of the countywide
flood insurance rate map for Cook County prepared by the federal emergency management agency for Flint Creek, Salt Creek, Salt Creek
(upper reach), tributary A of Salt Creek, tributary B of Salt Creek, and tributary C of Salt Creek, and Poplar Creek, unnamed tributary 1 of
Poplar Creek, unnamed tributary 2 of Poplar Creek, and unnamed tributary 3 of Poplar Creek.
2. Official Village Flood Profiles: The flood profiles ("profiles") describing the expected elevation of floods along the centerlines of the principal
watercourses of the village and of adjacent unincorporated areas, are available for inspection in the offices of the village of Inverness, are
hereby made part of this title, are incorporated herein and are identified as countywide flood insurance study for Cook County prepared by the
federal emergency management agency dated August 19, 2008.
3. Conflicts Between Maps And Profiles: In the event a conflict arises between the information depicted by the official village map of flood prone
areas and the official village flood profiles as described above, and in the absence of any reasonably reliable and verifiable information to the
contrary, the data prescribed by the profiles shall govern.
4. Official Elevations: The system of official bench marks and elevations already established in the area by the U.S. geological survey (USGS)
and by the official bench marks of the village of Inverness, shall hereafter be taken by engineers, surveyors, architects and contractors when
making topographical surveys and maps, and when setting grades and elevations of buildings, pavements, drainage facilities, and other
structures or works constructed or regulated by the village. Persons relying on those bench marks shall be required to close a circuit on a
second official bench mark to assure accuracy of datum.
5. Determination Of Base Flood Elevation In Flood Prone Areas: It is recognized that certain flood prone areas inundate with considerable
frequency and result in frequent damage or otherwise adversely affect the health and welfare of individuals and the community at large.
Whenever a high water elevation is not shown on the official maps, these areas need to be identified, the damage potential determined and
provisions need to be made for the protection of the existing flood and storm water storage potentials. The enforcement officer may require
storm water drainage system improvements to be provided where necessary to increase storage potentials, or to otherwise lessen the
opportunities for damage and other adverse impacts. In such cases, the developer's engineer shall determine the high water elevation and the
flood protection elevation and submit these to the enforcement officer for review. (Ord. 2008-866, 5-13-2008)
7-1-1200: VARIANCES:
No variances shall be granted to any development located in a regulatory floodway as defined in section 7-1-300 of this chapter. However, when a
development proposal is located outside of a regulatory floodway, and whenever the standards of this chapter place undue hardship on a specific
development proposal, the applicant may apply to the enforcement officer for a variance. The enforcement officer shall review the applicant's
request for a variance and shall submit its recommendation to the board of trustees.
A. No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates that:
1. The development activity cannot be located outside the SFHA or flood prone area;
2. An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not granted;
3. The relief requested is the minimum necessary;
4. There will be no additional threat to public health, safety, beneficial stream uses and functions, especially aquatic habitat, or creation of a
nuisance;
5. There will be no additional public expense for flood protection, lost environmental stream uses and functions, rescue or relief operations,
policing, or repairs to stream beds and banks, roads, utilities, or other public facilities;
6. The provisions of subsection 7-1-700B and section 7-1-900 of this chapter shall still be met;
7. The activity is not in a regulatory floodway;
8. The applicant's circumstances are unique and do not represent a general problem; and
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 236/366
9. The granting of the variance will not alter the essential character of the area involved including existing stream uses.
All data submitted to the village shall be prepared by and bear the seal of a professional engineer registered in the state.
B. The enforcement officer shall notify an applicant in writing that a variance from the requirements of section 7-1-1000 of this chapter that would
lessen the degree of protection to a building will:
1. Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty five dollars ($25.00) for one hundred dollars ($100.00)
of insurance coverage;
2. Increase the risks to life and property; and
3. Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks and that he will acknowledge in writing that he assumes the risk and liability.
C. Variances requested in connection with restoration of a site or building listed on the National Register of Historical Places or documented as
worthy of preservation by the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency may be granted using criteria more permissive than the requirements of
subsections 7-1-1200A and B of this section. (Ord. 93-498, 11-9-1993)
7-1-1300: DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available information
derived from engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur or flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural
causes. This chapter does not imply that development, either inside or outside of the SHFA, will be free from flooding or damage. This chapter does
not create liability on the part of the village or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that results from reliance on this chapter or any
administrative decision made lawfully thereunder. (Ord. 93-498, 11-9-1993)
7-1-1400: PENALTY:
Failure to comply with the requirements of a permit or conditions of a variance resolution shall be deemed to be a violation of this chapter. Upon due
investigation, the enforcement officer may determine that a violation of the minimum standards of this chapter exist. The enforcement officer shall
notify the owner in writing of such violation.
A. If such owner fails after ten (10) days notice to correct the violation:
1. The village may make application to the circuit court for an injunction requiring conformance with this chapter or make such other order as the
court deems necessary to secure compliance with the chapter.
2. Any person who violates this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) or more than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense.
3. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
4. The village may record a notice of violation on the title to the property.
B. The enforcement officer shall inform the owner that any such violation is considered a wilful act to increase flood damages and, therefore, may
cause coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to be suspended.
C. Nothing herein shall prevent the village from taking such other lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected therewith
shall accrue to the person or persons responsible. (Ord. 93-498, 11-9-1993)
7-1-1500: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. Where this chapter and other
ordinances, easements, covenants or deed restrictions conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. This
chapter is intended to repeal the original ordinance which was adopted to meet the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, but is not
intended to repeal the resolution which the village passed in order to establish initial eligibility for the program. (Ord. 93-498, 11-9-1993)
7-1-1600: SEPARABILITY:
The provisions and sections of this chapter shall be deemed separable and the invalidity of any portion of this chapter shall not affect the validity of
the remainder. (Ord. 93-498, 11-9-1993)
7-1-1700: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval and publication in pamphlet form pursuant to law. (Ord. 93-498, 11-
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 237/366
9-1993)
Footnote 1: See title 6, chapter 2, and title 5, chapter 6, respectively, of this code.
Footnote 2: See chapter 4 of this title.
Footnote 3: 225 ILCS 330/1 through 330/49.
Footnote 4: 225 ILCS 325/1 through 325/49.
Footnote 5: See subsection 7-1-800E16 of this Chapter.
Footnote 6: 765 ILCS 205/2.
Chapter 2
LAND USE REGULATIONS
7-2-1: FLOOD PRONE AREAS:
A. Floodways: Relative to the base flood areas where the floodways have been identified, the following provisions shall prevail:
1. The following are the only land uses permitted in floodways; provided, however, that such uses are also permitted by the Zoning Title and by
other ordinances:
Agriculture as now practiced
Agriculture
Archery range
Flower farm
Golf course
Golf driving range
Grass or sod farm
Nature conservancy area
Park, commercial recreational
Park, public recreational
Public and private open land
Public safety facilities, where a VCROMR has been granted by the Board of Trustees of the Village in accordance with Chapter 1 of this Title.
2. No use or activity will be permitted within a floodway which will impede or increase the flow and passage of floodwaters.
3. Individual disposal systems and domestic wells shall not be permitted in any floodway.
B. Flood Fringe and Other Flood Prone Areas:
1. The following are the only land uses permitted in flood fringes and other flood prone areas; provided, however, that such uses are also
permitted by the Zoning Title and by other ordinances:
Agriculture as now practiced
Arboretum or Botanical Garden
Archery Range
Flower Farm
Game Animal Farm
Golf Course
Golf Driving Range
Grass or Sod Farm
Nature Conservancy Area
Nursery, Tree or Shrub
Orchard
Park, Commercial Recreational
Park, Public Recreational
Roadways
Outdoor Recreational Uses
Picnic Grove
Playground
Public and Private Open Land
Public Safety Facilities, where a VCROMR has been granted by the Board of Trustees of the Village in accordance with Chapter 1 of this Title.
Truck Farm
Utility Installation
Wilderness Areas and Wildlife Refuges
2. Individual disposal systems and domestic wells shall not be permitted in any flood fringe or flood prone area. (Ord. 92-474, 12-8-92)
7-2-2: OPEN STORAGE OF FLOATABLE MATERIALS:
Logs, wastes, lumber, lumber products, and other floatable materials or containers shall not be placed, displayed, or stored in any floodway or any
flood fringe or other flood prone areas.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 238/366
7-2-3: OPEN STORAGE OF OTHER MATERIALS:
The open storage or display in any floodway, or in any flood fringe or other flood prone areas of inoperable motor vehicles and similar nonmovable
machinery and other nonfloatable materials and products, even though such storage is permitted by the regulations of the applicable zoning district
is prohibited.
7-2-4: OPEN STORAGE OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS:
The open storage in any floodway or in any flood fringe or other flood prone area of materials which are flammable, explosive, toxic or which could
be otherwise injurious to human, animal or plant life is prohibited. (1983 Code)
Chapter 3
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS
7-3-1: OTHER REGULATIONS:
Before commencing any of the work regulated by this Title, an applicant shall comply with the requirements set forth in other applicable provisions of
this Code and other ordinances of this Village, along with those set forth in this Title and as may be required by Federal or State laws and the
regulations of any department of the State of Illinois, and other governmental agencies having jurisdiction. Where provisions of this Title are more
restrictive than other requirements, this Title shall apply.
7-3-2: APPLICABILITY:
The requirement for stormwater detention shall apply to any new residential development having a gross aggregate area, including roads, utility
rights of way and other dedicated lands, of two (2) or more acres, and to any new commercial, industrial, institutional or utility development having a
gross aggregate area of one acre or more.
7-3-3: LIMITATION ON STORMWATER RUNOFF RATE:
Downstream property, watercourses, channels or conduits shall not receive stormwater runoff from proposed developments at higher velocities nor
at a higher peak flow rate than that prescribed by this Title.
7-3-4: MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE RELEASE RATE:
The maximum allowable release rate of stormwater originating from the proposed development will not exceed fifteen-hundredths (0.15) cubic feet
per second per acre and may not exceed the predetermined safe carrying capacity of any limiting downstream restriction. If more than one detention
basin is involved in the development of the area upstream of the limiting restriction, the allowable release rate from any one detention basin will be
in direct ratio that its drainage area bears to the entire drainage area of the watershed.
7-3-5: ON-SITE DETENTION OF EXCESS STORMWATER RUNOFF:
The increased stormwater runoff resulting from the proposed development will be detained on-site by the provision of appropriate wet or dry bottom
reservoirs, by storage in parking lots, or by other techniques acceptable to the Enforcement Officer. Storage will be sufficient to store excess flows
from 100-year storms of all intensities and durations up to twenty four (24) hours. Control devices shall limit the discharge from storage to a rate no
greater than that prescribed by this Title.
7-3-6: VELOCITY OF DISCHARGE:
The velocity of discharge from any release device shall not exceed the velocity of flow which occurred at the respective point of discharge prior to
construction of the stormwater drainage facility.
7-3-7: EARLY INSTALLATION OF STORMWATER CONTROL SYSTEMS:
Runoff control measures shall be installed concurrently with initial earthwork operations, and shall be constructed in a manner consistent with the
provisions of soil erosion control and sedimentation regulations of this Village as contained in Title 4, Chapter 8 of this Code.
7-3-8: DETENTION FACILITIES IN FLOOD PLAIN:
If detention storage is provided within a flood plain, only the net increase in storage volume above that which naturally existed on the flood plain
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 239/366
shall be credited to the development. No credit will be granted for volumes below the elevation of the regulatory flood at that location unless
compensatory storage is also provided. (Ord. 90-412, 11-13-90)
7-3-9: FLOWS FROM UPLAND AREAS:
The total tributary area must be used in calculating the allowable release rate. The required storage volume will be based on the project area only,
with extraneous flows from upland areas being bypassed or discharged via overflow spillways or other devices. (Ord. 90-412, 11-13-90)
7-3-10: DESIGN METHODS:
The Enforcement Officer shall approve the hydrological and hydraulic methods and computations for the design of stormwater runoff, detention
storage flood plain alterations. (Ord. 90-412, 11-13-90)
7-3-11: VARIATIONS:
The President and Board of Trustees may grant a variation from the provisions of this Chapter only if the applicant for the variation can demonstrate
that:
A. An undue hardship would result without the variation;
B. The relief granted is the minimum necessary to avoid such hardship;
C. No potential harm to public health, safety or welfare will result from the grant of such variation;
D. No additional public expense will result from the grant of such variation; and
E. All data submitted to the Village shall be prepared by and bear the seal of a professional engineer registered with the State. (Ord. 90-412, 11-13-
90)
Chapter 4
SUBDIVISION AND PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
7-4-1: PRELIMINARY PLANS, REQUIRED INFORMATION:
Accompanying the preliminary plans of each proposed subdivision or planned unit development, there shall be furnished the following information
and data:
A. Contour Map: A topographic map with no greater than two foot (2') interval contours of the property to be subdivided or developed and such
adjoining land whose topography may affect the layout or drainage of the subject property. Where ground slopes are less than one foot (1')
vertical per one hundred feet (100'), horizontal a one foot (1') interval contour map will be required. Datum shall be USGS (mean sea level) and
shall be identified with respect to specific official Village bench marks. On such a map, there shall be shown the following:
1. The location of streams and other floodwater runoff channels, their normal channels, the extent of their flood plains at the established high
water elevations and the limits of the floodway, all properly identified;
2. The normal shoreline of lakes, ponds, swamps and detention basins, their flood plains and lines of inflow and outflow, if any;
3. The location of agricultural tile, inlets and outlets;
4. Storm, sanitary and any sewer outfalls;
5. Septic tank systems and outlets, if any, upon the land to be developed and within one hundred feet (100') of contiguous property;
6. Seeps, springs and wells;
7. Location of existing structures that will remain;
8. 100-year flood elevation and limits, including floodway data for that portion of a subdivision or development which is in the base flood area.
B. Channel Profiles: Profile drawings of each stream channel, pond and basin showing elevations of the following:
1. The stream bed;
2. Channel banks, if any;
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 240/366
3. Waterway openings of existing culverts and bridges within and near the tract;
4. Size and elevation of sewer and drain outlets into the stream channel or basin;
5. The base flood elevations established by this Title.
C. Preliminary Drainage Plan: A preliminary drainage plan is intended to describe the present conditions and the general method and features
proposed for handling stormwater runoffs after development. The plan will be accompanied by preliminary maps or other descriptive materials
prepared by and bearing the seal of a registered professional engineer showing the following:
1. Drainage subareas;
2. General alignment of storm sewers and other drains;
3. Areas where special provisions may be necessary to reduce the impacts of high stormwater flows;
4. Existing streams and flood prone areas and any proposed realignments or modifications;
5. Locations of existing and proposed culverts, detention ponds and basins, and other features which now affect, or will affect, stormwater
runoffs and areas inundated by high stream flows;
6. Dimensions of the property to be developed, together with proposed elevations, structure locations, proposed pavement elevations at summits
and sags, and overland flow routes and critical elevations. (Ord. 93-498, 11-9-93)
7-4-2: FINAL PLANS, REQUIRED INFORMATION:
Accompanying the final plans of each proposed subdivision or planned unit development, there shall be furnished the following information and data
prepared by and bearing the seal of a professional engineer registered in Illinois:
A. Contour Map: As described in subsection 7-4-1A.
B. Comprehensive Drainage Plan: A comprehensive drainage plan is a plan designed to handle safely the stormwater runoff following the
rainstorms which exceed the design capacity of storm sewer systems by detention of the increased stormwater runoff. The plan shall provide or
be accompanied by maps or other descriptive material showing the following:
1. The extent and area of each watershed tributary to drainage channels in the project;
2. Pavement elevations, roadway ditches, storm sewers and other storm drains to be built, the basis of their design, the outfall and outlet
locations and elevations, receiving stream or channel and its high water elevation and the functioning of the drains during high water
conditions;
3. Proposed drainage patterns for all lots open space areas. Information shall include ground slopes, nature of drainageway improvements and
transitions into channels or drains;
4. Existing streams and flood prone areas to be maintained, enlarged, altered and eliminated; and new channels to be constructed, their
locations, cross sections and profiles;
5. Existing culverts and bridges, drainage areas, elevation and adequacy of waterway openings; and new culverts and bridges to be built, their
materials, elevations, waterway openings and the basis of their design;
6. Existing detention ponds and basins to be maintained, enlarged and altered and new ponds or basins to be built with dams, if any;
7. The estimated location and extent of impervious surfaces existing and expected to be constructed when the subdivision is completely
developed;
8. The slope, type and size of all sewers and other waterways;
9. For all detention basins, a plot or tabulation of storage volumes with corresponding water surface elevations and of the basin outflow rates for
those water surface elevations;
10. For all detention basins, design hydrographs of inflow and outflow for the 10-year and 100-year design runoff events for the site under
developed conditions and the calculated 10-year and 100-year peak flows from the site under natural and developed conditions;
11. Locations routing, cross sections and capacities of overland flow routes to contain and discharge excess flows into the detention basins.
(Ord. 93-498, 11-9-93)
7-4-3: DEVELOPMENT DESIGN:
The following rules shall govern the design of land improvements with respect to floods:
A. General: All proposed subdivision and planned unit developments within the base flood area shall be reviewed to assure that the proposed
improvements are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage, that all public utility and cable television facilities are located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage and that adequate drainage is provided.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 241/366
B. Design: Streets, blocks, depths of lots, parks and other public grounds shall be located and laid out in such a manner as to reduce the velocity of
overland flow and allow the maximum opportunity for infiltration of stormwaters into the ground, and to preserve and utilize natural streams,
channels and detention basins and, wherever possible, including streams and flood plains within parks or other public grounds.
C. Channel Straightening: Sharply meandering streams or channels may be partially straightened and minor changes made in other channels,
subject to the approval of the Enforcement Officer, provided:
1. The hydraulic capacity of the floodway is maintained;
2. The volume of floodwater storage outside the floodway is not reduced;
3. Provision is made to stabilize the banks of the modified channel to control erosion; and
4. Any additional permits for this work that are required by the Illinois Department of Transportation pursuant to subsection 7-1-800B17 are
obtained.
D. Lots in Flood Prone Area: Land lying partially in the base flood area may be laid out and platted as building lots or parcels, provided a building
site not lower than the base flood elevation plus one foot (1'):
1. Exists on the high part of the lot or parcel;
2. The individual sewage disposal system can be constructed in accordance with the provisions of the health and sanitation regulations of this
Code.
E. Compensatory Storage: Such filling as may be required or permitted by this Title must meet the provisions of subsection 7-1-900F.
F. Streets and Roads: When failure or interruption of service of streets or roads would endanger public health or safety, streets and roads shall be
protected to the base flood elevation. In other instances, protection shall be provided to the extent practical.
G. Drainageways: Whenever the plans call for the passage and/or storage of surface runoff or excess stormwater on individual lots, the critical
elevations on all such lots shall be prescribed and established as part of the plat of subdivision. The areas so designated for the passage and/or
storage of such waters shall not be obstructed and shall be protected by appropriate easements on the plat of subdivision. The limits of the high
water levels resulting from the passage and/or storage of surface runoff or excess stormwater on lots shall be recorded on the plat of subdivision
and shall be covered by an easement.
H. Storm Sewer Outfalls: Storm sewer outfalls shall be so designed, by reason of elevation of the invert, by the installation of pumps, or by other
features, that when the receiving stream is in full flood, the storm sewers will continue to drain the areas they are designed to serve unless the
provision is made for excess flows to discharge overland into detention basins.
I. Manholes: All sanitary sewer manholes constructed in a flood plain must have a rim elevation of a minimum of one foot (1') above the base flood
elevation or be provided with a locking, watertight manhole cover. (Ord. 93-498, 11-9-93)
7-4-4: DETENTION BASINS:
Basins for this purpose shall be constructed to temporarily detain the stormwater runoff which exceeds the maximum peak flow rate authorized by
this Title.
A. Storage Volumes: The volume of storage provided in these basins, together with such storage as may be authorized in other on-site facilities, will
be sufficient to control the excess runoff from the 100-year storm of any duration.
B. Maximum Depth: The maximum planned depth of stormwaters stored shall not normally exceed five feet (5').
C. Side Slopes: The side slopes of the basin will conform as closely as possible to regraded or natural land contours, shall be under twenty percent
(20%), and shall be planted with perennial varieties of grass approved by the Enforcement Officer. If the side slopes exceed twenty percent
(20%), erosion control and safety measures shall be provided, as approved by the Enforcement Officer.
D. Outlet Control Structures: Outlet control structures shall be designed to operate simply and automatically. Such structures shall be designed to
limit discharges into existing or planned downstream channels or conduits so as not to exceed predetermined maximum approved peak rates.
E. Emergency Spillway: Emergency overflow facilities must be provided in all instances so that stored waters will not exceed the safe capacity of the
basin. (Ord. 93-498, 11-9-93)
7-4-5: WET BOTTOM BASINS:
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 242/366
For basins designed with permanent pools:
A. If fish are to be used to help keep the basin clean, at least one-fourth (1/4) of the area of the permanent pool must have a minimum depth of ten
feet (10').
B. All ponds shall be designed and constructed to incorporate a safety ledge along the shoreline. The configuration and specifications shall be
approved by the Enforcement Officer.
C. Designs of detention facilities will incorporate additional safety features, particularly at outlets, on steep slopes, and at any attractive nuisances to
include, as necessary, steps, grilles, signs and other protective or warning devices so as to restrict access during critical periods and to afford
some measure of safety to both authorized and unauthorized persons.
D. Designs of detention facilities will incorporate features which facilitate their inspection and maintenance. The growth of noxious weeds, the
creation of conditions which support the growth of mosquitoes and other insects and the decrease in available storage by accumulated
sediments will all be controlled. The cleanup of accumulated debris, flotsam and other materials after runoff events have subsided will be
assured. Assignment of responsibility for maintaining facilities serving more than one lot or holding will be documented by appropriate covenants
to property deeds unless responsibility is formally assigned to a public body. (Ord. 93-498, 11-9-93)
Chapter 5
BUILDING REGULATIONS
7-5-1: PERMITS:
A. In addition to any necessary building permit, site development permits shall be required for any proposed construction or improvement or
substantial alteration within flood-prone areas. Such permit shall not be issued until all other necessary permits have been received from those
governmental agencies from which approval is required by Federal, State or local laws. Any proposed work must be subject to the provisions of
Section 7-1-1000 of this Title. The permit application will be reviewed to assure that any proposed construction is:
1. Designed and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure;
2. Constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; and
3. Constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
B. At the time of issuing a building permit, the following information will be noted and recorded by the Village:
1. Elevation of the lowest floor (including basement).
2. Where the elevation of the lowest floor is below grade on one or more sides, the elevation of the floor immediately above.
3. Where a structure is to be floodproofed, the elevation to which such floodproofing extends. (Ord. 96-570, 8-13-1996)
7-5-2: BUILDING SITE:
A. Structures: Each main building or structure that is built on fill shall have or shall be provided with a site, area, or yard that is not lower than the
established base flood elevation plus two feet (2') and which shall extend beyond the outside walls for a distance of at least ten feet (10'). The
finished grade or surface of this area beyond the aforesaid 10-foot distance shall be graded or surfaced so as to drain away from the walls over
a distance of not less than five (5) additional feet.
B. Individual Sewage Disposal Systems: Septic tanks and seepage fields, and all appurtenances shall be constructed wholly outside of flood-prone
areas and shall have finish grade elevations which are not lower than the established flood plain base flood elevation plus two feet (2') or, in
other flood-prone areas, the approved high water elevation plus two feet (2'). The systems must comply in all respects with the health and
sanitation regulations of this Code. (Ord. 96-570, 8-13-1996)
7-5-3: WATER SUPPLY AND SANITARY SEWER SYSTEMS:
The design of water supply and sanitary sewer systems to be located in the flood plain shall minimize or eliminate the discharges from the system
into the floodwaters and the infiltration of floodwaters into the system. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located so as to avoid impairment of
them or contamination of such systems due to flooding. (Ord. 96-570, 8-13-1996)
7-5-4: DESIGN CRITERIA:
The following general design criteria shall apply to all new construction and substantial improvements which may be authorized where portions of
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 243/366
the building lots lie in flood-prone areas.
A. Residential Structures: The lowest floor, including the basement of residential structures must be at an elevation not less than that of the base
flood elevation plus two feet (2'), unless they are adequately floodproofed and not be defined as a substantial improvement pursuant to Section
7-1-300 of this Title. Within any AO zone, all new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures shall have the lowest floor
(including basement) elevated above the depth number specified on the Village FIRM.
B. Nonresidential Structures: The lowest floor, including the basement, of nonresidential structures must be elevated or floodproofed to an elevation
not less than that of the base flood elevation plus two feet (2'). Within an AO zone, all new construction and substantial improvements of
nonresidential structures shall:
1. Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the crown of the nearest street to or above the depth number specified on the
FIRM; or
2. Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities shall be completely floodproofed to or above that level to FEMA standards.
C. Walls: The walls, foundations, and other features which may be authorized for construction or installation at an elevation below that of the base
flood elevation plus two feet (2') must be designed in accordance with subsection 7-1-1000C2b(1) of this Title. A door sill, window sill, top of
foundation or the bottom of any other opening in the outer walls of a building or structure shall be constructed at an elevation not lower than two
feet (2') above the base flood elevation.
D. Anchoring: All authorized structures, including underground and aboveground tanks, shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation. Anchoring
materials shall be rust-resistant.
E. Service Facilities: To the maximum extent feasible, all service facilities, such as electrical and heating equipment, shall be installed, constructed
or otherwise protected so as to remain operational should floodwaters reach the base flood elevation plus two feet (2'). Water supply and
wastewater collection and treatment systems shall be designed and constructed so as to prevent the entrance of floodwaters.
F. Floodproofing: Where the lowest floor elevation (including basement) is below the base flood elevation plus two feet (2'), the structure, with the
attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall be floodproofed to a level of two feet (2') above the base flood elevation. Where floodproofing is
required, a registered professional engineer shall certify that the floodproofing methods employed are adequate to withstand the flood depths,
pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated with the base flood and a record of such certificates indicating the
specific elevation to which such structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the Village.
G. Overhead Sewers: When the building wall encloses open space that is below flood elevation, gravity storm and sanitary sewer connections are
specifically prohibited and overhead sewers are required for the sanitary connections and sumps for the storm sewer connections. (Ord. 96-570,
8-13-1996)
Chapter 6
GENERAL PROVISIONS
7-6-1: RESPONSIBILITY:
The administration of this Title shall be the responsibility of the Enforcement Officer, as designated by the Village President with the approval of the
Board of Trustees, provided that no site development permit requiring a variation from the terms, conditions or requirements of this Title shall be
granted without the prior approval of the Board of Trustees.
7-6-2: INTERPRETATION:
In the interpretation and application of this Title, the provisions hereof shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in
favor of the Village of Inverness and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by State Statutes or by other provisions
of this Code or by other ordinances of this Village.
7-6-3: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
It is not intended by this Title to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, deed restrictions, special uses for planned unit
development, or other applicable ordinances of this Village except as expressly stated. However, where this Title imposes greater restrictions, the
provisions hereof shall prevail.
7-6-4: DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of flood protection and stormwater management required by this Title is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
historical records, engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur or flood heights may be increased by man made or natural
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 244/366
causes. This Title does not imply that areas outside the prescribed boundaries of flood prone areas or land uses permitted within such areas will be
free from flooding or flood damages. This Title shall not create liability on the part of the Village of Inverness or any officer or employee thereof for
any flood or stormwater damages which may result from reliance on this Title or on any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
7-6-5: CORRECTIVE ACTIONS:
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Village of Inverness from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. All
such costs connected therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible for such violation. (Ord. 90-412, 11-13-90)
Title 8
STREETS, ROADS AND OTHER PUBLIC PROPERTY
Footnotes - Click any footnote link to go back to its reference.
Footnote 1: The Village Zoning Ordinance has been inserted in this Code for convenience only and is not part of this Code.
Chapter 1
STREET AND ROADS IN GENERAL
8-1-1: INJURY TO PAVEMENT:
It shall be unlawful to walk upon or drive any vehicle or animal upon, or injure any newly laid street pavement while same is guarded by a warning
sign or barricade, or to knowingly injure any street pavement. (1983 Code)
8-1-2: LITTERING:
It shall be unlawful to store or throw any refuse of any kind on any road, street or other public place. (1983 Code)
8-1-3: OBSTRUCTIONS AND ENCROACHMENTS GENERALLY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, create or maintain any obstruction of, or encroachment upon any street, road or other public way,
whether on, above or below ground level, except as may be specifically authorized by the board of trustees or by the village president. (1983 Code)
8-1-4: SALE OR DISPLAY OF MERCHANDISE ON STREETS; DEFACING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to use any street, road or other public place, as space for the sale or display of goods or merchandise for sale; or
to write or mark, or to place any signs or advertisements on any such street, road or other public place, and any such merchandise, goods or signs
may be removed summarily with or without notice by any village official. (1983 Code)
8-1-5: DISTURBING BARRICADES:
It shall be unlawful to disturb or to interfere with any barricades or lights lawfully placed to protect or mark any new pavement or excavation or
opening or other hazard in any public road or street. (1983 Code)
8-1-6: SECURITY OF SCAFFOLDS, LADDERS; OBJECTS LIKELY TO FALL INTO STREET:
Any scaffold or ladders placed in such position that they overhang or can fall onto any public street, road or other public place in the village, shall be
firmly and properly constructed and safeguarded; and it shall be unlawful to place or leave any tool or article on any place in such a manner that the
same can fall into any such street, road or other public place. (1983 Code)
8-1-7: INSURANCE FOR HAZARDOUS ACTIVITIES:
No person shall engage in any work which involves the maintenance of ladders, scaffolds or any other equipment, on or overhanging any such
public place, or the use of any tools whatsoever on or over any such place, if a permit from the village is required for such work, without filing a
certificate of insurance as required by section 8-2-4 of this title. (1983 Code)
8-1-8: HARMFUL DEPOSITS ON STREETS:
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 245/366
It shall be unlawful to deposit on any road, street or other public place any material which may be harmful to the pavement thereof, or any waste
material, or any glass, or other articles which may cause injury to any person, animal or property. (1983 Code)
8-1-9: BURNING ON STREETS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to burn any leaves, paper, rubbish or other substances upon any street in the Village. (1983 Code)
8-1-10: DRAINAGE ONTO STREETS:
It shall be unlawful to construct or permit the construction of or the maintenance of any drain which discharges effluent of any kind onto or into any
public street or road or directly into any public ditch or storm sewer unless approved in advance by the Village. (1983 Code)
8-1-11: ROADWAY DRAINAGE FACILITIES:
A. Cross Slopes: All ditches constructed or repaired after August 1, 1990 shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the provision of
subsection 6-3-3D1 of this Code. Ditch surface treatment for ditches installed or repaired after August 1, 1990 shall be seeded or sodded in
accordance with the Illinois Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction (STSRB) and any treatment
other than turf for such ditches must be approved by the Village Engineer in accordance with the provisions of Section 8-2-1 of this Code.
B. Hydraulic Capacities of Ditches, Culverts and Storm Sewers: All ditches and appurtenances constructed or repaired after August 1, 1990 shall be
designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with the provisions of subsection 6-3-3D4 of this Code.
C. Alteration of Ditches and Appurtenances: It shall be unlawful for any person to fill, excavate or otherwise alter drainage ditches and
appurtenances without first having obtained a permit in accordance with Chapter 2 of this Title. No posts, rocks or obstructions of any kind may
exist or shall be permitted or maintained in ditch areas unless approved by the Village Engineer.
D. Construction and Material Specifications of Driveway Culverts: Driveway culverts constructed or repaired after August 1, 1990 shall conform to
the following minimum standards:
1. Minimum twelve inch (12") internal diameter, and manufactured of fourteen (14) ga. galvanized steel complying with IDOT STSRB, or of such
other material of equivalent strength and durability as approved by the Village Engineer. Culverts shall be sized to comply with subsection 6-3-
3D4.
2. Culverts shall extend a minimum of five feet (5') beyond and on either side of the paved portion of the driveway. The cross-slope over the
culvert shall be no greater than a ratio of three to one (3:1) unless an approved headwall is used. The maximum culvert length shall be forty
feet (40').
3. Culverts shall be bedded in a minimum of four inches (4") pea gravel after removal of all top soil, silt and organic material and replaced with
nonfrost-susceptible materials. The invert elevations and pipe slope shall be approved in advance by the Village Engineer. Culverts shall be
covered with a minimum thickness of paving materials as specified in subsection 8-10-3B.
4. End Treatment: Unless an approved headwall is used, flared end sections shall be installed at each end of the culvert. The end-section
material shall be of the same material as the culvert. Headwalls, if used, shall be of a design approved by the Village Engineer and shall be
constructed of Portland cement concrete, or of such other material of equivalent strength and durability, acceptable to the Village Engineer.
5. Curbing in Right of Way: Curbing shall not be permitted in the right of way unless deemed appropriate by the Village Engineer, or unless the
subdivision complies with the provisions of Section 6-3-10 of this Code.
E. Private Underground Facilities: It shall be unlawful to construct or to maintain any private underground facilities for storm water, sump pump
drainage, potable water supply, waste water, irrigation or any private electrical facilities within any part of any public right of way of the Village
and any such facilities shall be removed prior to December 1, 1990.
8-1-12: ROADWAY SHOULDERS AND PARKWAYS:
A. Design: Shoulders shall conform to the provisions of subsection 6-3-3D1 of this Code. (Ord. 90-404, 8-14-90)
B. Shoulder Treatment: Roadway shoulders shall be permanently seeded or sodded to the edge of the pavement or such shoulders shall otherwise
be improved in a manner specifically approved in writing by the village board. Roadway shoulders shall be constructed and maintained so that
no dropoff occurs at the pavement edge. (Ord. 93-483, 6-8-1993)
C. Obstructions In Shoulders: There shall be no objects placed within the shoulder areas other than a properly located and constructed mailbox
complying with section 8-1-13 of this chapter.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 246/366
D. Parkway Treatment: Parkway surfaces shall be seeded or sodded to the edge of the pavement. No light standards, posts, rocks or obstructions
may exist in the parkway areas. Exceptions to this provision are traffic control signs; street signs; approved parkway trees in accordance with
section 6-3-9 of this code and/or natural vegetation; and facilities owned and maintained by the village or by other public and quasi-public
agencies.
E. Sight Distances: Stopping sight distances shall be maintained to comply with the minimum standards set forth in subsections 6-3-3C2 and C3 of
this code. Owners of abutting premises shall remove overhanging branches which interfere with traffic and safe transit pursuant to section 8-4-14
of this title.
F. Compliance: Any roadway shoulder and/or parkway which does not conform to the provisions of this section shall be brought into compliance on
or before December 1, 1990. (Ord. 90-404, 8-14-1990)
8-1-13: MAILBOXES:
Permits shall not be required for the installation in public rights of way of mailboxes and supporting structures meeting the requirements of the
United States postal service and subject to the following conditions:
A. The installation shall not conflict with existing or proposed public and private utilities.
B. The face of the mailbox shall not be closer than twelve inches (12") from the back of the curb or edge of the pavement if there is no curb.
C. The mailbox and supporting post shall be placed so as to comply with United States postal service regulations as they exist from time to time but
the post shall be no closer than eighteen inches (18") from the back of the curb or edge of the pavement if there is no curb. (Ord. 90-404, 8-14-
1990)
D. All mailboxes within public rights of way shall be set upon wood, hollow metal or plastic posts not to exceed six inches (6") in diameter.
Notwithstanding anything contained herein, all parts shall meet the requirement for mailbox posts as published by the Illinois department of
transportation, from time to time, and on file with the village administrator. The use above the surface of the ground of metal posts greater than
six inches (6") in diameter, concrete posts or brick structures for support of the mailboxes is prohibited. (Ord. 92-468, 12-8-1992)
E. The owner shall be responsible for all costs of installing and maintaining the mailbox.
F. Any mailbox support which does not conform to the provisions of this section shall be removed or brought into compliance on or before December
1, 1990. (Ord. 90-404, 8-14-1990)
8-1-14: DEPOSITING OF SOIL, AGGREGATE, MUD, DIRT, DUST, PLOWED SNOW, DEBRIS AND/OR ANY OTHER
SUBSTANCE:
Any soil, aggregate, mud, dirt, dust, plowed snow, debris and/or any other substance deposited on any street, road, or highway by any vehicle shall
be immediately and substantially removed by the owner and/or operator of the vehicle depositing such soil, aggregate, mud, dirt, dust, plowed snow,
debris and/or any other substance and/or by the building permittee, and/or owner of the site or property within the village where such soil,
aggregate, mud, dirt, dust, plowed snow, debris and/or any other substance originates, and such parties shall be jointly and severally liable and
culpable for such violation if such immediate and substantial removal of any soil, aggregate, mud, dirt, dust, plowed snow, debris and/or any other
substance does not occur. (Ord. 2009-889, 7-14-2009)
8-1-15: PENALTY:
Instead of the general penalty provided for in subsection 1-4-1A of this code, any person violating section 8-1-3, 8-1-8, or 8-1-14 of this chapter shall
be fined not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. A separate offense shall
be deemed committed on each day a violation exists or continues uncorrected. (Ord. 2009-889, 7-14-2009)
Chapter 2
CONSTRUCTION, MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR1
8-2-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to construct or lay any pavement on, make any excavation in or tunnel under any public street, road or other public way, or to
repair the same without having first secured a permit therefor. (Ord. 87-302, 6-9-1987)
8-2-2: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 247/366
Applications for permits required by this chapter shall be made to the village president, or his or her designee, and shall state the location of the
intended work, the extent thereof and the person who is to do the actual construction work. (Ord. 92-468, 12-8-1992)
8-2-3: APPROVAL OF PERMIT:
No permit or other approval required by this chapter shall be issued except on order of the village president, or his or her designee. (Ord. 92-468,
12-8-1992)
8-2-4: INSURANCE REQUIRED:
Each applicant for a permit required by this chapter shall file an insurance policy or certificate of insurance with public liability and property damage
coverage in the amount of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) naming the village, its officers, agents, servants and employees as
additional insureds. (Ord. 87-302, 6-9-1987)
8-2-5: CASH DEPOSIT:
No permit required by this chapter shall be issued unless the applicant has also filed with the village collector a cash deposit in an amount not less
than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and shall file such larger deposit as the village president determines necessary to insure that the surface of
such public place shall be restored to its original condition upon completion of the work. If within three (3) months of the commencement of the work,
the surface is so properly restored, the amount of the deposit shall be returned to the applicant or his assignee. If it is not restored within this time,
the money shall become the property of the village unless the applicant, within said three (3) months, returns the permit to the village president, or
his or her designee, for cancellation, and the village president, after inspection, determines that no work has been done at such public place. If work
has been done on the public place but it has not been restored, the village may, but shall not be obligated to restore the surface using the deposit to
pay the cost thereof, and the applicant shall be liable for any such cost in excess of such deposit. (Ord. 92-468, 12-8-1992)
8-2-6: COMPLIANCE WITH SPECIFICATIONS:
All street and road pavement construction and repairs, excavations, refills, tunneling and related resurfacing shall conform to the standards specified
in the subdivision regulations and other applicable provisions of this code, including those specifications relating to street and road width, grade and
required drainage structures. (Ord. 87-302, 6-9-1987)
8-2-7: SUPERVISION OF WORK:
All repair work on pavements, new construction, all excavations, refills, tunneling and related resurfacing shall be under the supervision of the
village president. (Ord. 87-302, 6-9-1987)
8-2-8: BARRICADES:
Any person laying or repairing any pavement on a street, road, or other public place or making any excavation therein shall maintain suitable
barricades to prevent injury of any person or vehicle by reason of the work. Such barricades shall be protected by suitable lights at nighttime. (Ord.
87-302, 6-9-1987)
8-2-9: REFILLING, RESTORATION OF SURFACE:
Any person making any excavation shall refill the same properly and shall restore the surface to its condition before the excavation was made, as
soon as possible. (Ord. 87-302, 6-9-1987)
8-2-10: OBSTRUCTING, ALTERING DRAINAGE DITCH OR OTHER DRAINAGE STRUCTURE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to alter or obstruct established or prescribed culverts, drainage ditches, storm drains, or other drainage structures
within any public road, street or easement, without first having obtained a permit in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. 87-302, 6-9-1987)
8-2-11: OWNER TO MAINTAIN VILLAGE DITCH:
Unless otherwise directed by the village, the owners and occupants of the abutting private or public property shall be jointly and severally obligated
to maintain unpaved portions of adjacent village rights of way and easements, including, but not limited to, vegetation, culverts, storm drains,
ditches, and all other roadway drainage facilities, unobstructed and free from foreign or natural materials or objects and said areas shall be
maintained in accordance with all applicable standards and provisions of this code. (Ord. 90-404, 8-14-1990)
8-2-12: DAMAGE TO VILLAGE RIGHTS OF WAY:
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 248/366
No person, firm, company, corporation, or association, and/or their employee(s) and/or agent(s) shall damage any pavement and/or shoulder within
any village right(s) of way or the unpaved portion(s) of any village right(s) of way, including, but not limited to, grass, ground cover, landscaping,
and/or other vegetation, culverts, storm drains, ditches, and all other roadway drainage facilities in, upon, along, across, above, over, under, or
within or in any manner connected with such village right(s) of way within the corporate limits of the village. All such parties shall be jointly and
severally liable and culpable for such violation(s). Any person(s) violating this section shall be fined not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
nor more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day a violation exists or
continues uncorrected. (Ord. 2008-874, 9-9-2008)
Footnote 1: See also chapter 5 of this title.
Chapter 3
DRIVEWAYS
8-3-1: DRIVEWAY AND CULVERT REQUIRED:
No building shall be erected or permitted on any residential lot unless in conjunction there is constructed a hard surfaced driveway as hereinafter
defined measuring at least ten feet (10') in width and running from the street paving to the building line. Not more than two (2) driveways or other
means of ingress and egress shall be installed or maintained from one lot or parcel to the same street, road or highway. (1983 Code)
8-3-2: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
Any person who installs or repairs, or causes to be installed or repaired, any driveway or other means of ingress and egress or any portion thereof
or any culvert within that portion of the right of way of any road, street or highway under the jurisdiction of the village which lies between the traveled
portion thereof and right of way line shall comply with all the provisions of this chapter. (1983 Code)
8-3-3: PERMIT REQUIRED, APPLICATION:
A. Prior to any installation of a new driveway or other new means of ingress and egress, or repair of a driveway or other means of ingress and
egress (except repairs which are exempted by subsection D of this Section), within the right of way of any road, street or highway under the
jurisdiction of the Village, a driveway permit shall be secured from the Village President.
B. Application: An application for a driveway permit shall be submitted, in writing, to the Village President on such form as shall be reasonably
required by the Village President and shall include or be accompanied by the following information:
1. Sketch, plat, drawing or other data showing the location of said driveway;
2. The relation between the elevation of the travelled portion of the road, street or highway, the portion thereof lying between such travelled
portion and the edge thereof, and the driveway to be installed;
3. The location of the driveway and reference to the nearest existing intersecting road, street or highway; and
4. Provision for drainage under and over said driveway.
C. Permit Fees: The application fee to be paid to the Village at the time of the filing of an application for a driveway permit as herein provided shall
be seventy five dollars ($75.00) when the construction of the driveway is performed in conjunction with the construction of a new residence, and
shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00) in all other cases. The driveway permit fee shall be paid in addition to any other permit fees which may be
required.
D. Exception to Permit: No driveway permit shall be required for repairs or maintenance of any existing driveway, if in the opinion of the Village
President said repairs and maintenance shall not result in relocation of said driveway, materially change the grade or elevation of said driveway
or materially affect drainage.
8-3-4: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT:
The Village President shall issue a driveway permit if he finds that the provisions of this Chapter have been complied with and that no unusual
safety hazards will result from said driveway location which could be avoided or reduced by relocating the driveway to serve the same property. The
Village President may order that construction of any driveway or the repair of any driveway within the right of way of any road, street or highway
under the jurisdiction of the Village cease and desist if he finds that the provisions of this Chapter are not being complied with.
8-3-5: HARD SURFACE DRIVEWAY, DEFINITION AND SPECIFICATIONS:
A. For the purposes of this Chapter, a hard surface driveway shall be any permanent driveway serving a residential lot constructed in accordance
with one of the following pavement designs:
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 249/366
Surface Base Course Subgrade
(1)11/2" Bit. Concrete 5" crushed
aggregate
(CA-6)
Dense Clay
(90% mod.
proctor min.)
(2)5" Port. Cement Concrete
(reinf. or nonreinf.)
2" gravel bed
and dense clay
(3)8" crushed stone (CA-6)
aggregate
Dense Clay
(90% mod.
proctor min.)
(4)Other equivalent designs as
approved by the Village
Engineer
B. All hard surface driveways shall meet the following additional requirements:
1. The driveway culvert shall be placed in accordance with an approved site development permit for the property in question.
2. The driveway culvert and the driveway base course shall be completed prior to the commencement of any on-site construction, including
preparatory site grading, and shall be the only access utilized for construction vehicles or equipment.
3. The driveway surface course shall be completed prior to the issuance of any occupancy permit for the subject property.
4. Each culvert shall be at least twelve inches (12") in diameter and shall extend at least five feet (5') beyond and on either side of the paved
portion of the driveway, and shall be constructed of fourteen (14) gauge galvanized steel or of such other material of equivalent strength and
resistance to corrosion as approved by the Village Engineer.
5. At each end of the culvert as specified in subparagraph B4 above, a flared end section, of the same material as the culvert, shall be installed.
The total length of the culvert, including such flared end sections, shall not exceed forty feet (40').
8-3-6: MAINTENANCE:
No driveway shall be installed or maintained within the right of way of any road, street or highway which shall significantly interfere with or impede
existing drainage. The owner of the property served by a driveway shall be responsible for the maintenance of such driveway and the structures
appurtenant thereto.
8-3-7: INTERFERENCE WITH DRAINAGE PROHIBITED:
No person shall otherwise interfere with or impede drainage of any drainage ditch, swale or other means of drainage within the right of way of any
road, street or highway under the jurisdiction of the Village, whether such interference or impediment occurs within such right of way or upon private
property.
8-3-8: DRAINAGE FACILITIES IN ROADWAY:
No person shall construct, operate, or maintain any conduit, drain, structure or appurtenance within the public right of way unless a permit has first
been obtained therefor.
8-3-9: TEMPORARY CONSTRUCTION DRIVEWAY REQUIRED:
A temporary gravel driveway from the roadway to a point no less than twenty feet (20') from the proposed terminus of the final driveway shall be
constructed, and a culvert in compliance with this Chapter shall be installed, before any other construction is done on a building site.
Chapter 4
TREES AND SHRUBS
8-4-1: TITLE:
This Chapter 4 of Title 8 shall be known and may be cited as the "INVERNESS TREE ORDINANCE" of the Village of Inverness, Cook County,
Illinois.
8-4-2: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 250/366
A. Purpose: It is the purpose of this Chapter to promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare by providing for the regulation of
the planting, maintenance, and removal of trees, shrubs, and other plants within the Village of Inverness, Cook County, Illinois ("the Village").
B. Intent: It is the intent of the Board of Trustees of the Village that the terms of this Chapter shall be construed so as to promote:
1. The planting, maintenance, restoration, and survival of desirable trees, shrubs and other plants within the Village; and
2. The protection of community residents from personal injury and property damage, and the protection of the Village from property damage,
caused or threatened by the improper planting, maintenance, or removal of trees, shrubs, or other plants located within the community.
8-4-3: DEFINITIONS:
As used within this Chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth in this Section:
ARBORICULTURAL SPECIFICATIONS AND STANDARDS OF PRACTICE FOR THE VILLAGE OF INVERNESS: A manual prepared by the
Arborist pursuant to this Chapter containing regulations and standards for the planting, maintenance, and removal of trees, shrubs, and other plants
upon Village-owned property. (Hereinafter, "Arboricultural Specifications Manual".)
ARBORIST: The Village Arborist of the Village of Inverness ("the Arborist").
PROPERTY OWNER: The record owner or contract purchaser of any parcel of land.
TREES, SHRUBS, AND OTHER PLANTS: All vegetation, woody or otherwise, except lawn grass and flowers less than twenty four inches (24") in
height.
VILLAGE-OWNED PROPERTY: Property within the Village limits of the Village of Inverness, Illinois; and
A. Owned by the Village in fee simple absolute; or
B. Implied or expressly dedicated to the public for present or future use for purposes of vehicular or pedestrian traffic, or for public easements.
8-4-4: THE INVERNESS TREE COMMISSION; ESTABLISHMENT, COMPOSITION, APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS,
DUTIES:
A. Establishment: The Inverness Tree Commission (hereinafter "Tree Commission") is hereby established. Its functions and duties are limited to
those set forth in this Chapter.
B. Composition: The Tree Commission shall be composed of eight (8) Commissioners. Five (5) Commissioners shall be appointed by the Village
President with the approval of the Board of Trustees. These five (5) Commissioners shall serve without pay and shall reside within the Village.
The remaining three (3) Commissioners shall be ex officio and shall not vote. For example, the three (3) ex officio Commissioners shall be: the
Village President, Village Administrator, Chairman of the Plan Commission, and the Arborist. Subject to the exceptions in subsection C
immediately below, each Commissioner of the Tree Commission shall serve for a term of three (3) years.
C. Appointment of Members: One of the five (5) Commissioners initially appointed to the Tree Commission, who is not an ex officio member, shall
serve for a term of one year; two (2) of the five (5) Commissioners initially appointed shall serve for a term of two (2) years; and, two (2) of the
five (5) Commissioners initially appointed shall serve for a term of three (3) years. All terms shall start on a common date. Determination of the
length of terms of the five (5) Commissioners initially appointed shall be by lot. The Village President shall designate the Chairperson of the Tree
Commission.
D. Expiration or Vacation of Terms: Within thirty (30) days following the expiration of the term of any appointed Commissioner, a successor shall be
appointed by the Village President with the approval of the Board of Trustees, and the successor shall serve for a term of three (3) years. Should
any Commissioner resign or be removed from the Tree Commission, a successor shall be appointed by the Village President and shall serve for
the unexpired period of the vacated term. A member of the Tree Commission may be removed by the Village President with the approval of a
majority of Board of Trustees.
E. Duties: The Tree Commission shall perform the following duties:
1. Within a reasonable time after the appointment of the Tree Commission, upon call of the Chairperson of the Tree Commission, the Tree
Commission shall meet and adopt rules of procedure for regular and special meetings to fulfill the duties imposed upon it by this Chapter.
2. The Tree Commission shall advise and consult the Arborist on any matter pertaining to the Inverness Tree Ordinance and its enforcement.
The topics under which this advice and consultation may be given may include, but are not limited to, any of the following:
a. Amendments to the Inverness Tree Ordinance, and alterations or revisions to the Arboricultural Specifications Manual, and alterations or
revisions of the Urban Forestry Plan;
b. Policies concerning selection, planting, maintenance, and removal of trees, shrubs, and other plants within the Village;
c. Allocation of funds to the Arbor Division, and expenditures of funds by the Arbor Division;
d. Establishment of educational and informational programs;
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 251/366
e. Development of policies and procedures regarding the Arborist's duties;
f. Issuance of permits required by this Chapter;
3. The Tree Commission, upon the request of any person who disagrees with the decision of the Arborist, shall hear all issues of the disputes
which arise between the Village Arborist and any such person whenever those issues involve matters or the interpretation or enforcement of
the Arboricultural Specifications Manual, the Urban Forest Plan, or of the interpretation or enforcement of this Chapter, including disputes
regarding the issuance of permits, or the concurrence or nonconcurrence of the Arborist in permits required under other ordinance or laws, or
the abatement of nuisances. The decision of a majority of the appointed members of the Tree Commission with regard to such dispute shall be
binding upon the Arborist. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to limit the jurisdiction of any Court of Law with respect to such disputes.
8-4-5: VILLAGE ARBORIST; ESTABLISHMENT, DUTIES:
A. Establishment: The position of the Village Arborist is hereby established.
B. Duties: The Village Arborist ("the Arborist") shall perform the following duties:
1. The Arborist, with the assistance of the Tree Commission, shall develop, and each subsequent year, update the Urban Forestry Plan. The
Plan shall outline urban forestry program activities for a minimum of the next five (5) years. This plan shall describe the urban forestry activities
to be undertaken by the Village, the reasons for those activities, the possible funding source(s), the means of accomplishing the activities, the
alternatives available to the Village to fund or accomplish the activity, the projected date of completion, and the consequences if the activity is
not completed. Activities may include but are not limited to street tree inventory, planting, tree removal, beautification projects, and educational
projects.
2. The Arborist, with the assistance of the Tree Commission shall develop and periodically review and revise, as necessary, the Arboricultural
Specifications Manual. This manual shall contain regulations and standards for the planting, maintenance, and removal of trees, shrubs and
other plants upon Village-owned property. (Ord. 91-432, 12-10-91)
3. The Arborist shall cause the Urban Forestry Plan and the Arboricultural Specifications Manual, and all revisions and amendments to it, to be
published and promulgated and shall cause three (3) copies of the Manual, and all revisions and amendments to it, to be available for public
inspection at the office of the Village Administrator. Notice that such information is available for public inspection shall be published in a
newspaper of general circulation within the Village at least one weekday of each of four (4) consecutive weeks immediately following the initial
availability of the Arboricultural Specifications Manual, or revisions or amendments thereto. The Arboricultural Specifications Manual, and any
revisions and additions thereto, shall become effective on the tenth day following the final publication in a newspaper of general circulation
required under this subsection. (Ord. 92-468, 12-8-92)
4. The Arborist shall make available to any interested person copies of the Tree Ordinance, information about the activities of the Tree
Commission, copies of the Arboricultural Specifications Manual and copies of the Urban Forestry Plan.
5. The Arborist shall administer the Urban Forestry Plan, the Tree Ordinance and the provisions of the Arboricultural Specifications Manual.
6. The Arborist shall perform whatever acts are necessary, including the planting and maintenance of trees, the removal of undesirable trees,
shrubs, and other plants located on Village-owned property, to insure that all trees, shrubs, and other plants located on Village-owned property
conform with the Urban Forestry Plan, the Arboricultural Specifications Manual, and this Chapter.
7. The Arborist shall issue such permits as are required by this Chapter and shall obtain as a condition precedent to the issuance of such permits
the written agreement of each person who applies for such permits that he or she will comply with the requirements of this Chapter, the Urban
Forestry Plan, and with the regulation and standards of the Arboricultural Specifications Manual. The Arborist shall have the right to inspect all
work performed pursuant to such permits. If the Arborist finds that the work performed is not in compliance with the requirements of this
Chapter, the Urban Forestry Plan, or with the regulations of standards of the Arboricultural Specifications Manual. The Arborist shall provide
written notice of his/her finding to the permit applicant. The notice shall include a copy of this Chapter; and
a. The permit shall be nullified and shall be void; and
b. The Arborist may issue a written order that the permit applicant cease and desist all work for which the permit was required; and
c. The permit applicant shall be subject to penalty under the terms of this Chapter; and
d. The Arborist may take steps to correct the results of the noncomplying work and the reasonable costs of such steps shall be charged to the
permit applicant.
8. The Arborist shall establish a program of public information and education that will encourage the planting, maintenance, or removal of trees,
shrubs, and other plants on private property in furtherance of the goals of the Urban Forestry Plan.
8-4-6: PERMITS:
A. Scope of Requirement: No person except the Arborist, an agent of the Arborist, or a contractor hired by the Arborist may perform any of the
following acts without first obtaining from the Arborist a permit for which no fee shall be charged, and nothing in this Section shall be construed to
exempt any person from the requirements of obtaining any additional permits as are required by law:
1. Plant on Village-owned property, or treat, prune, remove, or otherwise disturb any tree, shrub, or other plant located on Village-owned
property, except that this provision shall not be construed to prohibit owners of property adjacent to Village-owned property from watering or
fertilizing without a permit any tree, shrub, or other plant located on such Village-owned property.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 252/366
2. Trim, prune, or remove any tree or portions thereof if such tree or portions thereof reasonably may be expected to fall on Village-owned
property and thereby to cause damage to persons or property;
3. Place on Village-owned property, either above or below ground level, a container for trees, shrubs, or other plants;
4. Damage, cut, tap, carve, or transplant any tree, shrub, or other plant located on Village-owned property;
5. Attach any rope, wire, nail, sign, poster, or any other man-made object to any tree, shrub, or other plant located on Village-owned property;
6. Dig a tunnel or trench on Village-owned property;
B. Issuance: Within seven (7) days of receipt of the application, the Arborist shall issue a permit to perform within thirty (30) days of the day of
issuance any of the acts specified in subsections A and B immediately above, for which a permit is requested whenever:
1. Such acts would result in the abatement of a public nuisance or to otherwise comply with the provisions of the Village Code; or
2. Such acts are not inconsistent with the development and implementation of the Urban Forestry Plan or with any regulations or standards of
the Arboricultural Specifications Manual; and whenever
3. An application has been signed by the applicant and submitted to the Arborist detailing the location, number, size, and species of trees,
shrubs, or other plants that will be affected by such acts, setting forth the purpose of such acts and the methods to be used, and presenting
any additional information that the Arborist may find reasonably necessary;
4. The applicant agrees to perform the work for which the permit is sought in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, the Urban Forestry
Plan and with the regulations and standards set forth in the Arboricultural Specifications Manual; and
5. The applicant certifies that he or she has read and understands those provisions of the Urban Forestry Plan, this Chapter and of the
Arboricultural Specifications Manual which are pertinent to the work for which the permit is sought; and
6. If the work for which a permit is issued entails the felling of any tree or part thereof, located on private property, which, as a result of such
felling reasonably may be expected to fall upon Village-owned property, and if such felling is done by one other than the owner of the property
on which such felling is done, then the applicant shall agree to indemnify and to hold the Village harmless for all damages resulting from work
conducted pursuant to the permit and shall deposit with the Village Administrator a Liability Insurance Policy in the amount of one hundred
thousand dollars ($100.000.00) per person, three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) per accident for Bodily Injury Liability and fifty
thousand dollars ($50,000.00) aggregate for Property Damage Liability, which policy shall name the Village, its officers, agents and
employees, as additional insureds.
C. Public Utility Companies: Nothing in this Section shall be construed to exempt public utility companies or their agents from any of the
requirements of this Chapter.
8-4-7: PUBLIC NUISANCES:
A. Definition: The following are hereby declared public nuisances under this Chapter:
1. Any dead or dying tree, shrub, or other plant, whether located on Village-owned property or on private property.
2. Any otherwise healthy tree, shrub, or other plant, whether located on Village-owned property or on private property, which harbors insects or
diseases which reasonably may be expected to injure or harm any tree, shrub, or other plant.
3. Any tree, shrub, other plant, or portion thereof, whether located on Village-owned property or on private property, which by reason of location
or condition constitutes an imminent danger to the health, safety, or welfare of the general public.
4. Any tree, shrub or other plant or portion thereof whether located on Village-owned property or on private property which obstructs the free
passage of pedestrian or vehicular traffic or which obstructs a street sign on Village property.
5. Any tree, shrub or other plant or portion thereof whether located on Village-owned property or on private property which dangerously obstructs
the view as such may be determined by the Village Engineer pursuant to Chapter.
B. Right To Inspect: The officers, agents, servants and employees of the Village have the authority to enter onto private property whereon there is
located a tree, shrub, plant or plant part that is suspected to be a public nuisance.
C. Abatement: The following are the prescribed means of abating public nuisances under this Chapter:
1. Any public nuisance under this Chapter which is located on Village-owned property shall be pruned, removed, or otherwise treated by the
Arborist in whatever fashion is required to cause the abatement of the nuisance within a reasonable time after its discovery.
2. Any public nuisance under this Chapter which is located on privately-owned property shall be pruned, removed, or otherwise treated by the
property owner or his/her agent in whatever fashion is required to cause the abatement of the nuisance. No property owner may be found
guilty of violating this provision unless and until the following requirements of notice have been satisfied:
a. The Arborist shall cause a written notice to be personally served or sent by Regular U.S. Mail Postage Paid to the person to whom was sent
the tax bill for the general taxes for the last preceding year;
b. Such notice shall describe the kind of tree, shrub, or other plant or plant part which has been declared to be a public nuisance; its location
on the property; the reason for declaring it a nuisance;
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 253/366
c. Such notice shall describe by legal description or by common description the premises;
d. Such notice shall state the actions that the property owner may undertake to abate the nuisance;
e. Such notice will require the elimination of the nuisance no more than thirty (30) days after the notice is delivered or sent to the person to
whom was sent the tax bill for the general taxes for the last preceding year;
f. In the event that the nuisance is not abated by the date specified in the notice the Arborist is authorized to cause the abatement of said
nuisance.
3. The Arborist is empowered to cause the immediate abatement of any public nuisance provided that the nuisance is determined by the Arborist
to be an immediate threat to any person, or property.
8-4-8: INTERFERENCE WITH ARBORIST:
No person shall unreasonably hinder, prevent, delay, or interfere with the Arborist or his/her agents while engaged in the execution or enforcement
of this Chapter.
8-4-9: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter or who fails to comply with any notice, directive or order issued pursuant to the provisions of
Chapter, upon being found guilty of violation, shall be subject to a fine as specified in Section 1-4-1 of the Village Code for each separate offense,
and each day during which any violation of the provisions of the Chapter shall occur or continue shall be a separate offense. If, as the result of the
violation of any provision of this Chapter, the injury, mutilation, or death of a tree, shrub, or other plant located on Village-owned property is caused,
the cost of repair or replacement of such tree, shrub, or other plant shall be borne by the party in violation. The replacement value of trees and
shrubs shall be determined in accordance with the latest revision of A Guide to the Professional Evaluation of Landscape Trees, Specimen Shrubs,
and Evergreens, as published by the International Society of Arboriculture.
8-4-10: APPEAL:
Any party who elects to dispute any action or decision by the Village Arborist or Tree Commission shall be entitled to appeal to the Corporate
Authorities of the Village for a final determination.
8-4-11: PERMITS TO PLANT OR REMOVE TREE OR SHRUBS IN PUBLIC PLACES:
It shall be unlawful to plant, remove or cut down any tree or shrub within any public street or parkway or other public place without having first
secured a permit as provided for in Section 8-4-6 of this Chapter.
8-4-12: DAMAGING TREES OR SHRUBS IN PUBLIC PLACES:
It shall be unlawful to injure any tree or shrub planted in any public place.
8-4-13: ADVERTISEMENTS, NOTICES ON TREE OR SHRUBS:
It shall be unlawful to attach any sign, advertisement or notice to any tree or shrub in any street, parkway or other public place.
8-4-14: PLANTS OVERHANGING PUBLIC PLACES; ROOTS IMPEDING DRAINAGE:
A. Any tree or shrub which overhangs any sidewalk, street or other public place in the Village in such a way as to impede or interfere with traffic or
travel on such public place shall be trimmed by the owner of the abutting premises so that the obstruction shall be removed. Roots of any tree or
shrub which impede drainage shall be removed by the owner of the abutting premises pursuant to a permit as provided in Section 8-4-6 of this
Chapter.
B. Any limb of a tree which has become likely to or does fall on or across any public way or place shall be removed by the owner of the abutting
premises pursuant to a permit as provided in Section 8-4-6 of this Chapter.
C. If the owner of the abutting premises fails to fulfill said responsibilities as specified above, the Village may fulfill said responsibilities, but shall not
be required to do so, and such owner shall be liable for the costs thereof pursuant to a permit as provided in Section 8-4-6 of this Chapter.
8-4-15: POLES, WIRES TO BE KEPT AWAY FROM TREES AND SHRUBS:
Any person given the right to maintain poles and wires in the streets, alleys or other public places in the Village shall, in the absence of provision in
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 254/366
the franchise concerning the subject, keep such wires and poles free from and away from any trees or shrubs in such places so far as may be
possible and shall keep all such trees and shrubs properly trimmed and subject to the supervision of the Village President, so that no injury shall be
done to the poles or wires or shrubs and trees by contact. (Ord. 91-432, 12-10-91)
Chapter 5
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN RIGHTS OF WAY
8-5-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and procedures for constructing facilities on rights of way within the village's
jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit consistent with the preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the village rights
of way and the village as a whole.
B. Intent: In enacting this chapter, the village intends to exercise its authority over the rights of way in the village and, in particular, the use of the
public ways and property by utilities, by establishing uniform standards to address issues presented by utility facilities, including, without
limitation:
1. Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys, parkways and other public ways and places;
2. Prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions and other conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
3. Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the village's utilities and of other utilities lawfully located in rights of way or public
property;
4. Protect against environmental damage, including damage to trees, from the installation of utility facilities;
5. Protect against increased storm water runoff due to structures and materials that increase impermeable surfaces;
6. Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which facilities are installed;
7. Preserve open space, particularly the tree lined parkways that characterize the village's residential neighborhoods;
8. Prevent visual blight from the proliferation of facilities in the rights of way; and
9. Assure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties adjacent to utility facilities locations.
C. Facilities Subject To This Chapter: This chapter applies to all facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights of way
within the jurisdiction of the village. A facility lawfully established prior to the effective date of this chapter may continue to be maintained,
repaired and operated by the utility as presently constructed and located, except as may be otherwise provided in any applicable franchise,
license or similar agreement.
D. Franchises, Licenses, Or Similar Agreements: The village, in its discretion and as limited by law, may require utilities to enter into a franchise,
license or similar agreement for the privilege of locating their facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the village rights of
way. Utilities that are not required by law to enter into such an agreement may request that the village enter into such an agreement. In such an
agreement, the village may provide for terms and conditions inconsistent with this chapter.
E. Effect Of Franchises, Licenses, Or Similar Agreements:
1. Utilities Other Than Telecommunications Providers: In the event that a utility other than a telecommunications provider has a franchise, license
or similar agreement with the village, such franchise, license or similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement
and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
2. Telecommunications Providers: In the event of any conflict with, or inconsistency between, the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of
any franchise, license or similar agreement between the village and any telecommunications provider, the provisions of such franchise, license
or similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
F. Conflicts With Other Chapters: This chapter supersedes all chapters or parts of chapters adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the
extent of such conflict.
G. Conflicts With State And Federal Laws: In the event that applicable federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this
chapter, the utility shall comply with the requirements of this chapter to the maximum extent possible without violating federal or state laws or
regulations.
H. Sound Engineering Judgment: The village shall use sound engineering judgment when administering this chapter and may vary the standards,
conditions, and requirements expressed in this chapter when the village so determines. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability of
the village to regulate its rights of way for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 2007-855, 11-13-2007)
8-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 255/366
As used in this chapter and unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the words and terms listed shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section. Any term not defined in this section shall have the meaning ascribed to it in 92 Illinois administrative code section 530.30, unless the
context clearly requires otherwise.
AASHTO: American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials.
ANSI: American National Standards Institute.
ASTM: American Society for Testing and Materials.
APPLICANT: A person applying for a permit under this chapter.
BACKFILL: The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a trench or pit.
BORE OR BORING: To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the insertion of a pipe or electrical conductor.
CABLE OPERATOR: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(5).
CABLE SERVICE: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(6).
CABLE SYSTEM: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(7).
CARRIER PIPE: The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be transported.
CASING: A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such as: carrier pipes, electrical conductors, and fiber optic devices.
CLEAR ZONE: The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may consist
of a shoulder, a recoverable slope, a nonrecoverable slope, and a clear run out area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and
speeds, and on the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO "Roadside Design Guide".
COATING: Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for protection against external corrosion.
CODE: The village code of the village of Inverness.
CONDUCTOR: Wire carrying electrical current.
CONDUIT: A casing or encasement for wires or cables.
CONSTRUCTION OR CONSTRUCT: The installation, repair, maintenance, placement, alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification or
abandonment in place of facilities.
COVER: The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or conductor.
CROSSING FACILITY: A facility that crosses one or more right of way lines of a right of way.
DISRUPT THE RIGHT OF WAY: For the purposes of this chapter, any work that obstructs the right of way or causes a material adverse effect on
the use of the right of way for its intended use. Such work may include, without limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting; placement
(whether temporary or permanent) of materials, equipment, devices, or structures; damage to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil,
and shall not include the parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not materially obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway.
EMERGENCY: Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the safety of the public using or in the vicinity of the right of way or immediate
maintenance required for the health and safety of the general public served by the utility.
ENCASEMENT: Provision of a protective casing.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL: The village president, or the village employee or agent(s) designated by the village president to administer, enforce,
and/or interpret the provisions of this chapter.
ENGINEER: An engineer employed by or engaged by the village, as designated by the village president, or his or her designee, to assist and
consult with the enforcement official.
EQUIPMENT: Materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other items used to facilitate construction of facilities.
EXCAVATION: The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or laying bare by digging.
EXTRA HEAVY PIPE: Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation.
FACILITY: All structures, devices, objects, and materials (including, but not limited to, track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable, antennas,
vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, cabinets, pedestals, poles, conduits, grates, covers, pipes, cables, and appurtenances thereto) located on,
over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights of way under this chapter. For purposes of this chapter, the term "facility" shall not include
any facility owned or operated by the village.
FREESTANDING FACILITY: A facility that is not a crossing facility or a parallel facility, such as an antenna, transformer, pump, or meter station.
FRONTAGE ROAD: Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land adjacent to the highway where it is precluded by control of access to a
highway.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 256/366
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any substance or material which, due to its quantity, form, concentration, location, or other characteristics, is
determined by the village director of public works to pose an unreasonable and imminent risk to the life, health or safety of persons or property or to
the ecological balance of the environment, including, but not limited to, explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum products or gases,
poisons, etiology (biological) agents, flammables, corrosives or any substance determined to be hazardous or toxic under any federal or state law,
statute or regulation.
HIGHWAY: A specific type of right of way used for vehicular traffic including rural or urban roads or streets. "Highway" includes all highway land and
improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges, drainage structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and
appurtenances necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic.
HIGHWAY CODE: The Illinois highway code, 605 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-101 et seq., as amended from time to time.
HOLDER: A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the ICC pursuant to the Illinois cable and
video competition law, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
ICC: Illinois commerce commission.
IDOT: Illinois department of transportation.
JULIE: The joint utility locating information for excavators utility notification program.
JACKING: Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical means with or without boring.
JETTING: Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to create a cavity ahead of the pipe.
JOINT USE: The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two (2) or more utilities.
MAJOR INTERSECTION: The intersection of two (2) or more major arterial highways.
OCCUPANCY: The presence of facilities on, over or under right of way.
PARALLEL FACILITY: A facility that is generally parallel or longitudinal to the centerline of a right of way.
PARKWAY: Any portion of the right of way not improved by street or sidewalk.
PAVEMENT CUT: The removal of an area of pavement for access to facility or for the construction of a facility.
PERMITTEE: That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to sections 8-5-4 and 8-5-5 of this chapter.
PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PIPELINES: Pipelines carrying crude or refined liquid petroleum products including, but not limited to, gasoline,
distillates, propane, butane, or coal slurry.
PRACTICABLE: That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather than that which is simply convenient.
PRESSURE: The internal force acting radially against the walls of a carrier pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig).
PROMPT: That which is done within a period of time specified by the village. If no time period is specified, the period shall be thirty (30) days.
PUBLIC ENTITY: A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the government, whether at local, state or federal level.
RESTORATION: The repair of a right of way, highway, roadway, or other area disrupted by the construction of a facility.
RIGHT OF WAY OR RIGHTS OF WAY: Any street, alley, other land or waterway, dedicated or commonly used for pedestrian or vehicular traffic or
other similar purposes, including utility easements, in which the village has the right and authority to authorize, regulate or permit the location of
facilities other than those of the village. "Right of way" or "rights of way" shall not include any real or personal village property that is not specifically
described in the previous two (2) sentences and shall not include village buildings, fixtures and other structures or improvements, regardless of
whether they are situated in the right of way.
ROADWAY: That part of the highway that includes the pavement and shoulders.
SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying, or furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in
connection therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned
subsidiaries, when the gross charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater than the gross charge paid to the
retailer for their use or consumption and not for sale.
SECURITY FUND: That amount of security required pursuant to section 8-5-10 of this chapter.
SHOULDER: A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing lateral support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency
vehicular stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.
SOUND ENGINEERING JUDGMENT: A decision(s) consistent with generally accepted engineering principles, practices and experience.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: This term includes, but is not limited to, messages or information transmitted through use of local, toll and wide area
telephone service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer exchange service, private line services, mobile radio
services, cellular mobile telecommunications services, stationary two-way radio, paging service and any other form of mobile or portable one-way or
two-way communications, and any other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means, between or among points by wire,
cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or similar facilities. "Private line" means a dedicated nontraffic sensitive service for a single
customer that entitles the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications channel, or a group of such channels, from one or more
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 257/366
specified locations to one or more other specified locations. "Telecommunications" shall not include value added services in which computer
processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code and protocol of the information for purposes other than transmission.
"Telecommunications" shall not include purchase of telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a component part of
the service provided by such provider to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the end to end communications.
"Telecommunications" shall not include the provision of cable services through a cable system as defined in the cable communications act of 1984
(47 USC section 521 and following), as now or hereafter amended, or cable or other programming services subject to an open video system fee
payable to the village through an open video system as defined in the rules of the federal communications commission (47 CFR section 76.1500
and following), as now or hereafter amended.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER: Any person that installs, owns, operates or controls facilities in the right of way used or designed to be used
to transmit telecommunications in any form.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER: Means and includes every person engaged in making sales of telecommunications at retail as defined
herein.
TRENCH: A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an underground facility.
UTILITY: The individual or entity owning or operating any "facility" as defined in this chapter.
VENT: A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or vapors from an underground casing.
VIDEO SERVICE: That term as defined in section 21-201(v) of the Illinois cable and video competition law of 2007, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes
21-201(v).
VILLAGE: The village of Inverness, Cook County, Illinois.
WATER LINES: Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.
WET BORING: Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to soften the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material. (Ord.
2007-855, 11-13-2007)
8-5-3: ANNUAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
Every utility that occupies right of way within the village shall register on January 1 of each year with the enforcement official, providing the utility's
name, address and regular business telephone and telecopy numbers, the name of one or more contact persons who can act on behalf of the utility
in connection with emergencies involving the utility's facilities in the right of way and a twenty four (24) hour telephone number for each such
person, and evidence of insurance as required in section 8-5-8 of this chapter, in the form of a certificate of insurance. (Ord. 2007-855, 11-13-2007)
8-5-4: PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATIONS AND FEES:
A. Permit Required: No person shall construct (as defined in this chapter) any facility on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within any
village right of way which: 1) changes the location of the facility, 2) adds a new facility, 3) disrupts the right of way (as defined in this chapter), or
4) materially increases the amount of area or space occupied by the facility on, over, above, along, under, across or within the right of way,
without first filing an application with the enforcement official and obtaining a permit from the village therefor, except as otherwise provided in this
chapter. No permit shall be required for installation and maintenance of service connections to customers' premises where there will be no
disruption of the right of way.
B. Permit Application: All applications for permits pursuant to this chapter shall be filed on a form provided by the village and shall be filed in such
number of duplicate copies as the village may designate. The applicant may designate those portions of its application materials that it
reasonably believes contain proprietary or confidential information as "proprietary" or "confidential" by clearly marking each page of such
materials accordingly.
C. Minimum General Application Requirements: The application shall be made by the utility or its duly authorized representative and shall contain,
at a minimum, the following:
1. The utility's name and address and telephone and telecopy numbers;
2. The applicant's name and address, if different than the utility, its telephone and telecopy numbers, e-mail address, and its interest in the work;
3. The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers and e-mail addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the
applicant with respect to the application;
4. A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will be put. The scope
and detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature and character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on those
matters likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed;
5. Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the village:
a. A written traffic control plan demonstrating the protective measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the "Illinois Manual
On Uniform Traffic Control Devices", to prevent injury or damage to persons or property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian
and vehicular traffic; and
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 258/366
b. An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of potential emergencies, including, without limitation, construction and
hazardous materials emergencies, and the intended response by the applicant. The intended response shall include notification to the
village and shall promote protection of the safety and convenience of the public. Compliance with ICC regulations for emergency
contingency plans constitutes compliance with this section unless the village finds that additional information or assurances are needed;
6. Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed, including the certification of an engineer that such drawings, plans, and
specifications comply with applicable codes, rules, and regulations;
7. Evidence of insurance as required in section 8-5-8 of this chapter;
8. Evidence of posting of the security fund as required in section 8-5-10 of this chapter;
9. Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of this chapter (see section 8-5-21 of this chapter); and
10. Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the village.
D. Supplemental Application Requirements For Specific Types Of Utilities: In addition to the requirements of subsection C of this section, the permit
application shall include the following items, as applicable to the specific utility that is the subject of the permit application:
1. In the case of the installation of a new electric power, communications, telecommunications, cable television service, video service or natural
gas distribution system, evidence that any "certificate of public convenience and necessity" or other regulatory authorization that the applicant
is required by law to obtain, or that the applicant has elected to obtain, has been issued by the ICC or other jurisdictional authority;
2. In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size, design, construction class, and operating pressures;
3. In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the Illinois environmental protection agency, division of public water supplies, have
been satisfied;
4. In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land and water pollution requirements of the Illinois environmental protection agency,
division of water pollution control and the metropolitan water reclamation district, if applicable, have been satisfied; or
5. In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or types of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure, and the
design standard to be followed.
E. Applicant's Duty To Update Information: Throughout the entire permit application review period and the construction period authorized by the
permit, any amendments to information contained in a permit application shall be submitted by the utility in writing to the village within thirty (30)
days after the change necessitating the amendment.
F. Application Fees: Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar agreement, all applications for permits pursuant to this chapter shall
be accompanied by a fee in the amount of two hundred dollars ($200.00). (Ord. 2007-855, 11-13-2007)
8-5-5: ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS:
A. Village Review Of Permit Applications: Completed permit applications, containing all required documentation, shall be examined by the
enforcement official within a reasonable time after filing. If the application does not conform to the requirements of applicable ordinances, codes,
laws, rules, and regulations, the enforcement official shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the enforcement
official is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this chapter and applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and
regulations, the enforcement official shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable. In all instances, it shall be the duty of the applicant to
demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the enforcement official, that the construction proposed under the application shall be in full compliance with
the requirements of this chapter.
B. Additional Village Review Of Applications Of Telecommunications Retailers:
1. Pursuant to section 4 of the telephone company act, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 65/4, a telecommunications retailer shall notify the village
that it intends to commence work governed by this chapter for facilities for the provision of telecommunications services. Such notice shall
consist of plans, specifications, and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the purpose and intent of the facilities, and shall be
provided by the telecommunications retailer to the village not less than ten (10) days prior to the commencement of work requiring no
excavation and not less than thirty (30) days prior to the commencement of work requiring excavation. The enforcement official shall specify
the portion of the right of way upon which the facility may be placed, used and constructed.
2. In the event that the enforcement official fails to provide such specification of location to the telecommunications retailer within either: a) ten
(10) days after service of notice to the village by the telecommunications retailer in the case of work not involving excavation for new
construction or b) twenty five (25) days after service of notice by the telecommunications retailer in the case of work involving excavation for
new construction, the telecommunications retailer may commence work without obtaining a permit under this chapter.
3. Upon the provision of such specification by the village, where a permit is required for work pursuant to section 8-5-4 of this chapter the
telecommunications retailer shall submit to the village an application for a permit and any and all plans, specifications and documentation
available regarding the facility to be constructed. Such application shall be subject to the requirements of subsection A of this section.
C. Additional Village Review Of Applications Of Holders Of State Authorization Under The Cable And Video Competition Law Of 2007: Applications
by a utility that is a holder of a state issued authorization under the cable and video competition law of 2007 shall be deemed granted forty five
(45) days after submission to the village, unless otherwise acted upon by the village, provided the holder has complied with applicable village
codes, ordinances, and regulations. (Ord. 2007-855, 11-13-2007)
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 259/366
8-5-6: EFFECT OF PERMIT:
A. Authority Granted; No Property Right Or Other Interest Created: A permit from the village authorizes a permittee to undertake only certain
activities in accordance with this chapter on village rights of way, and does not create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to
impinge upon the rights of others who may have an interest in the rights of way.
B. Duration: No permit issued under this chapter shall be valid for a period longer than six (6) months unless construction is actually begun within
that period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion.
C. Preconstruction Meeting Required: No construction shall begin pursuant to a permit issued under this chapter prior to attendance by the
permittee and all major contractors and subcontractors who will perform any work under the permit at a preconstruction meeting. The
preconstruction meeting shall be held at a date, time and place designated by the village with such village representatives in attendance as the
village deems necessary. The meeting shall be for the purpose of reviewing the work under the permit, and reviewing special considerations
necessary in the areas where work will occur, including, without limitation, presence or absence of other utility facilities in the area and their
locations, procedures to avoid disruption of other utilities, use of rights of way by the public during construction, and access and egress by
adjacent property owners.
D. Compliance With All Laws Required: The issuance of a permit by the village does not excuse the permittee from complying with other
requirements of the village and applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations. (Ord. 2007-855, 11-13-2007)
8-5-7: REVISED PERMIT DRAWINGS:
In the event that the actual locations of any facilities deviate in any material respect from the locations identified in the plans, drawings and
specifications submitted with the permit application, the permittee shall submit a revised set of drawings or plans to the village within ninety (90)
days after the completion of the permitted work. The revised drawings or plans shall specifically identify where the locations of the actual facilities
deviate from the locations approved in the permit. If any deviation from the permit also deviates from the requirements of this chapter, it shall be
treated as a request for variance in accordance with section 8-5-21 of this chapter. If the village denies the request for a variance, then the permittee
shall either remove the facility from the right of way or modify the facility so that it conforms to the permit and submit revised drawings or plans
therefor. (Ord. 2007-855, 11-13-2007)
8-5-8: INSURANCE:
A. Required Coverages And Limits: Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar agreement, each utility occupying right of way or
constructing any facility in the right of way shall secure and maintain the following liability insurance policies insuring the utility as named insured
and naming the village, and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents, and employees as additional insureds on the policies listed in
subsections A1 and A2 of this section.
1. Commercial general liability insurance, including premises-operations, explosion, collapse, and underground hazard (commonly referred to as
"X", "C", and "U" coverages) and products-completed operations coverage with limits not less than:
a. Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for bodily injury or death to each person;
b. Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for property damage resulting from any one accident; and
c. Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for all other types of liability;
2. Automobile liability for owned, nonowned and hired vehicles with a combined single limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for personal
injury and property damage for each accident;
3. Workers' compensation with statutory limits; and
4. Employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per employee and per accident.
If the utility is not providing such insurance to protect the contractors and subcontractors performing the work, then such contractors and
subcontractors shall comply with this section.
B. Excess Or Umbrella Policies: The coverages required by this section may be in any combination of primary, excess, and umbrella policies. Any
excess or umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying insurance on a following form basis such that when any loss covered
by the primary policy exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella policy becomes effective to cover such loss.
C. Copies Required: The utility shall provide copies of any of the policies required by this section to the village within ten (10) days following receipt
of a written request therefor from the village.
D. Maintenance And Renewal Of Required Coverages: The insurance policies required by this section shall contain the following endorsement:
It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the intention not to renew be stated until thirty (30) days after
receipt by the Village, by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested, of a written notice addressed to the Village Administrator of
such intent to cancel or not to renew.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 260/366
Within ten (10) days after receipt by the enforcement official of said notice, and in no event later than ten (10) days prior to said cancellation, the
utility shall obtain and furnish to the enforcement official evidence of replacement insurance policies meeting the requirements of this section.
E. Self-Insurance: A utility may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance coverage and limit requirements required by subsection A of this section.
A utility that self-insures is not required, to the extent of such self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of additional insureds
under subsection A of this section, or the requirements of subsections B, C and D of this section. A utility that elects to self-insure shall provide
to the village evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the insurance coverage and limit requirements required under
subsection A of this section, such as evidence that the utility is a "private self-insurer" under the workers' compensation act.
F. Effect Of Insurance And Self-Insurance On Utility's Liability: The legal liability of the utility to the village and any person for any of the matters that
are the subject of the insurance policies or self-insurance required by this section shall not be limited by such insurance policies or self-insurance
or by the recovery of any amounts thereunder.
G. Insurance Companies: All insurance provided pursuant to this section shall be effected under valid and enforceable policies, issued by insurers
legally able to conduct business with the licensee in the state of Illinois. (Ord. 2007-855, 11-13-2007)
8-5-9: INDEMNIFICATION:
By occupying or constructing facilities in the right of way, a utility shall be deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and hold the village and its elected
and appointed officials and officers, employees, agents and representatives harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims, demands,
judgments, damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged
to arise out of or result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the utility or its affiliates, officers,
employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors in the construction of facilities or occupancy of the rights of way, and in providing or offering
service over the facilities, whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this chapter or by a franchise, license, or similar
agreement; provided, however, that the utility's indemnity obligations hereunder shall not apply to any injuries, claims, demands, judgments,
damages, losses or expenses arising out of or resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach of this chapter by the village, its officials, officers,
employees, agents or representatives. (Ord. 2007-855, 11-13-2007)
8-5-10: SECURITY:
A. Purpose: The permittee shall establish a security fund in a form and in an amount as set forth in this section. The security fund shall be
continuously maintained in accordance with this section at the permittee's sole cost and expense until the completion of the work authorized
under the permit. The security fund shall serve as security for:
1. The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements of this chapter;
2. Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the village occasioned by the permittee's failure to comply with any codes, rules, regulations,
orders, permits and other directives of the village issued pursuant to this chapter; and
3. The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims, costs, or expenses that the village may pay or incur by reason of any action or
nonperformance by permittee in violation of this chapter including, without limitation, any damage to public property or restoration work the
permittee is required by this chapter to perform that the village must perform itself or have completed as a consequence solely of the
permittee's failure to perform or complete, and all other payments due the village from the permittee pursuant to this chapter or any other
applicable law.
B. Form: The permittee shall provide the security fund to the village in the form, at the permittee's election, of cash, a surety bond in a form
acceptable to the village, or an unconditional letter of credit in a form acceptable to the village. Any surety bond or letter of credit provided
pursuant to this subsection shall, at a minimum:
1. Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice to the village and the permittee;
2. Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by the village of any amounts covered by it; and
3. Shall provide a location convenient to the village and within the state of Illinois at which it can be drawn.
C. Amount: The dollar amount of the security fund shall be sufficient to provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the right of way to at
least as good a condition as that existing prior to the construction under the permit, as determined by the enforcement official, and may also
include reasonable, directly related costs that the village estimates are likely to be incurred if the permittee fails to perform such restoration.
Where the construction of facilities proposed under the permit will be performed in phases in multiple locations in the village, with each phase
consisting of construction of facilities in one location or a related group of locations, and where construction in another phase will not be
undertaken prior to substantial completion of restoration in the previous phase or phases, the enforcement official may, in the exercise of sound
discretion, allow the permittee to post a single amount of security which shall be applicable to each phase of the construction under the permit.
The amount of the security fund for phased construction shall be equal to the greatest amount that would have been required under the
provisions of this subsection for any single phase.
D. Withdrawals: The village, upon fourteen (14) days' advance written notice clearly stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise withdrawal
rights under this subsection, may withdraw an amount from the security fund, provided that the permittee has not reimbursed the village for such
amount within the fourteen (14) day notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the permittee:
1. Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee hereunder;
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 261/366
2. Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and unpaid;
3. Fails to reimburse the village for any damages, claims, costs or expenses which the village has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of
any action or nonperformance by the permittee; or
4. Fails to comply with any provision of this chapter that the village determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the security
fund.
E. Replenishment: Within fourteen (14) days after receipt of written notice from the village that any amount has been withdrawn from the security
fund, the permittee shall restore the security fund to the amount specified in subsection C of this section.
F. Interest: The permittee may request that any and all interest accrued on the amount in the security fund be returned to the permittee by the
village, upon written request for said withdrawal to the village, provided that any such withdrawal does not reduce the security fund below the
minimum balance required in subsection C of this section.
G. Closing And Return Of Security Fund: Upon completion of the work authorized under the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the return of
the security fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit, within a reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to
compensate the village for failure by the permittee to comply with any provisions of this chapter or other applicable law. In the event of any
revocation of the permit, the security fund, and any and all accrued interest therein, shall become the property of the village to the extent
necessary to cover any reasonable costs, loss or damage incurred by the village as a result of said revocation, provided that any amounts in
excess of said costs, loss or damage shall be refunded to the permittee.
H. Rights Not Limited: The rights reserved to the village with respect to the security fund are in addition to all other rights of the village, whether
reserved by this chapter or otherwise authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said security fund shall
affect any other right the village may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the village shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery with
respect to any of its rights which may be infringed or otherwise violated. (Ord. 2007-855, 11-13-2007)
8-5-11: PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION:
A. Village Right To Revoke Permit: The village may revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this chapter for one or more of the following
reasons:
1. Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially incomplete statements in the permit application;
2. Noncompliance with this chapter;
3. Permittee's physical presence or presence of permittee's facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights of way
presents a direct or imminent threat to the public health, safety, or welfare; or
4. Permittee's failure to construct the facilities substantially in accordance with the permit and approved plans.
B. Notice Of Revocation Or Suspension: The village shall send written notice of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this
chapter stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension and the alternatives available to permittee under this section.
C. Permittee Alternatives Upon Receipt Of Notice Of Revocation Or Suspension: Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from
the village, the permittee shall have the following options:
1. Immediately provide the village with evidence that no cause exists for the revocation or suspension;
2. Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the village, the deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof of such correction to
the village within five (5) working days after receipt of the written notice of revocation; or
3. Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights of way and restore the rights of way
to the satisfaction of the village providing written proof of such removal to the village within ten (10) days after receipt of the written notice of
revocation.
The village may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend the time periods provided in this subsection.
D. Stop Work Order: In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation or suspension, the village may issue a stop work order immediately upon
discovery of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within subsection A of this section.
E. Failure Or Refusal Of The Permittee To Comply: If the permittee fails to comply with the provisions of subsection C of this section, the village or
its designee may, at the option of the village: 1) correct the deficiencies; 2) upon not less than twenty (20) days' notice to the permittee, remove
the subject facilities or equipment; or 3) after not less than thirty (30) days' notice to the permittee of failure to cure the noncompliance, deem
them abandoned and property of the village. The permittee shall be liable in all events to the village for all costs of removal. (Ord. 2007-855, 11-
13-2007)
8-5-12: CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OR OWNER'S IDENTITY OR LEGAL STATUS:
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 262/366
A. Notification Of Change: A utility shall notify the village no less than thirty (30) days prior to the transfer of ownership of any facility in the right of
way or change in identity of the utility. The new owner of the utility or the facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed by the
former owner under the permit, if any, and applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, including this chapter, with respect to the work and
facilities in the right of way.
B. Amended Permit: A new owner shall request that any current permit be amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a new
or amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to have accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions
of the permit if the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the village's right of way.
C. Insurance And Bonding: All required insurance coverage or bonding must be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer. (Ord.
2007-855, 11-13-2007)
8-5-13: GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
A. Standards And Principles: All construction in the right of way shall be consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and regulations,
and commonly recognized and accepted traffic control and construction principles, sound engineering judgment and, where applicable, the
principles and standards set forth in the following IDOT publications, as amended from time to time:
1. "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction";
2. "Supplemental Specifications And Recurring Special Provisions";
3. "Highway Design Manual";
4. "Highway Standards Manual";
5. "Standard Specifications For Traffic Control Items";
6. "Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices" (92 Ill. adm. code section 545);
7. "Flagger's Handbook"; and
8. "Work Site Protection Manual For Daylight Maintenance Operations".
B. Interpretation Of Municipal Standards And Principles: If a discrepancy exists between or among differing principles and standards required by this
chapter, the enforcement official shall determine, in the exercise of sound engineering judgment, which principles apply and such decision shall
be final. If requested, the enforcement official shall state which standard or principle will apply to the construction, maintenance, or operation of a
facility in the future. (Ord. 2007-855, 11-13-2007)
8-5-14: TRAFFIC CONTROL:
A. Minimum Requirements: The village's minimum requirements for traffic protection are contained in IDOT's "Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic
Control Devices" and this code.
B. Warning Signs, Protective Devices, And Flaggers: The utility is responsible for providing and installing warning signs, protective devices and
flaggers, when necessary, meeting applicable federal, state, and local requirements for protection of the public and the utility's workers when
performing any work on the rights of way.
C. Interference With Traffic: All work shall be phased so that there is minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
D. Notice When Access Is Blocked: At least forty eight (48) hours prior to beginning work that will partially or completely block access to any
residence, business or institution, the utility shall notify the resident, business or institution of the approximate beginning time and duration of
such work; provided, however, that in cases involving emergency repairs pursuant to section 8-5-20 of this chapter, the utility shall provide such
notice as is practicable under the circumstances.
E. Compliance: The utility shall take immediate action to correct any deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought to the utility's
attention by the village. (Ord. 2007-855, 11-13-2007)
8-5-15: LOCATION OF FACILITIES:
A. General Requirements: In addition to location requirements applicable to specific types of utility facilities, all utility facilities, regardless of type,
shall be subject to the general location requirements of this subsection.
1. No Interference With Village Facilities: No utility facilities shall be placed in any location if the enforcement official determines that the
proposed location will require the relocation or displacement of any of the village's utility facilities or will otherwise interfere with the operation
or maintenance of any of the village's utility facilities.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 263/366
2. Minimum Interference And Impact: The proposed location shall cause only the minimum possible interference with the use of the right of way
and shall cause only the minimum possible impact upon, and interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who
adjoin said right of way.
3. No Interference With Travel: No utility facility shall be placed in any location that interferes with the usual travel on such right of way.
4. No Limitations On Visibility: No utility facility shall be placed in any location so as to limit visibility of or by users of the right of way.
5. Size Of Utility Facilities: The proposed installation shall use the smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, power pedestals,
and/or cabinets then in use by the facility owner, regardless of location, for the particular application.
B. Parallel Facilities Located Within Highways:
1. Overhead Parallel Facilities: An overhead parallel facility may be located within the right of way lines of a highway only if:
a. Lines are located as near as practicable to the right of way line and as nearly parallel to the right of way line as reasonable pole alignment
will permit;
b. Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable from the curb with a minimum distance of two feet (2') (0.6 m) behind the
face of the curb, where available;
c. Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement edge as practicable with minimum distance of four feet (4') (1.2 m)
outside the outer shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear zone;
d. No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and
e. Any ground mounted appurtenance is located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right of way line or as near as possible to the right of way
line.
2. Underground Parallel Facilities: An underground parallel facility may be located within the right of way lines of a highway only if:
a. The facility is located as near the right of way line as practicable and not more than eight feet (8') (2.4 m) from and parallel to the right of
way line;
b. A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a highway only if other locations are impracticable or inconsistent with sound
engineering judgment (e.g., a new cable may be installed in existing conduit without disrupting the pavement); and
c. In the case of an underground power or communications line, the facility shall be located as near the right of way line as practicable and not
more than five feet (5') (1.5 m) from the right of way line and any above grounded appurtenance shall be located within one foot (1') (0.3 m)
of the right of way line or as near as practicable.
C. Facilities Crossing Highways:
1. No Future Disruption: The construction and design of crossing facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of village highways may
require the incorporation of materials and protections (such as encasement or additional cover) to avoid settlement or future repairs to the
roadbed resulting from the installation of such crossing facilities.
2. Cattle Passes, Culverts, Or Drainage Facilities: Crossing facilities shall not be located in cattle passes, culverts, or drainage facilities.
3. Ninety Degree Crossing Required: Crossing facilities shall cross at or as near to a ninety degree (90°) angle to the centerline as practicable.
4. Overhead Power Or Communication Facility: An overhead power or communication facility may cross a highway only if:
a. It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ICC's rules entitled, "construction of electric power and communication lines" (83 Ill.
adm. code 305);
b. Poles are located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right of way line of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and
c. Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided.
5. Underground Power Or Communication Facility: An underground power or communication facility may cross a highway only if:
a. The design materials and construction methods will provide maximum maintenance free service life; and
b. Capacity for the utility's foreseeable future expansion needs is provided in the initial installation.
6. Markers: The village may require the utility to provide a marker at each right of way line where an underground facility other than a power or
communication facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall identify the type of facility, the utility, and an emergency phone number. Markers
may also be eliminated as provided in current federal regulations (49 CFR section 192.707 (1989)).
D. Facilities To Be Located Within Particular Rights Of Way: The village may require that facilities be located within particular rights of way that are
not highways, rather than within particular highways.
E. Freestanding Facilities:
1. The village may restrict the location and size of any freestanding facility located within a right of way, or other public place.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 264/366
2. All freestanding facilities located within a right of way shall be located underground to the greatest extent possible, as determined by the
enforcement official, or his or her designee, and to the extent that the enforcement official, or his or her designee determines that it is not
technically possible to install any such facilities underground, such facilities shall be substantially screened from view by landscaping pursuant
to a landscaping plan which shall be approved in advance by the enforcement official, or his or her designee.
3. All freestanding facilities within any right of way shall be so located so as to cause only the minimum possible interference with the use of such
right of way and so as to cause only the minimum possible impact upon, and interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of
property owners who adjoin said right of way. No freestanding facilities shall be placed within any right of way in such a manner to interfere
with the usual travel on such right of way, nor shall such facilities limit the visibility of vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic within such right of way.
4. The owner of any freestanding facility shall, at its expense, promptly comply with the reasonable requests of the enforcement official, or his or
her designee, with respect to the location and screening of such facilities within any right of way, including, but not limited to, with respect to
any future relocation of such facilities.
5. If and when facilities are permitted to be installed overhead pursuant to the foregoing regulations, such overhead facilities shall only utilize
existing poles.
F. Facilities Installed Aboveground: Aboveground facilities may be installed only if:
1. No other existing facilities in the area are located underground;
2. New underground installation is not technically feasible; and
3. The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest protection of
aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed without adversely affecting safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to, existing selfsupporting
armless, single pole construction with vertical configuration of conductors and cable. Existing utility poles and light standards shall
be used wherever practicable; the installation of additional utility poles is strongly discouraged.
4. Where aboveground facilities are permitted in any right of way, such facilities shall be so located so as to cause only the minimum possible
interference with the use of such right of way and so as to cause only the minimum possible impact upon, and interference with the rights and
reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin said right of way. When permitted, no aboveground facilities shall be placed in any
right of way in such a manner to interfere with the usual travel on such right of way, nor shall such facilities limit the visibility of vehicular and/or
pedestrian traffic within such right of way.
5. The owner of any facilities shall, at its expense, promptly comply with the reasonable requests of the enforcement official, or his or her
designee, with respect to the location and, if aboveground, the screening of such facilities within any right of way, including, but not limited to,
with respect to any future relocation of such facilities.
6. Where aboveground facilities are permitted in any right of way, the smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, power pedestals,
and/or cabinets then in use by the facility owner for the particular application shall be used.
7. If and when facilities are permitted to be installed overhead pursuant to the foregoing regulations, such overhead facilities shall only utilize
existing poles.
8. For purposes of this chapter, a facility shall be considered "underground" if its highest elevation is at or below the ground level, and a facility
shall be considered "overhead" if it is attached above the ground to a utility pole.
G. Facility Attachments To Bridges Or Roadway Structures:
1. Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway structures only where the utility has demonstrated that all other means of
accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means shall include, but are not limited to, underground, underwater, independent poles,
cable supports and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from the bridge or roadway structure. Facilities transmitting
commodities that are volatile, flammable, corrosive, or energized, especially those under significant pressure or potential, present high
degrees of risk and such installations are not permitted.
2. A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a facility installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data demonstrating the
impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or disapproval of an application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway structure will be
based upon the following considerations:
a. The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and property in
the event of damage to or failure of the facility;
b. The type, length, value, and relative importance of the highway structure in the transportation system;
c. The alternative routings available to the utility and their comparative practicability;
d. The proposed method of attachment;
e. The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the proposed facility;
f. The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting;
g. The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and
h. The public benefit expected from the utility service as compared to the risk involved.
H. Appearance Standards:
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 265/366
1. The village may prohibit the installation of facilities in particular locations in order to preserve visual quality.
2. A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features visible to the
right of way user or to adjacent residents and property owners, and if it does not impair the aesthetic quality of the lands being traversed. (Ord.
2007-855, 11-13-2007)
8-5-16: CONSTRUCTION METHODS AND MATERIALS:
A. Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Construction Methods:
1. Boring Or Jacking:
a. Pits And Shoring: Boring or jacking under rights of way shall be accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance specified by the
enforcement official from the edge of the pavement. Pits for boring or jacking shall be excavated no more than forty eight (48) hours in
advance of boring or jacking operations and backfilled within forty eight (48) hours after boring or jacking operations are completed. While
pits are open, they shall be clearly marked and protected by barricades. Shoring shall be designed, erected, supported, braced, and
maintained so that it will safely support all vertical and lateral loads that may be imposed upon it during the boring or jacking operation.
b. Wet Boring Or Jetting: Wet boring or jetting shall not be permitted under the roadway.
c. Borings With Diameters Greater Than Six Inches: Borings over six inches (6") (0.15 m) in diameter shall be accomplished with an auger and
following pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the outside diameter of the following pipe by more than one inch (1")
(25 mm).
d. Borings With Diameters Six Inches Or Less: Borings of six inches (6") or less in diameter may be accomplished by either jacking, guided
with auger, or auger and following pipe method.
e. Tree Preservation: Any facility located within the drip line of any tree designated by the village to be preserved or protected shall be bored
under or around the root system.
2. Trenching: Trenching for facility installation, repair, or maintenance on rights of way shall be done in accord with the applicable portions of
section 603 of IDOT's "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction".
a. Length: The length of open trench shall be kept to the practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipe/line testing. Only one-half
(1/2) of any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless special permission is obtained from the enforcement official.
b. Open Trench And Excavated Material: Open trench and windrowed excavated material shall be protected as required by chapter 6 of the
"Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices". Where practicable, the excavated material shall be deposited between the roadway
and the trench as added protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the paved portion of the roadway. Where right of
way width does not allow for windrowing excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated material shall be hauled to an
off road location.
c. Drip Line Of Trees: The utility shall not trench within the drip line of any tree designated by the village to be preserved.
3. Backfilling:
a. Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the installation of facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth, and length using methods
and materials in accordance with IDOT's "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction". When excavated material is hauled
away or is unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be used.
b. For a period of three (3) years from the date construction of a facility is completed, the utility shall be responsible to remove and restore any
backfilled area that has settled due to construction of the facility. If so ordered by the enforcement official, the utility, at its expense, shall
remove any pavement and backfill material to the top of the installed facility, place and properly compact new backfill material, and restore
new pavement, sidewalk, curbs, and driveways to the proper grades, as determined by the enforcement official.
4. Pavement Cuts: Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair shall be permitted on a highway only if that portion of the highway is closed to
traffic. If a variance to the limitation set forth in this subsection A4 is permitted under section 8-5-21 of this chapter, the following requirements
shall apply:
a. Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled and compacted as soon as practicable with granular material of CA-6 or CA-10
gradation, as designated by the enforcement official.
b. Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as soon as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous mixture shall be
provided immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the village.
c. All saw cuts shall be full depth.
d. For all rights of way which have been reconstructed with a concrete surface/base in the last seven (7) years, or resurfaced in the last three
(3) years, permits shall not be issued unless such work is determined to be an emergency repair or other work considered necessary and
unforeseen before the time of the reconstruction or unless a pavement cut is necessary for a JULIE locate.
5. Encasement:
a. Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be continuous
either by one piece fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by the village.
b. The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right of way line. No aboveground vent pipes shall be
located in the area established as clear zone for that particular section of the highway.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 266/366
c. In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement shall be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or village approved
jointed pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be omitted only if pipe is installed prior to highway construction and carrier pipe is
continuous or mechanical joints are of a type approved by the village. Bell and spigot type pipe shall be encased regardless of installation
method.
d. In the case of gas pipelines of sixty (60) psig or less, encasement may be eliminated.
e. In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines with installations of more than sixty (60) psig, encasement may be eliminated
only if: 1) extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future maintenance or repair and 2) cathodic protection of the pipe is provided.
f. If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that construction does not
disrupt the right of way.
6. Minimum Cover Of Underground Facilities: Cover shall be provided and maintained at least in the amount specified in the following table for
minimum cover for the type of facility:
Type Of Facility Minimum Cover
Electric lines 30 inches (0.8 m)
Communication, cable or video service lines 18 to 24 inches (0.46 m to 0.6 m, as determined by village)
Gas or petroleum products 30 inches (0.8 m)
Water line Sufficient cover to provide freeze protection
Sanitary sewer, storm sewer, or drainage line Sufficient cover to provide freeze protection
B. Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Facilities:
1. Electric Power Or Communication Lines:
a. Code Compliance: Electric power or communications facilities within village rights of way shall be constructed, operated, and maintained in
conformity with the provisions of 83 Illinois administrative code part 305 (formerly general order 160 of the Illinois commerce commission)
entitled "rules for construction of electric power and communications lines", and the national electrical safety code.
b. Overhead Facilities: Overhead power or communication facilities shall use single pole construction and, where practicable, joint use of poles
shall be used. Utilities shall make every reasonable effort to design the installation so guys and braces will not be needed. Variances may be
allowed if there is no feasible alternative and if guywires are equipped with guy guards for maximum visibility.
c. Underground Facilities:
(1) Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing, provided that special consideration is given to boring in order to minimize damage when
crossing improved entrances and side roads.
(2) If a crossing is installed by boring or jacking, encasement shall be provided between jacking or bore pits. Encasement may be eliminated
only if: a) the crossing is installed by the use of "moles", "whip augers", or other approved methods which compress the earth to make the
opening for cable installation or b) the installation is by the open trench method which is only permitted prior to roadway construction.
(3) Cable shall be grounded in accordance with the national electrical safety code.
d. Burial Of Drops: All temporary service drops placed between November 1 of the prior year and March 15 of the current year, also known as
snow drops, shall be buried by May 31 of the current year, weather permitting, unless otherwise permitted by the village. Weather
permitting, utilities shall bury all temporary drops, excluding snow drops, within ten (10) business days after placement.
2. Underground Facilities Other Than Electric Power Or Communication Lines: Underground facilities other than electric power or
communication lines may be installed by:
a. The use of "moles", "whip augers", or other approved methods which compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe;
b. Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between the ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway;
c. Open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway construction; or
d. Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is not possible by other means.
3. Gas Transmission, Distribution And Service: Gas pipelines within rights of way shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in a village
approved manner and in conformance with the federal code of the office of pipeline safety operations, department of transportation, part 192 -
transportation of natural and other gas by pipeline: minimum federal safety standards (49 CFR section 192), IDOT's "Standard Specifications
For Road And Bridge Construction", and all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
4. Petroleum Products Pipelines: Petroleum products pipelines within rights of way shall conform to the applicable sections of ANSI standard
code for pressure piping (liquid petroleum transportation piping systems ANSI-B 31.4).
5. Water Lines, Sanitary Sewer Lines, Storm Water Sewer Lines Or Drainage Lines: Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, and
drainage lines within rights of way shall meet or exceed the recommendations of the current "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer
Main Construction In Illinois".
6. Ground Mounted Appurtenances: Ground mounted appurtenances to overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a right of way,
shall be provided with a vegetation free area extending one foot (1') (305 mm) in width beyond the appurtenance in all directions. The
vegetation free area may be provided by an extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy duty plastic or similar material approved by the
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 267/366
enforcement official. With the approval of the enforcement official, shrubbery surrounding the appurtenance may be used in place of
vegetation free area. The housing for ground mounted appurtenances shall be painted a neutral color to blend with the surroundings.
C. Materials:
1. General Standards: The materials used in constructing facilities within rights of way shall be those meeting the accepted standards of the
appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT's "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction", the requirements of the
Illinois commerce commission, or the standards established by other official regulatory agencies for the appropriate industry.
2. Material Storage On Right Of Way: No material shall be stored on the right of way without the prior written approval of the enforcement official.
When such storage is permitted, all pipe, conduit, wire, poles, cross arms, or other materials shall be distributed along the right of way prior to
and during installation in a manner to minimize hazards to the public or an obstacle to right of way maintenance or damage to the right of way
and other property. If material is to be stored on right of way, prior approval must be obtained from the village.
3. Hazardous Materials: The plans submitted by the utility to the village shall identify any hazardous materials that may be involved in the
construction of the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities.
D. Operational Restrictions:
1. Construction operations on rights of way may, at the discretion of the village, be required to be discontinued when such operations would
create hazards to traffic or the public health, safety, and welfare. Such operations may also be required to be discontinued or restricted when
conditions are such that construction would result in extensive damage to the right of way or other property.
2. These restrictions may be waived by the enforcement official when emergency work is required to restore vital utility services.
3. Unless otherwise permitted by the village, the hours of construction shall be those otherwise set forth in this code.
E. Location Of Existing Facilities: Any utility proposing to construct facilities in the village shall contact JULIE and ascertain the presence and
location of existing aboveground and underground facilities within the rights of way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The village will make
its permit records available to a utility for the purpose of identifying possible facilities. When notified of an excavation or when requested by the
village or by JULIE, a utility shall locate and physically mark its underground facilities within forty eight (48) hours, excluding weekends and
holidays, in accordance with the Illinois underground facilities damage prevention act1. (Ord. 2007-855, 11-13-2007)
8-5-17: VEGETATION CONTROL:
A. Electric Utilities; Compliance With State Laws And Regulations: An electric utility shall conduct all tree trimming and vegetation control activities
in the right of way in accordance with applicable Illinois laws and regulations, and additionally, with such local franchise or other agreement with
the village as permitted by law.
B. Other Utilities; Tree Trimming Permit Required: Tree trimming that is done by any other utility with facilities in the right of way and that is not
performed pursuant to applicable Illinois laws and regulations specifically governing same, shall not be considered a normal maintenance
operation, but shall require the application for, and the issuance of, a permit, in addition to any other permit required under this chapter.
1. Application For Tree Trimming Permit: Applications for tree trimming permits shall include assurance that the work will be accomplished by
competent workers with supervision who are experienced in accepted tree pruning practices. Tree trimming permits shall designate an
expiration date in the interest of assuring that the work will be expeditiously accomplished.
2. Damage To Trees: Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for cancellation
of the tree trimming permit and for assessment of damages. The village will require compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees
removed without authorization. The formula developed by the International Society of Arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the
compensation for damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The village may require the removal and replacement of trees if trimming
or radical pruning would leave them in an unacceptable condition.
C. Specimen Trees Or Trees Of Special Significance: The village may require that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of
special significance. The required measures may consist of higher poles, side arm extensions, covered wire or other means.
D. Chemical Use:
1. Except as provided in the following subsection, no utility shall spray, inject or pour any chemicals on or near any trees, shrubs or vegetation in
the village for any purpose, including the control of growth, insects or disease.
2. Spraying of any type of brush killing chemicals will not be permitted on rights of way unless the utility demonstrates to the satisfaction of the
enforcement official that such spraying is the only practicable method of vegetation control. (Ord. 2007-855, 11-13-2007)
8-5-18: REMOVAL, RELOCATION, OR MODIFICATIONS OF UTILITY FACILITIES:
A. Notice: Within ninety (90) days following written notice from the village, a utility shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily or
permanently disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any utility facilities within the rights of way whenever the corporate
authorities have determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration, is reasonably necessary for the construction, repair,
maintenance, or installation of any village improvement in or upon, or the operations of the village in or upon, the rights of way.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 268/366
B. Removal Of Unauthorized Facilities: Within thirty (30) days following written notice from the village, any utility that owns, controls, or maintains
any unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the rights of way shall, at its own expense, remove all or any part of such facilities or
appurtenances from the rights of way. A facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in the following circumstances:
1. Upon expiration or termination of the permittee's license or franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;
2. If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant of a license or franchise, if required;
3. If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance of a required permit in violation of this chapter; or
4. If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not permitted by the permittee's license or franchise.
C. Emergency Removal Or Relocation Of Facilities: The village retains the right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within the rights of
way of the village, as the village may determine to be necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If
circumstances permit, the municipality shall attempt to notify the utility, if known, prior to cutting or removing a facility and shall notify the utility, if
known, after cutting or removing a facility.
D. Abandonment Of Facilities: Upon abandonment of a facility within the rights of way of the village, the utility shall notify the village within ninety
(90) days. Following receipt of such notice the village may direct the utility to remove all or any portion of the facility if the enforcement official
determines that such removal will be in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare. In the event that the village does not direct the
utility that abandoned the facility to remove it, by giving notice of abandonment to the village, the abandoning utility shall be deemed to consent
to the alteration or removal of all or any portion of the facility by another utility or person. (Ord. 2007-855, 11-13-2007)
8-5-19: CLEANUP AND RESTORATION:
The utility shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and terrain and other property within ten (10) days after any portion of the rights of
way are disturbed, damaged or destroyed due to construction or maintenance by the utility, all to the satisfaction of the village. This includes
restoration of entrances and side roads. Restoration of roadway surfaces shall be made using materials and methods approved by the enforcement
official. Such cleanup and repair may be required to consist of backfilling, regrading, reseeding, resodding, or any other requirement to restore the
right of way to a condition substantially equivalent to that which existed prior to the commencement of the project. The time period provided in this
section may be extended by the enforcement official for good cause shown. (Ord. 2007-855, 11-13-2007)
8-5-20: MAINTENANCE AND EMERGENCY MAINTENANCE:
A. General: Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights of way are to be maintained by or for the utility in a manner
satisfactory to the village and at the utility's expense.
B. Emergency Maintenance Procedures: Emergencies may justify noncompliance with normal procedures for securing a permit:
1. If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the right of way, the utility shall take immediate steps to provide all necessary
protection for traffic on the highway or the public on the right of way including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If a hazard does
not exist on the traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is such as to require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in repair
operations, adequate signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on the shoulder in such an emergency will only be permitted when no other
means of access to the facility is available.
2. In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible, notify the enforcement official or his or her duly authorized agent of the emergency,
informing him or her as to what steps have been taken for protection of the traveling public and what will be required to make the necessary
repairs. If the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere with the free movement of traffic, the village police shall be notified immediately.
3. In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand to complete repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least inconvenience to the
traveling public.
C. Emergency Repairs: The utility must file in writing with the village a description of the repairs undertaken in the right of way within forty eight (48)
hours after an emergency repair. (Ord. 2007-855, 11-13-2007)
8-5-21: VARIANCES:
A. Request For Variance: A utility requesting a variance from one or more of the provisions of this chapter must do so in writing to the enforcement
official as a part of the permit application. The request shall identify each provision of this chapter from which a variance is requested and the
reasons why a variance should be granted.
B. Authority To Grant Variances: The enforcement official shall decide whether a variance is authorized for each provision of this chapter identified in
the variance request on an individual basis.
C. Conditions For Granting Of Variance: The enforcement official may authorize a variance only if the utility requesting the variance has
demonstrated that:
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 269/366
1. One or more conditions not under the control of the utility (such as terrain features or an irregular right of way line) create a special hardship
that would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable, given the public purposes to be achieved by the provision; and
2. All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that would conform with the provision from which a variance is requested are
impracticable in relation to the requested approach.
D. Additional Conditions For Granting Of A Variance: As a condition for authorizing a variance, the enforcement official may require the utility
requesting the variance to meet reasonable standards and conditions that may or may not be expressly contained within this chapter but which
carry out the purposes of this chapter.
E. Right To Appeal: Any utility aggrieved by any order, requirement, decision or determination, including denial of a variance, made by the
enforcement official under the provisions of this chapter shall have the right to appeal to the village board, or such other board or commission as
it may designate. The application for appeal shall be submitted in writing to the village clerk within thirty (30) days after the date of such order,
requirement, decision or determination. The village board shall commence its consideration of the appeal at the board's next regularly scheduled
meeting occurring at least seven (7) days after the filing of the appeal. The village board shall timely decide the appeal. (Ord. 2007-855, 11-13-
2007)
8-5-22: PENALTIES:
A. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, any violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of not less than two hundred
dollars ($200.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per offense, and each day a violation has existed or continues to exist shall
be a separate offense.
B. Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to fine in
accordance with the penalty provisions of this code. There may be times when the village will incur delay or other costs, including third party
claims, because the utility will not or cannot perform its duties under its permit and this chapter. Unless the utility shows that another allocation of
the cost of undertaking the requested action is appropriate, the utility shall bear the village's costs of damages and its costs of installing,
maintaining, modifying, relocating, or removing the facility that is the subject of the permit. No other administrative agency or commission may
review or overrule a permit related cost apportionment of the village. Sanctions may be imposed upon a utility that does not pay the costs
apportioned to it. (Ord. 2007-855, 11-13-2007)
8-5-23: ENFORCEMENT:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional or further remedies that the village may have for enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. 2007-855, 11-13-2007)
Chapter 6
TREE PRESERVATION ON PRIVATE PROPERTY
8-6-1: INTENT AND PURPOSE; SCOPE:
This chapter establishes requirements for the protection and preservation of existing trees which might otherwise be impacted by teardowns as
defined in section 5-1-6 of this code (the "zoning regulations"). (Ord. 2007-845, 3-13-2007)
8-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
dbh: For the purposes of this chapter, "dbh" shall mean "diameter at breast height" which shall be the diameter of the trunk size as measured at fifty
four inches (54") above the established ground level, or for replacement trees, fifty four inches (54") above the top of the root ball.
ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY: For the purposes of this chapter, the enforcement authority shall be the village administrator, or his or her designee.
EXEMPT TREE: For purposes of this chapter, a tree which has been determined by the village administrator, or his or her designee, or otherwise by
the village to be one of the exempt species of trees listed in subsection 8-6-4C3 of this chapter, or which has been determined by the village
administrator, or his or her designee, to be dead, diseased but not reasonably treatable, materially damaged, or structurally unsound or unsafe.
PROTECTED PRIVATE TREES: For the purposes of this chapter, "protected private trees" shall be defined as any tree located on private property
within the village with a trunk size greater than or equal to four inches (4") dbh, other than an exempt tree as defined in subsection 8-6-4C3 of this
chapter.
REGULATED ACTIVITY: For purposes of this chapter, "regulated activity" shall be defined as any activity associated with or related to a "teardown"
as defined in section 5-1-6 of this code (the "zoning regulations") that anticipates or involves the actual or reasonably likely damage or removal of
one or more protected private trees, including, but not limited to, any subdivision of property, demolition, new construction or development,
deforestation, landscaping, installation, repair, and/or modification of any private sewage disposal system (i.e., any septic system), site development
activity (including, but not limited to, excavation and/or filling), enlargements or expansion of any structure, building, driveway, or parking areas.
Regulated activity shall include, but not be limited to, any activity as described above which occurs after March 13, 2007, and which also occurs
within thirty six (36) months immediately preceding any application for any permit or approval related to a teardown.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 270/366
TEARDOWN: For the purposes of this chapter, a "teardown" shall be as defined in section 5-1-6 of this code (the "zoning regulations"). (Ord. 2007-
845, 3-13-2007)
8-6-3: TREE REMOVAL PERMITS AND PRESERVATION PLANS:
Except as specifically authorized in accordance with sections 8-6-7 and 8-6-8 of this chapter, no protected private tree shall be removed or shall be
otherwise the subject of regulated activity prior to receiving prior written approval by the village administrator, and a tree removal permit issued by
the village administrator, or his or her designee. No exempt tree shall be removed or shall be otherwise affected by regulated activity without the
prior written approval of the village administrator, or his or her designee. (Ord. 2007-845, 3-13-2007)
8-6-4: PROTECTION OF EXISTING TREES:
A. Tree Survey: A tree survey shall be submitted to the village administrator for review and approval, by anyone requesting a tree removal permit
related to any regulated activity. The tree survey shall indicate the location, size and species (both scientific and common name), relative health,
of all trees located on the parcel with a dbh of four inches (4") or greater. The tree location and size information which is part of a tree survey
shall be based upon a plat of survey prepared by a land surveyor. The balance of the information provided by any tree survey and any tree
preservation plan and any amendment(s) thereto, including, but not limited to, the species and condition of each tree shown on the tree survey,
shall be prepared by a registered landscape architect as defined by 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 315/1 et seq., or by an arborist certified by the
International Society of Arborculture, the American Horticulture Society, and/or the American Society of Consulting Arborists.
B. Integration Of Existing Trees Into Site And Landscape Plans: Subject to the determination of the village administrator, or his or her or its
designee, a reasonable effort shall be made to retain existing protected private trees shown on the tree survey through the integration of those
trees into the site and landscaping plan for a proposed site or development. Where a reasonable integration of protected private trees into the
site or development plan is not possible, and any protected private trees are, therefore, approved for removal, the applicant shall be required to
mitigate the removal of all such protected private trees based upon the replacement tree exchange rate set forth in section 8-6-5 of this chapter,
and further provided that removal of protected private trees designated for preservation shall be allowed only pursuant to the provisions of
section 8-6-5 of this chapter. In the event that a site development plan or landscaping plan is not required by a landowner who desires to remove
protected private trees, a tree survey and tree preservation plan in compliance with this chapter shall still be required.
C. Tree Preservation Plan: A tree preservation plan indicating the location and species of those protected private trees to be preserved and the
methods which are to be used to preserve such trees shall be submitted to the village administrator. This tree preservation plan shall specify the
following:
1. Preservation Techniques:
a. Grading And Construction Equipment: All grading and construction equipment shall be forbidden from encroaching upon the protected
private tree's drip line.
b. Material Detrimental To Trees: Crushed limestone and other materials detrimental to protected private trees shall not be dumped within the
drip line of any tree nor at any higher location where drainage toward the protected private tree could conceivably affect the health of the
protected private tree.
c. Installation Of Snow Fencing: Snow fencing shall be installed before construction at the periphery of the protected private tree's drip line. In
areas where a protected private tree is adjacent to a construction zone (i.e., any area of "regulated activity" as defined in section 8-6-2 of
this chapter) and fencing the drip line is not possible, two inch by six inch (2" x 6") by eight foot (8') long boards banded or wired around
each trunk shall be provided as protection to adequately prevent scarring.
d. During Construction: If protected private trees have their roots exposed, the roots shall be pruned. If exposed roots are greater than two
inches (2") in diameter, the tree crown is to be pruned to compensate for the root loss. Also the protected private tree shall be watered and
fertilized.
2. Preservation Methodology: The methods which are to be used to preserve those protected private trees shall be clearly specified on the tree
preservation plan. These shall, at a minimum, include the preservation techniques listed above, although alternative methods may be
considered. If, in the opinion of the village administrator or his or her or its designee, the necessary precautions as specified in the tree
preservation plan for the development were not undertaken before or during construction to ensure the preservation of those protected private
trees, any building or site development permit for the property in question shall not be issued, or, if previously issued, may be suspended or
revoked until such time as these precautions have been complied with.
3. Exempt Trees: Notwithstanding anything contained in this chapter to the contrary, the following species of trees shall not be required to be
preserved or protected as part of any tree preservation plan:
Buckthorn, common (Rhaminus cathartica)
Buckthorn, glossy (Rhaminus frangula)
Maple, box elder (Acer negundo)
Poplar, cottonwood (Populus deltoides)
Poplar, Lombardy (Populus nigra 'Italica')
Poplar, white or silver (Populus alba)
Willow (any of the species)
The written approval of the village administrator, or his or her designee, as specified in section 8-6-3 of this chapter, shall be required for the
removal of any of the species of trees specified in this subsection C3 in order to confirm that said tree is one of the exempt species as listed
above or is otherwise an exempt tree. After such a written determination has been made by the village administrator, or his or her designee,
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 271/366
such trees shall, therefore, be considered "exempt trees" for the purposes of this chapter. Until a tree has been determined by the village
administrator, or his or her designee, to be an "exempt tree", it shall be presumed to be a protected private tree.
4. Applicable Trees: The tree preservation plan shall be required to and shall specify such reasonable and necessary precautions to preserve
and protect all protected private trees.
5. Landscape Architect Or Arborist Review: The village, through the village administrator, shall have the right, but not the obligation, to retain, at
the applicant's expense, a landscape architect or certified arborist who shall, in that event, review the applicant's proposed tree preservation
plan and provide recommendations to the village administrator pursuant to this chapter.
6. Replacement Trees: Unless otherwise provided as part of a landscaping plan, the tree preservation plan shall also show the proposed location
of all required replacement trees.
7. Exception: Notwithstanding the other provisions of this chapter to the contrary, no tree survey or tree preservation plan shall be required for a
tree removal permit if the village administrator, or his or her designee, determines that such tree survey and tree preservation plan for such a
tree removal permit can both be documented by other means, such as photographs and/or a written report prepared by a qualified arborist.
(Ord. 2007-845, 3-13-2007)
8-6-5: REMOVAL OF PROTECTED PRIVATE TREES:
If a protected private tree is removed for any reason or is seriously damaged, destroyed or razed during construction or other regulated activities,
such trees shall be replaced with new trees in accordance with the following:
A. Tree Replacement Schedule:
Size Of Existing Protected
Trees dbh (In Inches)
Number Of
Replacement Trees
36 or greater 8
30 or greater 7
26 _ 29 6
20 _ 25 5
13 _ 19 4
8 _ 12 3
4 _ 7 2
In interpreting the above exchange rate, in the event of a fraction of an inch, if a fraction is equal to one-half inch (1/2") or greater, the higher full
number shall be used.
B. Minimum Size Of Replacement Trees: All replacement trees shall have a minimum dbh of three inches (3"), upon installation.
C. Species Of Replacement Trees: The following are the permitted species of replacement trees:
Basswood (Tilia americana)
Beech, European (Fagus sylvatica)
Buckeye, yellow (Aesculus octandra)
Coffeetree, Kentucky (Gymnocladus dioica)
Ginkgo (Ginkgo biloba)
Hickory, bitternut (Carya cordiformis)
Hickory, shagbark (Carya ovata)
Larch, European (Larix decidua)
Larch, Japanese (Larix kaempferi)
Lilac, Japanese tree (Syringa reticulara)
Linden, silver (Tilia tomentosa)
Magnolia, cucumbertree (Magnolia acuminara)
Maple, black (Acer nigrum)
Maple, miyabe (Acer miyabei)
Maple, sugar or rock (Acer saccharum)
Oak, bur (Quercus macrocarpa)
Oak, chinkapin (Quercus muchlenbergi)
Oak, red (Quercus rubra)
Oak, shingle (Quercus imbricaria)
Oak, swamp white (Quercus bicolor)
Oak, white (Quercus alba)
Pagodatree, Japanese (Sophora japonica)
Pecan (Carya illinoensis)
Sourgum, black gum, or tupelo (Nyssa sylvatica)
Tuliptree (Liriodendron tulipifera)
Yellowwood (Cladrastis lurea)
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 272/366
Other species shall require the specific written concurrence of the approval authority.
D. Amended Tree Preservation Plan: Removal of, or other regulated activity otherwise adversely affecting protected private trees designated for
preservation by a tree preservation plan shall be allowed only by amending such plan and with the approval of the village administrator. The
amended tree preservation plan shall indicate the location, species and size of all replacement trees consistent with the requirements for a tree
preservation plan as set forth in this chapter.
E. In The Field Adjustments: In the field adjustments to trees designated for preservation on the tree preservation plan may be necessary during the
course of construction. In such instances, the developer or property owner shall not remove, or otherwise adversely affect, any protected private
trees designated for preservation prior to site inspection and/or consultation with the village administrator, or his or her designee, and with a
specific written tree removal permit for such protected private trees. If in the opinion of the village administrator, or his or her designee, that any
tree designated for preservation substantially impedes the development, in the field adjustments may be approved by the village administrator, or
his or her designee, and a tree removal permit may be issued for such protected private trees without the need for resubmission of an amended
tree preservation plan, but such removal shall be and remain subject to the other provisions of this chapter.
F. Fee In Lieu: Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event the site in question cannot accommodate all of the required replacement trees, a fee in
lieu of such replacement trees shall be paid to the village based upon an estimated cost for each replacement tree and planting thereof as
approved by the village administrator, or his or her designee. Such fees paid in lieu of replacement trees shall be used only for providing of trees
on village property, including, but not limited to, village rights of way, and the care and maintenance thereof. (Ord. 2007-845, 3-13-2007)
8-6-6: TREE SURVIVAL; GUARANTEE:
The applicant for such tree preservation plan shall be obligated to replace any relocated or replacement tree for up to eighteen (18) months after
planting. In the event a relocated or replacement tree dies or is in declining condition, any such tree shall be replaced by a four inch (4") dbh tree.
The performance bond required by section 4-1-5 of this code shall be held by the village to secure this replacement obligation, among other
purposes, and shall not be released until the end of said eighteen (18) month period, if this section is applicable. (Ord. 2007-845, 3-13-2007)
8-6-7: ENFORCEMENT; APPEALS:
A. The village administrator, or his or her designee, shall be the enforcement authority for the purposes of the provisions of this chapter.
B. The owner of property on which one or more trees are located or on which any regulated activity affecting one or more trees is or will be
undertaken which is the subject of any decision of the village administrator, or his or her designee, made pursuant to this chapter may appeal
that decision in writing to the village president. Upon receipt of an appeal, the village president shall schedule and hold an informal hearing on
such appeal as soon as practical after having given seven (7) days' written notice to the parties to such appeal. The village president shall
render a decision in writing on such appeal as soon as practical after such hearing. Any party to such appeal may further appeal the decision of
the village president on such appeal to the entire village board, in which event, the board shall consider and decide said appeal by ordinance.
(Ord. 2007-845, 3-13-2007)
8-6-8: PENALTIES:
A. The removal, cutting, and/or other destruction of any protected private tree, and/or regulated activity otherwise adversely affecting any protected
private tree, without a tree permit shall result in a fine equal to one hundred dollars ($100.00) per inch of dbh.
B. Any other violation of this chapter shall result in a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) for each offense. Each day that a condition continues in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a separate offense.
C. In the event that any person undertakes any removal, cutting and/or other destruction of, and/or regulated activity otherwise adversely affecting
any tree without a permit due to emergency circumstances, the village board shall have the authority to waive any penalty or to issue a tree
permit after the fact of such cutting or destruction. (Ord. 2007-845, 3-13-2007)
Title 9
HEALTH AND SANITATION REGULATIONS
Footnotes - Click any footnote link to go back to its reference.
Footnote 1: The Village Zoning Ordinance has been inserted in this Code for convenience only and is not part of this Code.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 273/366
Chapter 1
ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROL
9-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
CORPORATE AUTHORITIES: The president and board of trustees of the village.
EPA: The environmental protection act of Illinois, sections 1 through 51, as codified in 415 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-51, inclusive. References
herein are to the Illinois Compiled Statutes.
Subparagraphs (b), (d), (e), (g), (h), (i), (k), (l), (m), and (n) of paragraph 1003 of the EPA are hereby adopted by reference as part of this chapter.
WATERS: All accumulations of water, surface and underground, natural and artificial, public and private, or parts thereof, which are wholly or
partially within, flow through or border upon the village. (1983 Code)
9-1-2: AIR POLLUTION:
A. The corporate authorities find that pollution of the air constitutes a menace to public health and welfare, creates public nuisances and offends the
senses.
B. Subparagraphs (a) and (c) of paragraph 1009 of the EPA are hereby adopted by reference as part of this chapter, except in subparagraph (a),
delete the word "Illinois" and all words following and add "Inverness"; and in subparagraph (c) delete the word "Agency" and all words thereafter
and add "Environmental Protection Agency of the State of Illinois".
C. In addition to the above, no person shall:
1. Burn or allow to be burned any coal as the principal source of heat of any building.
2. Conduct any business or use any premises or allow any business to be conducted or any premises to be used to release noxious, offensive,
unwholesome or disagreeable odors into the atmosphere.
3. Burn outdoors any material or landscape waste, or any other organic material of any kind, or rubbish, junk or trash of any kind at any time.
4. Build, light or permit any fire so close to a building or structure as to cause danger thereto, or under any other circumstances where there is a
danger of the fire spreading.
5. Build, light or permit any fire on any public street or sidewalk or within any right of way which has been dedicated or offered for dedication to
the village at any time.
D. Notwithstanding the above, permits for variances may be granted by the corporate authorities, provided that a permit, waiver or exemption for
such variance be first secured from the environmental protection agency of the state of Illinois or from any agency or board acting under the
authority of the environmental protection agency.
E. The following activities are not in violation of this section:
1. The setting of fires to combat or limit existing fires, when reasonably necessary in the judgment of the responsible government officials.
2. The burning of fuels for legitimate campfire, recreational and cooking purposes, or in indoor domestic fireplaces in areas where such burning
is consistent with other laws, provided that no garbage shall be burned in such areas.
3. Small open flames for heating tar, for welding, acetylene torches, highway safety flares and the like. (Ord. 89-353, 6-13-1989)
9-1-3: WATER POLLUTION:
A. The corporate authorities find that pollution of the waters of the village constitutes a menace to the public health and welfare, impairs legitimate
beneficial uses of water and offends the senses.
B. Paragraph 1012, subparagraphs (a) and (d) of the EPA are hereby adopted by reference as part of this chapter, except in paragraph (a) delete
"Illinois" and all words following and insert "Inverness".
C. In addition to and without limiting the foregoing, no person shall cause or threaten or allow the discharge of residential or industrial wastes,
including, but not limited to, sewage, septic effluent, soapy water and water conditioner backwash discharge into any waters, open ditches, storm
sewers or drainage systems. (1983 Code)
9-1-4: LAND POLLUTION, REFUSE DISPOSAL AND COMPOSTING:
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 274/366
A. Refuse Disposal: The corporate authorities find that improper methods of refuse disposal result in scenic blight, cause serious hazards to public
health and safety, create public nuisances and otherwise interfere with community life and development and contribute to the degradation of our
environment.
B. EPA: Paragraph 1021, subparagraphs (a), (b), (c) and (d) of the EPA are hereby adopted by reference as part of this chapter.
C. Compost Piles:
1. Definitions: For the purposes of this subsection, the following definitions shall apply:
COMPOST PILE: The location on the property where composting occurs in a heap, bin or container, provided, however, a compost pile of less
than two (2) cubic yards in volume shall not be subject to the regulations and requirements of this subsection. A manure pile shall also be
construed to be a compost pile.
COMPOSTING: The process of turning organic waste materials into humus. Temperature, moisture, ventilation and quantity of organic
materials are factors necessary to the process. Domestic sewage or septage shall not be used in the process of composting.
HUMUS: The finished product of composting to be used for enhancing or renovating the soil on the property on which it was produced.
2. Composting Conditions: It shall be unlawful to maintain a compost pile which:
a. Emits a putrid or rancid odor; or
b. Attracts or harbors flies, rats or vectors; or
c. Consists of domestic sewage or septage, animal carcasses, cooking greases or petroleum products; or
d. Is located within one hundred feet (100') of any residence or residential structure or within fifty feet (50') of any public or private right of way,
whichever is more restrictive; or
e. Is located within one hundred feet (100') of a watercourse, drainageway, flood plain, lake or pond; this provision shall not authorize a
compost pile to leach or drain in the direction of said surface waters; or
f. Exceeds twenty four (24) square yards in ground area or twenty four (24) cubic yards in volume. (Ord. 91-427, 10-8-1991)
9-1-5: NOISE POLLUTION:
A. The corporate authorities find that excessive noise endangers physical and emotional health and well being, offends the senses and reduces the
quality of our environment.
B. Paragraph 1024 of the EPA is hereby adopted by reference as part of this chapter.
C. In addition to the foregoing, the following is adopted:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to produce or allow to be produced, on any public or private premises any noise which disturbs the peace of
the neighborhood or is reasonably disagreeable to any adjacent property owner or property owner in the vicinity of such premises.
2. No person shall maintain or operate or allow to be operated or maintained any loudspeaker or amplifier connected with any sound source or
other device by which sounds are magnified which has as its primary function the broadcasting of sound over any public street or public place,
without having first secured a permit therefor.
3. The fee for permits shall be as follows:
a. For the use or operation of any such equipment from a moving vehicle or fixed location, one hundred dollars ($100.00) for any day or part of
any day. (1983 Code)
b. Any person desiring a permit for the use and operation of such equipment shall file an application with the village president, or his or her
designee, setting forth the name and address of the applicant, the name of the owner of the equipment, the date upon which it is intended to
be used or such other information as may be prescribed. Such application shall be filed not less than five (5) days prior to the date when
such equipment is proposed to be used. The village president, or his or her designee, shall approve or deny such permit application prior to
the date when such equipment is proposed to be used. (Ord. 92-468, 12-8-1992)
c. Such equipment shall not be operated after the hour of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. or before the hour of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. except on
Friday and Saturday evenings the prohibition shall begin at eleven thirty o'clock (11:30) P.M. (Ord. 2011-918, 7-12-2011)
9-1-6: DISCHARGES PROHIBITED:
No person, firm, corporation or other entity shall discharge any sanitary waste or industrial wastewater into any storm sewer or drainage facility
constructed as part of the U.S. Route 14 improvements at Baldwin Road and at Sterling Avenue, a portion of which improvements includes along
Baldwin Road between Roselle Road and the Union Pacific right of way, which is within the corporate limits of the village of Inverness. (Ord. 2002-0-
726, 1-8-2002)
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 275/366
Chapter 2
NUISANCE TREES, WEEDS, AND OTHER NUISANCE PLANTS
ARTICLE A. WEEDS AND OTHER NUISANCE PLANTS
9-2A-1: WEEDS DECLARED A NUISANCE; HEIGHT RESTRICTION:
A. Without in any way limiting the term "noxious weeds" by the enumeration that follows, all noxious weeds, including, but not limited to: burdock,
ragweed (giant), ragweed (common), thistle, cocklebur, jimson, blue vervain, common milkweed, wild carrot, poison ivy, wild mustard, rough
pigweed, lambsquarter, wild lettuce, curled dock, smart weeds (all varieties), poison hemlock, wild hemp, and weeds which due to pollination are
a menace to health and weeds otherwise injurious to public health or welfare, are hereby declared to be a public nuisance. (Ord. 2007-854, 10-
9-2007)
B. It shall be unlawful for anyone to permit any noxious weeds, grass, or other plants to grow to a height exceeding eight inches (8") on any lot,
tract, or parcel in the village; and any such noxious weeds, grass or other plants as described above exceeding such maximum height are
hereby declared to be a nuisance (hereinafter referred to as "nuisance plants") and are prohibited, provided, however, that this height restriction
shall not be applicable to: 1) trees, bushes, flowers, or other ornamental plants; 2) any vegetation on publicly held open space, parks, preserves,
and other public places; or 3) any vegetation on any privately owned community association or development common areas designed, planted,
and managed, with predominantly natural vegetation. (Ord. 2009-890, 7-14-2009)
9-2A-2: REMOVAL REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person owning or controlling any real estate within the corporate limits of the village to permit the growth thereon of
nuisance plants as defined in section 9-2A-1 of this article. (Ord. 2007-854, 10-9-2007)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 19-1004 - LIEN FOR REMOVAL COSTS FOR WEEDS . Go to new ordinance.
9-2A-3: ENFORCEMENT:
A. Owner/Occupant Responsibility: The owner and/or occupant of any real estate within the corporate limits of the village shall be responsible for
and shall cause the cutting and removal of nuisance plants as defined in section 9-2A-1 of this article, the trimming and/or the removal of
nuisance bushes and/or trees.
B. Abatement By Village: The officers, employees, and agents of the village are hereby authorized to enter upon private property to inspect such
property for violations of this chapter and/or for the purpose of abating such violations.
C. Costs As A Lien: The village administrator, or his designee, may cause the cutting of nuisance plants as defined in section 9-2A-1 of this article,
the trimming and/or the removal of bushes and trees when the owner(s) of real estate refuses or neglects to trim, and/or remove them ("nuisance
bushes and trees") and to collect from the owner(s) of private property the reasonable cost thereof. This cost incurred shall be a lien upon the
real estate affected, superior to all other liens and encumbrances, except tax liens; provided that within sixty (60) days after such cost and
expense is incurred, the village or person performing the service by authority of the village, in his or its own name, files notice of lien in the office
of the recorder in the county in which such real estate is located. The notice shall consist of a sworn statement setting out: 1) a description of the
real estate sufficient for identification thereof, 2) the amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred or payable for the service, and
3) the date or dates when such cost and expense was incurred by the village. However, the lien of such village shall not be valid as to any
purchaser whose right in and to such real estate have arisen subsequent to the cutting and removal of nuisance plants, or subsequent to the
trimming and/or the removal of nuisance bushes or trees, and prior to the filing of such notice, and the lien of the village shall not be valid as to
any mortgagee, judgment creditor or other lienor whose rights in and to such real estate arise prior to the filing of such notice. Upon payment of
the cost and expense by the owner of or persons interested in such property after notice of lien has been filed, the lien shall be released by the
village or person in whose name the lien has been filed and the release may be filed of record as in the case of filing notice of lien. The cost of
the cutting, trimming, and/or removal of nuisance plants, trees, and/or bushes shall not be a lien on the real estate affected unless a notice is
personally served on, or sent by certified mail to, the person to whom was sent the tax bill for the general taxes on the property for the last
preceding year, or if the property is exempt from real estate taxes, to the owner of record. The notice shall be delivered or sent after the cutting,
trimming, and/or removal of nuisance plants, trees, and/or bushes on the property. The notice shall state the substance of 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-20-7 and the substance of any ordinance of the village implementing this section and shall identify the property, by common
description, and the location of the nuisance plants, trees, and/or bushes to be cut.
D. Penalties: Any person, corporation, partnership, association, or other entity who or which violates any of the provisions of this article shall be
guilty of an offense punishable by a fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
Each day that any violation of this article shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 2007-854, 10-9-2007)
ARTICLE B. DISEASED, INFECTED AND/OR INFESTED TREES
9-2B-1: RIGHT TO INSPECT:
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 276/366
The officers, employees, and agents of the village are hereby authorized and directed to enter on and upon private property whereon there is
located any elm trees having the appearance of or suspected of being diseased with Ceratocystis ulmi, commonly called the Dutch elm disease, ash
trees infested with the emerald ash borer (Agrilus planipennis Fairmaire), or any tree of the species of oak having the appearance of or suspected of
being affected with the fungus Ceratocystis fagacearum, commonly called "oak wilt", and/or any tree having the appearance of or suspected of
being infected with conifer bark beetles, all as determined by the village arborist, for the purpose of inspecting said suspected tree, and, if
necessary, removing therefrom samples or portions thereof to be tested to establish whether said tree is, in fact, diseased or infested. (Ord. 2007-
854, 10-9-2007)
9-2B-2: NUISANCE DECLARED:
In the event that it is determined by the village administrator, or his designee, that any tree is, in fact, diseased or infected with the Dutch elm
disease, infested with the emerald ash borer, affected with oak wilt, or infected with conifer bark beetles, all as determined by the village arborist,
said tree or trees shall forthwith be and are hereby declared to be a nuisance. (Ord. 2007-854, 10-9-2007)
9-2B-3: DUTY OF OWNER/OCCUPANT TO ABATE:
The owner, occupant, or agent of the parcel of land on which exists a diseased elm tree, a tree infested with the emerald ash borer, or any oak tree
with oak wilt or infected with conifer bark beetles, all as determined by the village arborist, shall forthwith remove and destroy said tree and shall
chip the same or shall cause the same to be removed, destroyed, and ground, milled, chipped, or otherwise disposed of consistent with the
provisions of the applicable state or federal quarantine within ten (10) days of notification to such owner, occupant, or agent that said tree is, in fact,
diseased, infected, and/or infested. No chips or other particles resulting from such removal operation shall exceed one inch (1") in any dimension,
unless allowed pursuant to the provisions of any applicable state or federal quarantine. All stumps of such diseased, infected, and/or infested trees
shall be removed to a depth of not less than eight inches (8") below the ground surface and then covered with soil of the same depth. No ash
material shall be removed from any quarantine zone as imposed from time to time by any state or federal agency, unless such removal is done
consistent with the provisions of the state or federal quarantine. Notwithstanding any other provisions in this chapter to the contrary, all removal
operations for such diseased, infected and/or infested tree(s) shall fully comply with all applicable state and federal statutes and/or regulations as
exist from time to time. (Ord. 2007-854, 10-9-2007)
9-2B-4: NOTICE TO ABATE:
Whenever the owner or occupant of any private property containing a diseased, infected and/or infested tree permits the diseased, infected and/or
infested tree to remain on such premises, the village shall proceed as follows:
A. A notice shall be sent by registered mail or delivered to the occupant and to the person to whom was sent the tax bill for the general taxes for the
last preceding year on the premises.
B. Such notice shall state that there is an elm tree infected with Dutch elm disease or an ash tree infested with the emerald ash borer, or an oak tree
affected with oak wilt, or tree infected with conifer bark beetles, on the premises, the notice shall describe the premises by legal description or by
street address, and the notice shall state that unless the diseased, infected, or infested tree is removed on or before the date stated in the notice,
the diseased, infected, or infested tree shall be removed at the property owner's expense. The date stated in the notice shall be not less than
thirty (30) days after the date of delivery or mailing of the notice.
C. There shall be included with such notice a copy of this article or the ordinance from which it is derived and a copy of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/11-20-12. (Ord. 2007-854, 10-9-2007)
9-2B-5: ABATEMENT BY VILLAGE; CERTAIN COSTS CONSTITUTE A LIEN:
In all cases where the owner, occupant, or agent of the parcel of land on which said diseased, infected, or infested tree is located cannot be found,
or if found and notified as aforesaid neglects or refuses to abate said nuisance, it shall be lawful for the village to abate the same by the removal,
destruction, and chipping of said diseased, infected, or infested tree and in that event the said owner, occupant and agent or any of them shall be
charged with those expenses which may be incurred by the village in the removal or abatement of the diseased, infected, or infested tree as
aforesaid, which expense shall be collected by the village by suit or otherwise in addition to the fine or penalty provided. Such expenses incurred for
the removal of a tree or trees infected with Dutch elm disease or a tree or trees infested with emerald ash borer shall be a lien upon the affected real
estate in accordance with 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-20-12. (Ord. 2007-854, 10-9-2007)
9-2B-6: FAILURE TO REMOVE TREE PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any premises in the village to permit any tree or portion thereof infected with the Dutch elm disease or infested
with the emerald ash borer, or any tree of the species of oak affected with the fungus Ceratocystis fagacearum, commonly called "oak wilt", or any
tree infected with conifer bark beetles, all as determined by the village arborist, to remain on such premises or anywhere within the village. (Ord.
2007-854, 10-9-2007)
9-2B-7: PENALTIES:
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 277/366
Any person, corporation, partnership, association, or other entity who or which violates any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of an
offense punishable by a fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each day that any
violation of this article shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 2007-854, 10-9-2007)
Chapter 3
NUISANCES
9-3-1: NUISANCES ENUMERATED:
It is hereby declared to be a nuisance for any person within the limits of the village:
A. Contaminated, Spoiled Or Unwholesome Food: To permit any contaminated, spoiled or unwholesome food to be offered for sale to the public.
B. Animals At Large: To allow any domesticated animals to run at large.
C. Deposit Of Carcasses; Decaying Plant Or Vegetable Matter; Garbage: To cause, permit or suffer the carcasses of any animal or any decaying
plant or vegetable matter, garbage, filth, stable drippings or offal, or obnoxious substances of any kind to be collected or deposited or to remain
in any place, including both private property and public roads and highways in the village, where a menace to public health is thereby created, or
when offensive odors result therefrom.
D. Affecting Watercourses:
1. To throw or deposit, or cause or permit to be thrown or deposited, any junk, debris, offal or other offensive matter, or the carcass of any animal
or any decaying plant or vegetable matter in any watercourse, stream, pond, lake, ditch, spring or well, or otherwise corrupt or pollute or
render unwholesome or injure any watercourse, stream, pond, lake, spring or well.
2. To obstruct any watercourse, ravine or gutter so as to cause water to stagnate therein, or to permit foul or stagnant water to stand upon any
premises.
E. Accumulations Of Grass, Leaves, Etc.:
1. To cause, suffer or permit grass, leaves, underbrush or other combustible matter to be collected, deposited or to remain on any premises in
such quantities and in such condition as to materially increase the danger of forest or other fires, or to clog ditches and drainage structures.
2. To cause, suffer or permit accumulations of manure, rubbish, garbage, refuse and human and industrial or noxious or offensive waste, except
the normal storage of small quantities of manure for agricultural or garden purposes.
F. Garbage Cans: To maintain garbage cans which are not flytight.
G. Sanitary System Discharge: To cause, suffer or permit the discharge of any sanitary system, including any automatic washing machine or other
laundry discharge, into open ditches or into any part of a storm sewer or drainage system, or into any dry well.
H. Vermin Infestation And Transmission Of Disease: To cause, suffer or permit the infestations of vermin which may be involved in the transmission
of communicable disease.
I. Occupied Premises Unfit For Human Habitation: To permit premises to be leased, rented or occupied for human habitation which are unfit for
human habitation. (1983 Code)
J. Construction, Building, Landscaping And/Or Lawn Maintenance Operations:
1. To cause, suffer, or permit any failure to maintain any construction site and property in a neat and orderly fashion.
2. To conduct any construction, building, landscaping and/or lawn maintenance operations at the following times:
a. On Sundays before nine o'clock (9:00) A.M., or after ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.; and
b. On Mondays through Saturdays, before six o'clock (6:00) A.M., or after ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
Exceptions to these time restrictions shall be allowed for maintenance and/or operation of public safety equipment and/or traffic control
devices and/or for any construction and/or maintenance of an emergency nature.
3. To cause, suffer, or permit any truck, construction equipment, and/or any trailer for same to remain on any construction or building site for a
period of longer than thirty (30) days continuously or in the aggregate, without being utilized for a substantial period of time on such site. For
the purposes of this subsection, a "substantial period of time" shall mean not less than fifteen (15) documented hours of use. (Ord. 2011-916,
7-12-2011)
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 278/366
K. Maintaining Unwholesome Business: To establish, maintain and carry on any offensive or unwholesome business or establishment within the
limits of the village or within one mile of the limits thereof.
L. Obstructing Roads And Highways: To cause, suffer or permit any obstruction or encroachment upon or into any public road or highway.
M. Discarding On Streets: To throw or drop any debris or litter upon any public street, road or highway.
N. Unsightly Yards: To permit or maintain an unsightly, dangerous or unhealthful yard or premises, where there is an accumulation or deposit of any
vehicles, equipment, materials of any nature, waste or earth or where junk, wrecked or disabled automobiles, trucks or equipment, or other such
matters are allowed to accumulate. (1983 Code)
9-3-2: POWERS OF VILLAGE PRESIDENT:
The village president is hereby authorized and empowered to inspect all buildings, lands and places as to their conditions affecting health and
sanitation and whenever any nuisance or condition prejudicial to the public health is found to exist, the village president shall have the power and
the authority to order the owner, occupant or user thereof to make such alterations or changes necessary to correct and remove said nuisance or
condition prejudicial to the public health. (1983 Code)
9-3-3: ABATEMENT BY VILLAGE:
Whenever any nuisance exists or shall be found on any premises within the village, whether such nuisance is one specifically recognized by
ordinance or not, the village president is hereby authorized, in his discretion, to cause the same to be summarily abated in such manner as he may
direct at the expense of the party permitting or maintaining such nuisance. (1983 Code)
9-3-4: INOPERABLE VEHICLES:
A. Definitions: Whenever the following terms are used in this section they shall have the meanings respectively described to them in this subsection:
INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle from which, for a period of at least seven (7) days, the engine, wheels or other parts
have been removed, or on which the engine, wheels or other parts have been altered, damaged or otherwise so treated that the vehicle is
incapable of being driven under its own motor power. "Inoperable motor vehicle" shall not include a motor vehicle which has been rendered
temporarily incapable of being driven under its own motor power in order to perform ordinary service or repair operations. "Inoperable motor
vehicle" shall also include:
1. Any vehicle which is parked or stored but not completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner and which is not operated one or
more times within any thirty (30) day period; or
2. Any vehicle which is not licensed in accordance with applicable Illinois statutes or the applicable vehicle tax provisions of this code.
OPERABLE HISTORIC VEHICLE: A vehicle over twenty five (25) years of age which is capable of being driven under its own motor power
and which is licensed in accordance with the applicable Illinois statutes and in accordance with the applicable vehicle tax provisions of this
code.
B. Location Or Presence Of Inoperable Motor Vehicle Within Village Deemed Public Nuisance; Exceptions: The location or presence of any
inoperable motor vehicles on any lot, tract, parcel of land or portion thereof, occupied or unoccupied, improved or unimproved, within the village
shall be deemed a public nuisance and it shall be unlawful for any person or persons to cause or maintain such public nuisance by wrecking,
dismantling, rendering inoperable, abandoning or discarding his or their vehicle or vehicles on the property of another or to suffer, permit or allow
the same to be placed, located, maintained or exist upon his or their own real property or any premises leased or occupied by them; provided
that this section shall not apply to:
1. A vehicle or part thereof which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public
or private property;
2. A vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed vehicle
dealer or a vehicle on the premises of a licensed business engaged in wrecking or junking of vehicles, if such businesses are otherwise
permitted by the ordinances of the village; or
3. Operable historic vehicles.
C. Abatement Or Removal Order; Contents; Service:
1. Whenever such public nuisance exists in the village in violation hereof, the village and/or its agents shall give not less than ten (10) days'
notice to the owner of the real property, the occupant or lessee, if any, of the premises whereon such public nuisance exists to abate or
remove the same, stating the nature of the public nuisance on private property and that it must be removed and abated within ten (10) days
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 279/366
and further that a request for a hearing must be made before expiration of said ten (10) day period by the aggrieved person, such notice to be
personally served or to be mailed, by certified or registered mail with a five (5) day return receipt requested and by regular mail, to the owner,
the occupant or the lessee of the private premises whereupon such public nuisance exists. If notice by mail is returned undelivered by the
United States post office, official action to abate said nuisance shall be continued to a date not less than ten (10) days from the date of such
return.
2. Whenever such public nuisance exists in the village in violation hereof, the village and/or its agents shall give not less than a ten (10) day
notice, stating the nature of the public nuisance on the public property or on a public right of way and that it must be removed and abated
within ten (10) days and further that a request for a hearing must be made before expiration of said ten (10) day period, such notice personally
served or to be mailed, by certified or registered mail with a five (5) day return receipt requested, to the owner, the occupant or the lessee of
the public premises or to the owner, the occupant or the lessee of the premises adjacent to the public right of way whereupon such public
nuisance exists. If notice by mail is returned undelivered by the United States post office, official action to abate said nuisance shall be
continued to a date not less than ten (10) days from the date of such return.
3. A public hearing prior to the removal of the vehicle or part thereof as a public nuisance is to be held before a person designated by the village.
When such a hearing is requested by the owner, the occupant or the lessee of the public or private premises or by the owner, the occupant or
the lessee of the premises adjacent to the public right of way on which said vehicle is located, within ten (10) days after service of notice to
abate the nuisance, any resolution or order requiring the removal of a vehicle or part thereof shall include a description of the vehicle, and the
correct identification number and license number of the vehicle, if available at the site. (Ord. 88-324, 4-12-1988)
D. Removal With Permission Of Owner Or Occupant: If within ten (10) days after receipt of notice from the village and/or its agents to abate the
nuisance, as herein provided, the owner, the occupant or lessee of the premises shall give his written permission to the village for removal of the
inoperable motor vehicle from the premises, the removal shall be at the expense of said owner. The giving of such permission shall be
considered compliance with the provisions of this section.
E. Disposal Of Inoperable Vehicles: If such public nuisance is not abated by said owner, occupant or lessee after notice is given in accordance with
this section, official action shall be taken by the village to abate such nuisance. Inoperable vehicles or parts thereof may be disposed of by
removal to a scrap yard or demolishers for processing as scrap or salvage.
F. Authority To Enforce: The chief of police and/or his employees, or his agent, may enter upon private property for the purposes specified in this
section to examine vehicles or parts thereof, obtain information as to the identity of vehicles and to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or
parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this section but shall comply with the fourth amendment of the United States constitution.
G. Application: Nothing in this section shall affect statutes or ordinances that permit immediate removal of a vehicle left on public property which
constitutes an obstruction to traffic.
H. Penalty: Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. Each day that a vehicle remains inoperable after notice has been given shall constitute a separate
offense. (Ord. 88-319, 1-12-1988)
Chapter 4
PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS1
9-4-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect, promote and preserve the public health, safety and general welfare by the establishment and enforcement
of a minimum code of standards for design, alteration, construction, location, materials, operation and maintenance of private sewage disposal
systems and for the transportation and disposal of wastes therefrom. (Ord. 15-961, 4-14-2015)
9-4-2: APPLICABILITY:
A. No person or private sewage disposal system contractor may construct, install, modify, repair, maintain, or service a private sewage disposal
system or transport and dispose of waste removed therefrom, in such a manner that does not comply with the requirements of this chapter.
B. Any person who constructs, installs, repairs, modifies, or maintains a private sewage disposal system, shall be licensed by the department as a
private sewage system installation contractor and any person who cleans or pumps waste from a private sewage disposal system, or hauls or
disposes of wastes removed therefrom shall be licensed by the department as a private sewage disposal system pumping contractor.
C. No new private sewage disposal system shall be installed by any person until drawings, specifications and other information requested by the
village are submitted to and reviewed by the enforcement officer and found to comply with the village private sewage disposal systems code,
and until a permit for the installation of such system is issued by the village. (Ord. 15-961, 4-14-2015)
9-4-3: DEFINITIONS (IDPH SECTION 905.10):
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 280/366
In addition to the definitions contained in the private sewage disposal licensing act2, the following definitions shall apply:
AG EXPERIMENT STATION: The University Of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign agricultural experiment station.
ACT: The private sewage disposal licensing act3.
AEROBIC TREATMENT PLANT: Equipment or devices for the treatment of sewage by the forced addition of air or oxygen.
APPROVED CERTIFICATION AGENCY: An organization that has been accredited by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) and has
been found to meet the requirements specified in the International Organization For Standardization (ISO)/International Electrotechnical
Commission guide 65 to evaluate wastewater treatment units and components for compliance with National Sanitation Foundation (NSF)
International/ANSI standards.
APPROVED OR APPROVAL: Accepted by or acceptable to the department or local authority.
BEDROOM: All rooms that meet the criteria listed below shall be considered as potential bedrooms and included as bedrooms for the purpose of
determining the required size of a private sewage disposal system of a residence.
A. On A Bedroom Level: Any room, of one hundred (100) square feet or larger, regardless of its designation by the owner or permit applicant,
which is suitable for regular use as a room for sleeping, including, but not limited to, dens, studies, bonus rooms, libraries, television rooms,
sewing rooms and similar rooms (all of which are hereafter referred to as "extra rooms") whether finished or unfinished.
B. On A Nonbedroom Level: Extra rooms, of one hundred (100) square feet or larger, located on the nonbedroom level of a multi-story residence
shall be considered bedrooms if there is a bath on that level containing a shower or tub.
C. On A Single Story Residence: Extra rooms with or without a closet in a single story residence shall always be considered bedrooms.
BUILDING DRAIN: That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system that receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage
pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building (house) sewer. The building drain's developed length terminates five feet (5')
outside the building foundation wall.
BUILDING SEWER: That part of the horizontal piping of a drainage system that extends from the end of the building drain, receives the discharge of
the building drain and conveys it to a public sanitary sewer or private sewage disposal system. The building sewer commences five feet (5') outside
the building foundation wall.
CLEAR WATER: Cooling water and condensate water from refrigeration or air conditioning equipment, cooled condensate from steam heating
systems and subsoil drainage.
COMMON COLLECTOR: An underground enclosed conduit designed to carry treated sewage effluent exclusive of stormwater and that serves
more than one property.
COMMON PROPERTY: The property that is used by all owners or tenants for a private sewage disposal system.
COMPONENT: An integral part of a private sewage disposal system that is necessary for the satisfactory design, construction and operation of the
system.
DEPARTMENT: The Illinois department of public health.
DISCHARGE POINT: The point at which treated effluent discharges from an approved private sewage disposal system, which is compliant with
section 905.110(a).
DOMESTIC SEWAGE: Wastewater derived principally from dwellings, business or office buildings, institutions, food service establishments and
similar facilities.
EFFECTIVE SIZE: The size of screen opening where ninety percent (90%) by weight of a sample of filter media is retained on the screen and ten
percent (10%) passes through the screen.
EFFLUENT: Treated or partially treated liquid discharged from a private sewage disposal system or a component.
ESTIMATED SEASONAL HIGH WATER TABLE: The highest level to which the soil is saturated, as determined by direct observation or as may be
determined by a soil classifier examining additional information.
GRAVELLESS SEEPAGE SYSTEM: The use of approved perforated eight inch (8") or ten inch (10") diameter filter wrapped plastic pipe in lieu of
four inch (4") pipe and gravel, in subsurface fields and serial distribution systems.
HOT TUB: An artificial container of water with a liquid capacity greater than one hundred (100) gallons and designed with a mechanical air injection
system or recirculating device. These devices may filter or disinfect the water for reuse and are not intended to be drained between uses.
INFLUENT: Something that flows into a private sewage disposal system or a component.
LIMITING LAYER: A horizon or condition in the soil profile or underlying strata that includes:
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 281/366
A. An estimated high water table, whether perched or regional.
B. Masses of loose rock fragments, including gravel, with insufficient fine soil to fill the voids between the fragments.
C. Rock formation, other stratum or soil condition that is so slowly permeable that it effectively limits downward passage of effluent.
LIQUID CAPACITY: The volume of a tank below the invert of the outlet line.
LOCAL AUTHORITY: A local unit of government that enforces a private sewage disposal ordinance that has been approved by the department; or a
local health department that has been designated an agent of the state for conduct of the private sewage disposal program. In most contexts, local
authority means the village of Inverness.
MAINTAINED AND SERVICED: The tasks, procedures and inspections required by the manufacturer of the component/system or the department
for the private sewage disposal system to operate within the parameters and requirements of this chapter and any other restrictions established as
part of the system approval or as part of a variance.
MINIMUM SLOPE: The slope required for treated effluent to travel in the designed direction of flow.
NPDES PERMIT: Any general or individual national pollutant discharge elimination system permit issued by the Illinois environmental protection
agency or the United States environmental protection agency.
NSF INTERNATIONAL: The National Sanitation Foundation International, an independent testing laboratory.
NSF INTERNATIONAL/ANSI STANDARD 40 WASTEWATER TREATMENT SYSTEM: Any system that has been certified by an approved
certification agency to meet NSF International/ANSI standard 40, residential wastewater treatment systems.
NONRESIDENTIAL PROPERTY: Any property that is not residential property.
PORTABLE POTABLE HAND WASHING UNIT: A self-contained, movable, potable water unit equipped with a waste receiving holding container that
may be moved or transported from site to site.
PORTABLE SANITATION BUSINESS: Any partnership, company, limited liability company, corporation or individual that sells, rents, leases,
transports, services, cleans, sanitizes or maintains a portable toilet or portable potable hand washing unit or pumps, or transports or disposes of
waste from portable toilets or portable potable hand washing units.
PORTABLE SANITATION TECHNICIAN: Any individual who is certified by the department to be an employee for a portable sanitation business and
who has completed the training required by the department's rules.
PORTABLE SANITATION TECHNICIAN TRAINEE: Any individual who is certified by the department as an employee for a portable sanitation
business for less than one year.
PORTABLE TOILET: A self-contained, movable unit equipped with a waste receiving holding container that may be moved or transported from site
to site.
PROPER OPERATION: Operation of a system within the parameters and requirements of this chapter, the act, the department's rules and any other
restrictions established as part of the system approval or as part of a variance.
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY: A single-family home or multi-family unit that is intended for occupation as living quarters and is not used to conduct
any business that generates wastewater or domestic sewage.
RULES: The Illinois administrative code.
SEPTAGE: The solid and liquid wastes removed from private sewage disposal systems.
SHALL: The stated provision is mandatory.
SOIL BORING: An observation pit, dug by hand or backhoe, or an undisturbed soil core taken intact and undisturbed by a probe.
SOIL CLASSIFIER: One of the following:
A. A certified professional soil classifier (CPSC) who is certified by the Illinois Soil Classifiers Association (ISCA) or a certified soil classifier with
the American Registry Of Certified Professionals In Agronomy, Crops And Soils (ARCPACS).
B. A person who is a full member or associate member of the Illinois Soil Classifiers Association (ISCA), provided that direct supervision is
provided to this person by an ISCA certified professional soil classifier or ARCPACS certified soil classifier who accompanies the person on at
least twenty five percent (25%) of the soil investigations and reviews and signs all of that person's soil investigation reports.
SUBSOIL DRAINAGE: Groundwater such as runoff water, seepage water or clear water from the soil that is free from domestic sewage.
SUBSURFACE SEEPAGE SYSTEM: A subsurface seepage field or seepage bed.
UNIFORMITY COEFFICIENT: A number obtained by dividing that size of sand in millimeters of which sixty percent (60%) by weight is smaller, by
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 282/366
that size of sand in millimeters of which ten percent (10%) by weight is smaller.
WASTE: Either human waste or domestic sewage or both.
WASTEWATER SOURCE: Any equipment, facility or other source of any type whatsoever that discharges wastewater, directly or indirectly, to the
waters of the state.
WATER TABLE: The upper limit of the portion of the soil or rock formation that is completely saturated with water.
Soil science terms used throughout the text of this chapter are defined in the Soil Science Society Of America, "Glossary Of Soil Science Terms"
unless otherwise defined.
(Source: Amended at 37 Ill. reg. 14994, effective August 28, 2013) (Ord. 15-961, 4-14-2015; amd. Ord. 2015-966, 12-8-2015)
9-4-4: INCORPORATED AND REFERENCED MATERIALS (IDPH SECTION 905.15):
The following materials are incorporated or referenced in this chapter:
A. The following materials are incorporated by reference:
1. NSF International/ANSI standard 46, "Evaluation Of Components And Devices Used In Wastewater Treatment Systems" (October 22, 2004)
published by:
NSF International
789 Dixboro Road
Ann Arbor, MI 48105
Referenced in sections 905.40 and 905.120
2. NSF International/ANSI standard 40, "Residential Wastewater Treatment Systems" (August 1, 2005) published by:
NSF International
789 Dixboro Road
Ann Arbor, MI 48105
Referenced in section 905.100
3. NSF International/ANSI standard 41, "Non-Liquid Saturated Treatment Systems" (March 28, 2005) published by:
NSF International
789 Dixboro Road
Ann Arbor, MI 48105
Referenced in section 905.130
4. American Society For Testing And Materials (ASTM) required standards and dates that are not listed in subsection A5 of this section are listed
under appendix A, illustration C of this chapter. A list of approved plastic pipe for private sewage disposal system uses and standards may be
obtained from:
American Society For Testing And Materials
100 Barr Harbor Drive
West Conshohocken, PA 19428-2959
Referenced in sections 905.40, 905.60, 905.70
5. The following ASTM standards for the physical properties and characteristics of gravelless drainage pipe, which may be obtained from:
American Society For Testing And Materials
100 Barr Harbor Drive
West Conshohocken, PA 19428-2959
ASTM D4632-08 (2008)
ASTM D3786-09 (2009)
ASTM D737-08 (2008)
ASTM F662-86 (1992)
Referenced in section 905.60(c)(2)
6. "Standard Methods For Examination Of Water And Wastewater" (21st edition, October 2005) published by:
American Public Health Association
1015 8th Street
Washington, DC 20036
Referenced in section 905.110
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 283/366
7. "Glossary Of Soil Science Terms" (2001) published by:
Soil Science Society Of America
677 South Segoe Road
Madison, WI 53711
Referenced in section 905.10
8. Standards for the use or disposal of sewage sludge (40 CFR 503) (2008)
Referenced in section 905.170
9. National electrical code, 2005 edition, published by:
National Fire Protection Association
1 Batterymarch Park
Quincy, MA 02269
Referenced in section 905.20
10. International Organization For Standardization (ISO)/International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) guide 65 (December 18, 2006),
published by:
ISO Central Secretariat
International Organization For Standardization (ISO)
1, ch. de la Voie-Creuse
Case postale 56
CH-1211 Geneva 20
Switzerland
IEC Central Office
3, rue de Varembé
P.O. Box 131
CH-1211 Geneva 20
Switzerland
Referenced in section 905.100
11. "Field Book For Describing And Sampling Soils Ver. 2.0" (2002 edition)
National Resources Conservation Service
U.S. Department Of Agriculture
1400 Independence Ave., SW
Washington, DC 20250
Referenced in section 905.55
12. "Soil Taxonomy 1999" (2nd edition)
U.S. Department Of Agriculture
1400 Independence Ave., SW
Washington, DC 20250
Referenced in section 905.55
13. "Soil Survey Manual 1993"
Soil Conservation Service
U.S. Department Of Agriculture
1400 Independence Ave., SW
Washington, DC 20250
Referenced in section 905.55
B. The following materials are referenced in this chapter:
1. Department of public health administrative rules and statutes
a. Illinois plumbing code (77 Ill. adm. code 890).
Referenced in sections 905.20, 905.140, 905.150 and appendix A, illustration C of this chapter
b. Recreational area code (77 Ill. adm. code 800).
Referenced in section 905.150
c. Practice and procedure in administrative hearings (77 Ill. adm. code 100).
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 284/366
d. Plumbing license law4.
2. Pollution control board administrative rules and statutes
a. Introduction (35 Ill. adm. code 301).
Referenced in section 905.110
b. Permits (35 Ill. adm. code 309).
Referenced in sections 905.110 and 905.170
c. Waste disposal (35 Ill. adm. code subtitle G).
Referenced in sections 905.20 and 905.140
d. Classification of injection wells (35 Ill. adm. code 704.106).
Referenced in appendix A, illustration D of this chapter
3. "Illinois Department Of Transportation Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction" (January 1, 2007) published by:
Illinois Department Of Transportation
Manuals Office, Room 128
2300 S. Dirksen Parkway
Springfield, IL 62764
Referenced in section 905.95
4. Illinois highway code5
Referenced in section 905.110
C. All incorporations by reference of federal regulations and the standards of nationally recognized organizations refer to the regulations and
standards on the date specified and do not include any amendments or editions subsequent to the date specified.
D. All citations to federal regulations in this chapter concern the specified regulation in the 2005 code of federal regulations, unless another date is
specified.
E. All materials incorporated by reference are available for inspection and copying at the Illinois Department Of Public Health, Division Of
Environmental Health, 525 West Jefferson, Springfield, IL 62761.
(Source: Amended at 37 Ill. reg. 14994, effective August 28, 2013) (Ord. 15-961, 4-14-2015)
9-4-5: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS (IDPH SECTION 905.20):
A. Rate Of Flow For Domestic Sewage: Each unit of the private sewage disposal system shall be designed to treat the volume of domestic sewage
discharged to it. The volume of sewage flow shall be determined from appendix A, illustration A of this chapter. For nonresidential
establishments, the department will consider the use of actual flow volumes obtained from similar installations in lieu of the quantities contained
in appendix A, illustration A of this chapter, when the flow data is documented. Examples of the documentation that could be accepted would be
actual measurements of the quantity of wastewater, or water use receipts. In the design of a private sewage disposal system, peak flows shall be
designed for or attenuated.
B. Type Of Waste: A private sewage disposal system shall be designed to receive all waste from the buildings served.
1. Prohibited Influent: No subsoil drainage, discharge from roof drains or swimming pool wastewater shall be directed to the private sewage
disposal system.
2. Hot Tub Wastewater: Wastewater generated by a hot tub or similar device shall be discharged to one of the following:
a. A separate subsurface seepage system, provided that the seepage field is designed to accommodate the liquid capacity of the hot tub on a
daily basis. A septic tank is not required in front of a seepage field receiving flow from this device.
b. The seepage field serving the domestic wastewater flow, provided the seepage field is increased in size to accommodate the additional flow
from the hot tub on a daily basis. This drainage shall be piped around the septic tank and directly into the seepage field.
3. Motorized Equipment: Waste products, such as automotive grease, oils, solvents and chemicals, shall not discharge to a private sewage
disposal system. These waste products shall be handled according to rules for disposal of oil, gas and grease promulgated under the
environmental protection act, or according to 35 Illinois administrative code, subtitle G, or shall be taken to an oil and gas reclamation center.
The floor drain of any nonresidential property that meets the requirements of subsection B3a or B3b of this section, and is connected to a
public sewer, shall be connected to an approved gas and oil interceptor meeting the requirements of section 890.520 of the Illinois plumbing
code. Wastes from floor drains in areas where vehicles or motorized equipment are serviced and parked shall be treated in accordance with
the following:
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 285/366
a. For any nonresidential property in which a floor drain may receive fluids from vehicle or motorized equipment repair or maintenance
activities, floor drains shall be connected to a public sewer or holding tank and not to a private sewage disposal system. Repair and
maintenance facilities shall include, but shall not be limited to, service stations and auto body, muffler, transmission, small engine, and brake
repair shops. Floor drains in any facility that performs vehicle or motorized equipment repair work shall be connected to a public sewer or
holding tank. If the floor drain is connected to a public sewer, then the floor drain shall be connected to an approved gas and oil interceptor
meeting the requirements of section 890.520 of the Illinois plumbing code. If the floor drain is connected to a holding tank, a gas and oil
interceptor is not required. The holding tank shall be constructed of the same materials required for gas and oil interceptors.
b. For any nonresidential property on which vehicles or motorized equipment are parked or stored and repair or maintenance is not performed,
floor drains shall discharge to a public sewer or a private sewage disposal system, provided that floor drains are used only to receive water
from motorized equipment or vehicle washing or to drain melted snow. When floor drains in such properties are connected to a private
sewage disposal system, the system shall be increased in size based upon the anticipated daily flow. When a maintenance area is adjacent
to a parking area, physical barriers, such as a raised curb or recessed floor in the maintenance area, shall be provided to assure that oil and
gas are not discharged to floor drains.
c. For any residential property with a garage of any size, floor drains may discharge directly to a private sewage disposal system. No increase
in size of the residential private sewage disposal system is required to handle this liquid waste.
4. Other Than Domestic Sewage Or Wastewater: Drains or fixtures receiving any product other than domestic sewage or wastewater specified in
subsection B2 of this section shall be discharged to an approved treatment or disposal system that is regulated and approved by the state or
to a holding tank and not to a private sewage disposal system.
5. Water Softener Wastewater: Backwash water from a water softener or similar device shall be discharged to one of the following:
a. A separate subsurface seepage system, provided that the seepage field is designed to accommodate the liquid capacity of the water
softener on a daily basis. A septic tank is not required in front of a seepage field receiving flow from this device.
b. A separate building drain, in accordance with the Illinois plumbing code, that will discharge to a subsurface seepage system, provided that
the seepage field is designed to accommodate the flow from this device on a daily basis. A septic tank is not required in front of a seepage
field receiving flow from this device.
C. Individual Service: The use of a private sewage system to serve more than one property is prohibited except where a common property is
provided, under joint ownership of the users, or where the system is under public jurisdiction or managed by a district established for the
maintenance of these systems.
D. Water And Sewer Line Separation: The following criteria shall govern the separation of water supply lines and sewer lines:
1. Horizontal Separation: Sewers shall be installed at least ten feet (10') horizontally from any existing or proposed water line. When local
conditions prevent a lateral separation of ten feet (10'), a sewer may be laid closer than ten feet (10') to a water line provided that the elevation
of the crown of the sewer is at least eighteen inches (18") below the invert of the water line.
2. Crossings: Where sewer lines must cross water lines, the sewer line shall be laid at an elevation so that the crown of the sewer line is at least
eighteen inches (18") below the invert of the water line. This vertical separation shall be maintained for that portion of the sewer line located
within ten feet (10') horizontally of any water line it crosses. When sewer lines must cross above water lines, the sewer lines shall be schedule
40 or equivalent material with watertight joints.
E. Sanitary Sewer: New or renovated private sewage disposal systems shall not be approved where a sanitary sewer operated and maintained
under permit of the Illinois environmental protection agency is available for connection. A sanitary sewer is available for connection when it is
within three hundred feet (300') of a residential property or a nonresidential property with a sewage flow less than one thousand five hundred
(1,500) gallons per day, or within one thousand feet (1,000') of a nonresidential property with a sewage flow greater than or equal to one
thousand five hundred (1,500) gallons per day, unless a physical barrier or local ordinance exists that prevents connection to the sewer. If
connection from the property to the sanitary sewer cannot be made with an individual line (i.e., 4 inch line), then a private sewage disposal
system may be installed.
F. Acceptable Pipe Materials:
1. All piping located more than five feet (5') from the building foundation, used to convey wastewater to a private sewage disposal system, shall
be considered a part of the private sewage disposal system and shall be watertight. This piping shall be ductile iron, vitrified clay or plastic
pipe. Only vitrified clay or plastic pipe shall be used from the septic tank and after the distribution box (where used). Perforated pipe or open
jointed tile shall be used only as provided in this chapter.
2. Use of plastic pipe and fittings shall comply with the uses designated in appendix A, illustration C of this chapter.
3. Piping used to carry domestic sewage under areas such as driveways, roads or parking areas shall be schedule 40 equivalent or greater.
G. Pipe Size And Slope:
1. All solid pipes carrying domestic sewage by gravity flow shall have a nominal diameter of at least four inches (4") and a minimum slope of
twelve inches (12") per one hundred feet (100').
2. Solid header lines used for equal distribution shall be level.
3. Solid pipes carrying treated effluent by gravity shall have a nominal diameter of four inches (4") and a minimum slope to ensure designed flow
within the system.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 286/366
4. An alternative design for pipe sizing and slope may be proposed by an Illinois licensed professional engineer.
H. Prohibited Discharges: There shall be no discharge of raw or improperly treated domestic sewage to the surface of the ground or to farm tiles,
streams, rivers, ponds, lakes or other collectors of water. Improperly treated domestic sewage is sewage that does not meet the effluent
requirements of section 905.110(d) or sewage that comes directly from a septic tank or building sewer. Domestic sewage or effluent from any
private sewage disposal system or component shall not be discharged into any well, cistern or basement or into any underground mine, cave,
sinkhole or tunnel.
I. Pipe Length: Building sewers in excess of fifty feet (50') in length that carry wastewater from the buildings served to the septic tank, distribution
box or aeration treatment plant shall be provided with at least one cleanout every fifty feet (50') that terminates at grade.
J. Private Sewage Disposal System Development: The following factors shall govern the development of a private sewage disposal system:
1. Drainage: A private sewage disposal system shall not be located in areas where surface water will accumulate. The flow of surface water over
the private sewage system shall be minimized, for example, by the use of dikes, embankments, ditches or flow diverters.
2. Distances: The location of the various components of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with appendix A, illustration D of this
chapter.
3. Area Reserved For Sewage Disposal: The area to be used for a private sewage disposal system shall be selected and maintained so that it is
free from encroachment by driveways, accessory buildings, swimming pools, parking areas, buried lawn sprinkling systems and underground
utility services, patios, slabs, additions to the original structure, or any other structure that limits free access to the system for maintenance,
servicing or proper operation. The property owner and private sewage disposal system installation contractor shall ensure that the designated
area for the subsurface seepage system shall be secured prior to construction or modifications to the site and shall be protected throughout
the site development or construction process. The property owner and private sewage disposal system installation contractor shall secure this
area to deter any traffic, compaction of the soil, removal or addition of soil, or encroachment on the area of the proposed subsurface seepage
system. Temporary fencing, posts and roping or a similar restrictive barrier may be used to restrict access. The area of the proposed private
sewage disposal system shall be protected throughout the site development or construction process.
4. Creviced Limestone Formations: A subsurface seepage system shall not be constructed in an area where there is less than four feet (4') of
soil between the lowest point in a subsurface seepage system and the top of a creviced limestone formation. In areas where creviced
limestone is known to occur, a soil boring to a depth of at least four feet (4') below the bottom of the subsurface seepage system shall be
made to verify that creviced limestone is not present.
K. Electrical Devices: All electrical devices shall be wired in accordance with the national electrical code or a municipal, county or local electrical
code, whichever is more stringent.
1. Any component of a private sewage disposal system that is electrically activated shall be provided with a visible and audible warning device.
2. Alarms installed after January 1, 2014, shall be located outside of the building served. The power supply for the alarm shall be on a dedicated
circuit. The design of the alarm shall meet the requirements specified in section 5.8 of NSF International/ANSI standard 40. The alarm shall be
housed in a weatherproof box.
3. Electrical devices installed after January 1, 2014, shall be provided with an electrical disconnect that is located within sight of, and not more
than fifty feet (50') away from, the device.
L. Variances: If conditions exist at a proposed installation that make compliance with the requirements of this chapter impractical or impossible, a
variance may be requested by submitting to the Illinois department of public health, division of environmental health, or appropriate local
authority a written proposal that is to be used in lieu of compliance with this chapter. The written request shall include pertinent data to support
the proposal, such as soil conditions, water table elevations, drainage patterns and distances to water supplies. The capability of the system to
comply with the intent of this chapter will be the basis for approval or denial of the variances. The department or local authority will notify the
applicant in writing of its decision to either grant or deny the variance. Construction shall not begin before a variance is requested and approved.
M. Experimental Use Permits: If a private sewage disposal system or component is of a new or innovative type and does not comply with the
requirements of this chapter, the homeowner or private sewage contractor or manufacturer may request an experimental use permit. A request
shall be submitted in writing to the Illinois department of public health, division of environmental health, and construction or installation shall not
begin before a permit is requested and approved. The request shall meet the following requirements:
1. The request shall specify the type of proposed system or component to be used and shall be accompanied by plans, specifications and
engineering data to support the system's compliance with the general requirements under section 905.20 and with the effluent criteria under
section 905.110 for surface discharges, if applicable.
2. Information (such as topographical or plat maps) regarding the location of each installation shall be provided to the village and the department.
3. The homeowner, private sewage disposal system installation contractor or manufacturer shall provide the department and village with proof
that sufficient area is available for installation of an approved system if the experimental system fails.
4. The homeowner, private sewage disposal system installation contractor or manufacturer shall guarantee in writing that the experimental
system will be replaced with an approved system if the experimental system fails to perform in accordance with any of the sections of this
chapter, or with criteria established as a condition of approval of the system.
5. The private sewage disposal system installation contractor or the manufacturer shall notify the homeowner, or the person obtaining the
experimental use permit, of the guarantee required by subsection M4 of this section, and of the minimum standards of this chapter that shall
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 287/366
be met, as determined through the process described in subsections N3 and N4 of this section for developing criteria to be used in the
evaluation of the experimental system.
6. Upon receipt of the information required by this subsection M, the department will review the experimental system to determine whether the
proposed system is equal to or more stringent than applicable sections in this chapter, and will notify the applicant, in writing, of its decision to
approve or deny the request for an experimental use permit. If the request is approved, the department will issue an experimental use permit
for each installation, up to thirty (30) installations in the state.
N. Experimental Use Evaluation:
1. A minimum of ten (10) experimental installations shall be evaluated before an unconditional approval will be granted.
2. The experimental permit shall be valid for a period of up to two (2) years, during which time the department will evaluate the performance of
the experimental system. At the end of the two (2) year evaluation period, the department will determine whether the system will be approved.
3. The department, in consultation with the experimental use permit applicant, will develop a test method for the experimental system, which will
include the following information:
a. Purpose of the test;
b. Length of the test;
c. Analytical methods to be used;
d. Wastewater characteristics;
e. Loading requirements; and
f. Test criteria, including installation procedures, operating procedures, site evaluation criteria, control system criteria, start up procedures,
sampling procedures, and observation procedures.
4. The department, in consultation with the permit applicant, will develop performance requirements that will detail the criteria to be used to
evaluate the product to determine its ability to become an approved private sewage disposal system. The performance requirements shall
include, but are not limited to, ponding in subsurface systems indicating that failure of the system is imminent.
5. The experimental system will be deemed unacceptable:
a. When sewage erupts from the ground;
b. When effluent from the system does not meet the criteria of section 905.110(d); or
c. When the experimental system does not comply with the requirements of subsections N3 and N4 of this section.
6. If the experimental system is acceptable, it shall become an approved private sewage system. If the experimental system is unacceptable, it
shall not be approved for use as a private sewage disposal system and shall be replaced with an approved private sewage disposal system.
The department shall notify the applicant, in writing, of its determination.
7. A homeowner, private sewage contractor or manufacturer whose experimental system has been denied approval for use as a private sewage
disposal system may request a hearing to appeal the department's determination. The request shall be submitted in writing within ten (10)
days after receipt of the department's determination. The department's practice and procedure in administrative hearings rules shall apply to
all proceedings conducted under this section.
8. When the department has designated an experimental system as an approved private sewage disposal system, the department will amend
this chapter to include design, construction, operation and maintenance criteria for the newly approved system and will add the system to its
list of approved systems.
O. Garbage Grinders: When garbage grinders are used in residential property, solids shall be retained by one of the following methods:
1. A solids retention tank constructed in accordance with section 905.40 shall be placed between the wastewater source and the septic tank to
intercept solids from the garbage grinder. This tank shall receive waste from the garbage grinders or the kitchen wastes only. No other fixtures
shall discharge into this tank. The solids retention tank shall be at least fifty percent (50%) in liquid volume of the septic tank sized for the
waste from the rest of the property; however, the minimum size tank to be used shall be five hundred (500) gallons.
2. A septic tank receiving all flows from the property sized in accordance with appendix A, illustration F of this chapter.
P. Repair Or Replacement Of Existing System: Whenever an existing private sewage disposal system is repaired or replaced, that portion of the
system being repaired or replaced shall comply with all of the requirements of this chapter.
Q. Maintenance Of Private Sewage Disposal Systems:
1. After January 1, 2014, as a condition of applying for an installation approval required by section 905.190, the signature by the property owners
on the installation approval submission/construction permit for any private sewage disposal system being installed, repaired or renovated
serves as written acknowledgment that the property owners are aware of and accept the responsibility to service and maintain the private
sewage disposal system in accordance with the act and this chapter.
2. The property owner or the private sewage disposal system owner shall maintain all maintenance records on forms provided or approved by
the department and village and make records available upon request by the department or local authority. These records shall be transferred
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 288/366
from owner to owner. Records shall be kept for the life of the system.
3. After January 1, 2014, private sewage disposal systems installed and permitted under section 905.190 are required to be maintained and
serviced to ensure proper operation in accordance with the following:
a. Septic tank to a subsurface seepage system or septic tank followed by a sand filter discharging to a subsurface seepage system.
(1) Private sewage disposal system septic tanks serving residential properties shall be evaluated prior to or within three (3) years after the
date of installation of the system. The system may be evaluated by the homeowner, a private sewage disposal system installation
contractor, a licensed environmental health practitioner, an Illinois licensed professional engineer, a representative of the department, or
an agent of the department or local health department. The evaluation shall determine whether the tanks and all of the compartments of
the private sewage disposal system have layers of scum and settled solids greater than thirty three percent (33%) of the liquid capacity of
the tank. If the layers of scum and settled solids are greater than thirty three percent (33%), the tanks and compartments shall be pumped
out and maintenance shall be performed. After the first evaluation, the system shall be evaluated a minimum of once every five (5) years.
Depending on the system's use, the tanks and compartments may need to be evaluated and pumped more frequently.
(2) Private sewage disposal system septic tanks serving nonresidential property shall be evaluated within three (3) years after the date of
installation of the system. The system may be evaluated by a private sewage disposal system installation contractor, a licensed
environmental health practitioner, an Illinois licensed professional engineer, a representative of the department, or an agent of the
department or local health department. The evaluation shall determine whether the tanks and all of the compartments of the private
sewage disposal system have layers of scum and settled solids greater than thirty three percent (33%) of the liquid capacity of the tank. If
the layers of scum and settled solids are greater than thirty three percent (33%), the tanks and compartments shall be pumped out and
maintenance shall be performed. After the first evaluation, the system shall be evaluated at minimum once every three (3) years.
Depending on the system's use, the tanks and compartments may need to be evaluated and pumped more frequently.
b. An aerobic treatment unit (ATU) requires evaluation and maintenance at least once every six (6) months. The system may be evaluated by
a private sewage disposal system installation contractor, a licensed environmental health practitioner, an Illinois licensed professional
engineer, a representative of the department, or an agent of the department or local health department. The homeowner of an ATU may
conduct the inspection and maintenance as defined within the act, but the inspection and maintenance shall be performed per the
manufacturer's requirements to assure proper operation. If the required inspections and maintenance are not performed, the system is in
violation of the act, the rules and this chapter.
c. Sand filters and waste stabilization ponds with surface discharges require an evaluation to determine whether the tanks and all of the
compartments of the private sewage disposal system have layers of scum and settled solids greater than thirty three percent (33%) of the
liquid capacity of the tank. If the layers of scum and settled solids are greater than thirty three percent (33%), the tanks and compartments
shall be pumped out and maintenance shall be performed. The system shall be evaluated a minimum of once every year. The system may
be evaluated by a private sewage disposal system installation contractor, a licensed environmental health practitioner, an Illinois licensed
professional engineer, a representative of the department, or an agent of the department or local health department. Depending on the
system's use, the tanks and compartments may need to be evaluated and pumped more frequently. The homeowner of a sand filter or
waste stabilization pond may conduct the inspection and maintenance as defined within the act, but the inspection and maintenance shall
be performed per the requirements of the rules and this chapter to assure proper operation.
d. All other private sewage disposal systems that are not listed in subsections Q3a through Q3c of this section shall be maintained in
accordance with the manufacturer's specifications or based on a maintenance interval approved by the department.
e. The owner of a private sewage disposal system may submit an alternative maintenance interval to the department for approval. The
department will evaluate the alternative interval on a case by case basis. The approval is not transferable from owner to owner. Change in
ownership or use of the private sewage disposal system will void the approval.
4. A failure to properly operate, maintain and have routine service conducted on a private sewage disposal system is a violation of the act, the
rules and this chapter.
R. Installation Contractor On Site: A licensed private sewage disposal system installation contractor shall be present at the site during construction,
installation, repair, modification or maintenance of a private sewage disposal system. Cleaning, pumping, disposing and hauling of waste from a
private sewage disposal system shall be done by a licensed private sewage disposal system pumping contractor. A person who owns and
occupies a single-family dwelling and who constructs, installs, maintains, services or cleans the private sewage disposal system which serves
his/her single-family residence shall not be required to be licensed under this section; however, such person shall comply with all other
provisions of the act and this chapter. (Section 4 of the act.)
S. Construction And Excavation: Any construction or excavation performed by any individual other than the person who owns and occupies a singlefamily
dwelling shall be performed by a licensed private sewage disposal system installation contractor or an individual under the direct
supervision of a licensed private sewage disposal installation contractor.
T. Alternative Technology: The department may issue approval for a private sewage disposal system or a system component that has been
approved by another governmental body or an approved certification agency, based upon, but not limited to, the review of the following
information: submittals to other governmental bodies; analysis from third party testing; testing results from other governmental bodies; and
historical use within the jurisdiction of other governmental bodies.
(Source: Amended at 37 Ill. reg. 14994, effective August 28, 2013) (Ord. 15-961, 4-14-2015)
9-4-6: APPROVED PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS (IDPH SECTION 905.30):
A. The following systems are approved for private sewage disposal when designed, constructed, operated, and maintained in accordance with this
chapter:
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 289/366
1. Septic tank followed by:
a. A gravel subsurface seepage field;
b. An infiltration chamber system;
c. Mound system, design in accordance with the private sewage mound code.
2. Aerobic treatment plant and NSF International/ANSI standard 40 wastewater treatment system followed by:
a. A gravel subsurface seepage field;
b. An infiltration chamber system;
c. Mound system, designed in accordance with the private sewage mound code;
d. Seepage beds, when used to repair a failing system.
3. Any other system for which a variance in accordance with subsection 9-4-5L of this chapter has been issued or for which an experimental
permit in accordance with section 905.20(m) has been issued.
4. An NSF standard 350 certified system utilizing membrane technology as approved by the department. System will be approved provided that
there are adequate provisions incorporated into the design to accommodate a one hundred percent (100%) expansion of the system above
the manufacturer's design recommendations.
B. All other systems or components are not approved. (Ord. 15-961, 4-14-2015)
9-4-7: SEPTIC TANKS (IDPH SECTION 905.40):
A. Septic Tank Approval: Manufacturers of prefabricated septic tanks shall submit a set of plans for each size and configuration of septic tank to the
department for approval. Plans shall be drawn to scale and show all dimensions, baffles, tees, cleanouts and material specifications. The
department will provide a written approval for each size tank when the plans are found to conform to the requirements of this chapter.
1. The department will issue an approval number to each manufacturer for each series of approved septic tanks and will maintain a listing of the
approved manufacturers and approved septic tank series.
2. No prefabricated septic tank shall be sold, offered for sale, or installed other than those which have been approved by the department. The
tank shall bear the manufacturer's approval number and the liquid capacity of the tank, in gallons, prominently displayed on the outside end
wall of the tank above, or next to, the outlet pipe so that this information is readily visible after installation and prior to covering. The Illinois
department of public health approval number shall not be used on any tank other than the septic tank for which it has been issued.
3. All persons who manufacture, sell, offer for sale or deliver septic tanks or aerobic treatment plants in or into the state of Illinois shall record the
following information about each septic tank or aerobic treatment plant sold or delivered. This information shall be available for inspection by
the department or local authority upon request.
a. Name of purchaser or property owner (if different);
b. Location of delivery (county and address, legal description or driving directions);
c. Date of sale and delivery; and
d. Size of septic tank or model of aerobic unit.
B. Septic Tank Construction: Septic tanks shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the following: (Appendix A, illustration E of this
chapter is an illustration of these requirements.)
1. Septic Tank: A septic tank shall be watertight and constructed of sound and durable materials not subject to excessive corrosion, decay, frost
damage or cracking due to settling or backfilling.
2. Engineering Specifications:
a. The tank shall support a top dead load of not less than five hundred (500) pounds per square foot, and concrete tanks shall have a
minimum twenty eight (28) day compressive strength of three thousand (3,000) pounds per square inch (psi).
b. Tanks shall be designed and constructed so that they will not collapse or rupture when subjected to anticipated earth and hydrostatic
pressures when the tanks are either full or empty. The manufacturer, design engineer or structural engineer shall certify in writing to the
department that the tank is designed and constructed to meet the load requirements of this chapter. If additional loading is anticipated, the
tank shall be strengthened to accommodate the additional loading.
3. Materials: Septic tanks shall be constructed of any of the following approved materials:
a. Poured in place reinforced concrete.
b. Precast reinforced concrete.
c. Concrete block, provided that the core is filled with concrete and reinforcing rods are inserted in the core prior to pouring.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 290/366
d. Reinforced plastic.
e. Reinforced fiberglass.
f. Thermoplastic.
4. Depth: The minimum liquid depth of the tank shall be forty two inches (42"), and the maximum liquid depth shall be seventy two inches (72").
5. Inlet And Outlet Connections:
a. The invert elevation of the inlet shall be at least two inches (2") above the liquid level in the tank.
b. The inlet and outlet openings of the septic tank shall be provided with cast in watertight openings.
6. Baffles: Septic tank baffles shall meet the following requirements:
a. Inlet baffles shall be provided and shall extend at least six inches (6") below the surface of the liquid.
b. Inlet baffles shall be located no farther than twelve inches (12") from the inlet orifice.
c. Inlet and outlet baffles shall have a clearance of at least one inch (1") but not greater than three inches (3") of free space between the
underside of the tank lid and the baffles.
d. Outlet baffles shall be provided and shall extend to a depth of forty percent (40%) of the liquid depth.
e. Outlet baffles shall be located no farther than six inches (6") from the outlet end wall.
f. Slip in baffles shall extend the full width of the tank.
g. The sides of "V" or semicircular type baffles shall fit tightly against the end wall of the tank.
h. Venting shall be provided through all baffles and a free vent area equal to the cross sectional area of the building shall be provided.
i. Submerged pipe T-branches or sanitary tees may be used at the inlets and outlets in lieu of baffles, provided that all of the above stated
distances and depths are maintained.
j. Submerged pipe T-branches or sanitary tees used as inlet baffles shall be six inches (6") in diameter or larger. Outlet baffles shall be four
inches (4") in diameter.
k. Submerged pipe T-branches or sanitary tees shall meet the requirements of ASTM 2661, ASTM 2665 or ASTM 3034, or ASTM 2751,
provided that the pipe does not have an SDR (standard dimension ratio) number greater than 35.
l. When submerged pipe T-branches or sanitary tees are used as baffles, it shall be the responsibility of the septic tank manufacturer to assure
proper location of components during initial installation.
m. When a single compartment septic tank is manufactured or used, a gas deflection baffle shall be provided below the outlet baffle of the tank
configured to deflect rising gas bubbles away from the outlet structure and toward the interior of the tank. This baffle shall be constructed of
a durable material not subject to corrosion or decay. (Appendix A, illustration E, exhibit C of this chapter is an illustration.) An NSF
International/ANSI standard 46, section 10 septic tank filter may be used in lieu of the gas deflector baffle. The septic tank filter baffle shall
be installed so that it is extended or suspended to a depth equal to forty percent (40%) of the liquid level of the tank. The tank access over
the filter shall be provided with an access riser that extends to three inches (3") above the ground surface or greater.
7. Access: Access shall be provided over the inlet and outlet of the tank to facilitate inspection and cleaning. The manhole or access opening
shall have a fitted lid with a minimum dimension of twelve inches (12") (width or diameter). Risers shall be watertight and constructed of a
durable material. If the top of the tank is greater than twelve inches (12") below the ground surface, a riser with a minimum dimension of
twelve inches (12") (width or diameter) shall be provided to bring access over the inlet and outlet to within twelve inches (12") of the ground
surface. The joint between the septic tank and the risers shall be watertight. If a two (2) compartment tank is used, and the tank has an
opening over the wall between the compartments, the center opening shall have access provided within twelve inches (12") of the ground
surface.
C. Capacity:
1. Septic tanks for individual residences shall be sized in accordance with appendix A, illustration F of this chapter. Septic tanks for any
establishment other than residential property shall be sized in accordance with the estimated flow provided in appendix A, illustration A of this
chapter and as provided in subsection C2 of this section.
2. The volume below the liquid level for flows up to five hundred (500) gallons per day shall be at least seven hundred fifty (750) gallons. For
flows greater than five hundred (500) gallons per day, the volume shall be equal to at least one and one-half (11/2) the estimated daily sewage
flow. When the total flow exceeds one thousand three hundred fifty (1,350) gallons per day, two (2) or more tanks in series, or a
multicompartment tank, shall be installed.
D. Multiple Tanks Or Compartments: When multiple compartment septic tanks or multiple septic tanks in series are used, the capacity of the first
compartment or tank shall be one-half (1/2) to two-thirds (2/3) of the total required capacity. Two-compartment tanks shall also comply with the
following:
1. The wall separating the first and second compartments shall be tightfitting and designed to handle the differential in pressure if one side is
pumped.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 291/366
2. The wall separating the compartments shall extend to within three inches (3") of the tank lid and shall have a free vent area equal to the cross
sectional area of the house sewer.
3. The center of the opening between compartments shall be in line with the center of the inlet and outlet openings.
4. The depth to the invert of the opening between compartments shall be forty percent (40%) of the liquid depth.
5. A gas deflection baffle shall be provided below the outlet baffle of the tank configured to deflect rising gas bubbles away from the outlet
structure and toward the interior of the tank. This baffle shall be constructed of a durable material that is not subject to corrosion or decay. An
NSF International/ANSI standard 46, section 10 septic tank filter may be used in lieu of the gas deflector baffle. The septic tank filter baffle
shall be installed so that it is extended or suspended to a depth equal to forty percent (40%) of the liquid level of the tank. The tank access
over the filter shall be provided with an access riser that extends to three inches (3") or more above the ground surface.
6. For a two-compartment tank, openings with a minimum dimension of eighteen inches (18") shall be located over the inlet and outlet of the tank
or twelve inch (12") openings as follows:
a. One located over the inlet;
b. One over the outlet; and
c. One centered over the compartment wall.
E. Septic Tank Installation:
1. The septic tank shall be set level and backfilled to prevent flotation or drifting of the tank. "Level" shall mean plus or minus one-half inch (±1/2")
in any direction (length or width or diameter of the tank).
2. If the inlet, outlet or access openings are to be set at or below the seasonal high water table, all openings in the tank shall be made watertight
using mastic, tar, silicone caulk, etc.
3. There shall be no connections, such as joints, splices or fittings within the area of overdig around the septic tank.
F. Abandoned Treatment Units: Septic tanks, cesspools, pit privies, aerobic treatment plants and seepage pits that are no longer in use shall be
completely pumped. The floor and walls shall be cracked or crumbled so that the tank will not hold water, and the tank shall be filled with sand or
soil. If the tank is removed from the ground, the excavation shall be filled with soil.
(Source: Amended at 37 Ill. reg. 14994, effective August 28, 2013) (Ord. 15-961, 4-14-2015)
9-4-8: DISTRIBUTION BOXES (IDPH SECTION 905.50):
A. General: Distribution boxes may be installed between a septic tank, aerobic treatment plant, NSF International/ANSI standard 40 wastewater
treatment system, and a subsurface seepage system or buried sand filter. If a distribution box is used, it shall be installed level on unexcavated
earth, and shall provide equal distribution of flow to the subsequent disposal system.
B. Connecting Pipe: The pipe connecting the pretreatment or primary treatment component to the distribution box and the pipe connecting the
distribution box to the disposal system shall be watertight.
C. Construction: Distribution boxes shall be constructed of a durable, watertight, noncorrosive material. They shall be designed to accommodate the
necessary distribution lines.
D. Access: Distribution boxes shall be provided with an opening that will serve as a ready access for inspection, cleaning and general maintenance.
E. No Connections Around Distribution Box: There shall be no connection such as joints, splices or fittings within the area of the overdig around the
distribution box.
(Source: Amended at 37 Ill. reg. 14994, effective August 28, 2013) (Ord. 15-961, 4-14-2015)
9-4-9: DROP BOXES:
A. General: Drop boxes shall meet all the requirements of section 9-4-8 of this chapter except that they shall be installed in serial distribution
systems between a septic tank or aerobic treatment plant and a subsurface disposal trench, and between subsurface disposal trenches. (Ord.
15-961, 4-14-2015)
9-4-10: SUBSURFACE SEEPAGE SYSTEM DESIGN REQUIREMENTS (IDPH SECTION 905.55):
After January 1, 2014, when designing a subsurface seepage system, the absorption capacity of the soil shall be determined by subsection A of this
section. After January 1, 2014, subsection B of this section shall not be used to determine design requirements for a subsurface system.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 292/366
A. Soil Investigation:
1. Soil investigations shall be conducted in the following manner:
a. Determination of soil characteristics on sites proposed for development with private sewage disposal systems shall be based on soil boring
data collected by a soil classifier or an Illinois licensed professional engineer.
b. There shall be a minimum of three (3) borings per soil absorption system site. The soil borings shall be at least fifty feet (50') apart, and the
proposed subsurface seepage system shall be located within the area where the soil borings were located. More soil borings may be
necessary for accurate and appropriate evaluation of a site where there is some concern about the consistency of the soil materials. One of
the borings shall be made at the lowest elevation of the proposed absorption field area. Borings shall extend a minimum of sixty inches (60")
below the natural ground surface. An observation pit shall be used in gravelly materials.
c. Observation and determination of soil characteristics may also be determined from a pit dug by a backhoe or other excavating equipment.
The department or local authority may require soil pits (backhoe excavation) in cases where ground is frozen, where the soil materials are
considerably varied in texture, where there has been previous or current fill material or cutting of soils, or where gravelly soils are
encountered. Soil pits shall be prepared at the perimeter of the expected soil absorption area to minimize damage to natural soil structure.
Soil pits shall extend a minimum of sixty inches (60") below the natural ground surface.
d. Site characteristics to be described include zones of seasonal and permanent water saturation, United States department of agriculture
(USDA) soil textural changes; USDA soil structural features for each horizon, slope, compaction and depth; soil coloration; consistence;
coatings; depth of limiting layer; depth of soil mottling; internal drainage classification; permeability range; and other limiting soil
characteristics that may reduce permeability. The following reference materials shall be used as a guide for describing and classifying soil:
"Field Book For Describing And Sampling Soils", "Soil Taxonomy", and "Soil Survey Manual".
2. The following persons are qualified to conduct soil investigations:
a. Any person who meets the definition of "soil classifier" in section 9-4-3 of this chapter;
b. An Illinois licensed professional engineer;
c. An employee of a local health department who has three (3) years of experience in designing or approving private sewage disposal systems
using soil classification information and six (6) semester hours of soils related coursework;
d. An employee of a local health department with five (5) years of experience reviewing the design and approving private sewage disposal
systems using soil classification information under the direct supervision of those persons listed in subsections A2a, A2b, and A2c of this
section.
3. If conflicting soils investigation information is provided about a given site, a third soil classifier may be requested to provide additional
information or help to resolve the conflict. A national resources conservation service (NRCS) soil scientist who is also a soil classifier may be
contacted for technical information or interpretation.
B. Percolation Tests:
1. Performance Of Percolation Tests: At least three (3) separate percolation tests, a minimum of fifty feet (50') apart, shall be performed at the
site of each proposed subsurface seepage system.
2. Procedure For Performing Percolation Tests: Percolation tests shall be performed in accordance with the procedure outlined in appendix A,
illustration G of this chapter. Alternate procedures for performing percolation tests may be submitted to the department for review. If
determined to be as stringent as that described in appendix A, illustration G of this chapter, the alternate procedure will be approved.
3. Soil Investigation Required: The department or its agent may choose not to accept percolation data results and may require a soil
investigation if soils information, permits for private sewage disposal systems in proximity to the proposed site, direct observation or other
information shows conditions that will have an impact on the design, construction, installation, modification or performance of the private
sewage disposal system.
(Source: Amended at 37 Ill. reg. 14994, effective August 28, 2013) (Ord. 15-961, 4-14-2015)
9-4-11: SUBSURFACE SEEPAGE SYSTEM CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS (IDPH SECTION 905.60):
A. Seepage Field Requirements - Gravel, Gravelless And Chamber Systems: Subsurface seepage fields shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with appendix A, illustrations H, I and J of this chapter and the following:
1. Size: All subsurface seepage systems using soils information for sizing shall use the soil suitability table in appendix A, illustration M of this
chapter to determine the size requirements of the subsurface seepage system. The least permeable soil layer between the top of the gravel or
gravelless pipe or chamber system and two feet (2') below the bottom of the trench shall be used to determine the size of the subsurface
seepage system. For mound or at grade systems, the least permeable soil layer in the upper two feet (2') of the soil shall be used to determine
system size.
2. Bottom Must Be Level: The bottom of the subsurface seepage field, each trench and its distribution line shall be level. "Level" for this chapter
shall mean plus or minus one-half inch (±1/2") in any direction over the entire area of the subsurface seepage system.
3. Backfill: There shall be a minimum of six inches (6") and a maximum of twenty four inches (24") of earth backfill over the bedding materials,
gravelless pipe or chamber system.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 293/366
4. Earth Between Septic Tank And Nearest Trench: There shall be a minimum of five feet (5') of undisturbed earth between the septic tank and
the nearest trench.
5. Precipitation Causing Damage: If precipitation falls onto the excavation and evidence of soil washing into the excavation of the subsurface
seepage system exists, the damaged portion of the seepage system shall be reconstructed to comply with this section.
6. Top Of Gravel, Gravelless Pipe, Or Chamber System: The top of the gravel, gravelless pipe, or chamber system in the subsurface seepage
field shall be at least one inch (1") below the invert of the outlet pipe from the septic tank or distribution box in a gravity flow system.
7. Site Evaluation For Subsurface Seepage Systems: Subsurface seepage systems receiving septic tank effluent shall have at least two feet (2')
of vertical separation distance between the bottom of the subsurface seepage system and the top of the limiting layer. For soils in design
group I - VI or with a loading rate of greater than 0.62 gallons per day per square foot, there shall be at least a vertical separation distance of
three feet (3') between the bottom of the subsurface seepage system and the top of the limiting layer. When the limiting layer is the estimated
seasonal high water table, artificial drains, which are designed to lower the estimated seasonal high water table, may be installed to achieve
the specified vertical separation distances.
8. Sizing Of A Seepage System In Fill Soil:
a. The least permeable soil layer between the top of the gravel, gravelless pipe or chamber system and two feet (2') below the bottom of the
trench shall be used to determine the size of the subsurface seepage system.
b. The use of fill for installing subsurface seepage systems shall not be approved for lots platted after March 15, 1996.
c. Fill soils may be used to cover a private sewage disposal system, provided that no part of the system is located in the fill and the fill material
is at least equal to or better than the original soil or meets the requirements in subsection A9 of this section.
9. Soil Criteria For Use Of Fill In Subsurface Seepage Systems:
a. Soils to be used for fill shall be identified by a soil classifier or licensed professional engineer and a report submitted to the department or
local authority. The report shall contain specific information on the fill soil, including location, depth, permeability, and texture. Soils that can
be used as fill are those identified in appendix A, illustration M of this chapter as 2A, 2B, 2K, 3A, 3B, 3C, 3K, 3L, 4B, 4D and 4K (design
group II, III and IV).
b. In addition to the requirements in subsection A9a of this section, fill soil shall not contain extraneous material such as tires, concrete, brick,
reinforcing bar, demolition material, etc.
c. All of the following conditions shall be met for a subsurface seepage system to be installed in fill:
(1) Satisfactory original soil shall be at least three feet (3') above bedrock.
(2) A maximum of two feet (2') of fill soil shall be used.
(3) Fill shall not be placed on original soil with a slope greater than ten percent (10%).
(4) The fill shall be placed at the site so that a minimum of compaction occurs, and the fill shall be allowed to settle undisturbed for a period
of at least twelve (12) months. Soils in design group II, when used for fill, shall not be required to settle for a period of at least twelve (12)
months.
(5) After the fill has been settled, a percolation test shall be conducted in accordance with the procedure outlined in appendix A, illustration
G of this chapter and a percolation rate of not greater than two hundred seventy (270) minutes/six inch (6") fall or less than sixty (60)
minutes/six inch (6") fall shall be achieved.
10. Site Preparation For Use Of Fill Soil:
a. Excess vegetation shall be cut and removed. The site shall be plowed with a mold board plow seven (7) to eight inches (8") deep with the
plowing done perpendicular to the slope. It shall not be done with the furrow running up and down the slope. Chisel plowing may be used in
place of mold board. Rototilling is prohibited.
b. Once the site is plowed, all traffic shall be kept off the site. The fill material can be deposited on the top with a backhoe or pushed on from
the side, preferably the upslope side, using a track type tractor, keeping six inches (6") of fill beneath the tracks. At no time shall ruts be
made in the plowed area. The fill shall be placed immediately after site preparation to avoid the possibility of precipitation falling on the
plowed area.
c. Traffic on the downslope side of the fill area shall be minimal to reduce compaction. All work shall be performed from the ends and upslope
side. Compaction of the natural soil downslope will reduce the lateral movement of the effluent.
d. The fill shall not be placed on frozen ground or when the soil is wet. Moisture content of the soil is very important when filling. Site
preparation shall not take place when the soil is too wet. To check moisture content, a soil sample may be taken from the plow layer (7 to 8
inches) and rolled between the palms of the hands. If the soil rolls into a ribbon, it is too wet to prepare. If the soil crumbles, site preparation
can then proceed.
B. Gravel Seepage Field Requirements:
1. Bedding Material: The bedding material shall be clean gravel or clean stone that is free of mud, silt, or clay, with particle size ranging from
three-fourths inch (3/4") minimum to four inches (4") maximum. The bedding material shall extend the full width of the trench and to a depth of
at least six inches (6") below the bottom of the distribution line. The bedding material shall extend at least two inches (2") above the top of the
distribution line.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 294/366
2. Distribution Lines: Distribution lines shall be constructed of materials as approved in subsection 9-4-5F of this chapter. The lines shall be
perforated or open joint tile. Where open joint tile is used, the tile sections shall be spaced not less than one-fourth inch (1/4") or more than
one-half inch (1/2") apart. Perforated piping with the exception of eight inch (8") or ten inch (10") gravelless seepage beds shall have one-half
(1/2) to three-fourths inch (3/4") diameter openings on three (3) to five inch (5") centers with a minimum of two (2) rows. The openings in the
pipe shall be placed downward.
3. Separation Material: Bedding materials shall be covered by straw, newspaper, untreated building paper, geotextile fabric or other permeable or
biodegradable material to support the backfill as the laying of the distribution line proceeds. Tarpaper, plastic, or other impervious material
shall not be used between the bedding material and the earth backfill.
4. Ends: The ends of a gravel seepage field shall be looped except in serial distribution systems.
C. Gravelless Seepage Field Requirements: In addition to subsection 9-4-5F of this chapter, eight inch (8") or ten inch (10") gravelless seepage
systems shall comply with the following specifications:
1. Pipe Requirements: Eight inch (8") and ten inch (10") inside diameter (ID) corrugated polyethylene tubing shall meet the requirements of
ASTM F667-06, "Standard Specification For Large Diameter Corrugated Polyethylene Tubing" with the following exceptions:
a. Perforations shall be uniformly spaced along the length of the tubing as follows: Two (2) rows of holes three-eighths inch (3/8") in diameter
for eight inch (8") tubing and one-half inch (1/2") in diameter for ten inch (10") tubing, located one hundred twenty degrees (120°) to one
hundred forty degrees (140°) apart along the bottom half of the tubing, each row sixty degrees (60°) to seventy degrees (70°) up from the
bottom centerline. The perforations shall be staggered so that there is at least one hole in each corrugation.
b. The pipe shall be marked to indicate the top of the pipe.
2. Filter Wrap: All gravelless drainfield pipe shall be encased at the point of manufacture with a filter wrap having the following characteristics:
Physical Properties Minimum Value
Grab strength, pounds (ASTM D4632):
Machine direction 19
Traverse direction 11
Burst strength, psi (ASTM D3786-09) 26
Air permeability, cfm per square foot (ASTM D737-08) 500
Particle size distribution (ASTM F662-86)
Polyethylene particles in water and alcohol solution, Coulter counter analysis, single pass:
Particle Size (Microns) Percent Retained
70 80
60 68
50 56
40 40
30 22
20 5
3. Gravelless Seepage Trenches: Eight inch (8") or ten inch (10") gravelless seepage trenches shall comply with the following illustrations in
appendix A of this chapter unless otherwise stated in this chapter:
a. Illustration D;
b. Illustration H, exhibit B;
c. Illustration I, exhibit C;
d. Illustration I, exhibit D;
e. Illustration J, exhibit C;
f. Illustration J, exhibit D;
g. Illustration K, exhibits E through H;
h. Illustration M, exhibit A.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 295/366
4. Bedding Material: Eight inch (8") and ten inch (10") gravelless seepage systems or chamber systems may be bedded with material excavated
to construct the system. The backfill material shall not contain large clods of earth, demolition material or other extraneous material.
5. Separation Material: No straw, newspaper or untreated building paper shall be placed between the gravelless seepage system or chamber
system and the earth backfill.
6. Bending: Eight inch (8") and ten inch (10") gravelless pipe shall not be bent around corners on a radius of less than five feet (5'). If a sharper
radius is required, a tee shall be used.
7. Looping: Gravelless seepage systems or chamber systems are not required to be looped. Gravelless seepage systems or chamber systems
that are not looped shall be capped on the end.
D. Serial Distribution: Serial distribution shall be used in areas where the slope of the terrain prohibits the installation of conventional subsurface
seepage systems. The following criteria shall be used in the design and construction of a serial distribution system (see appendix A, illustration K
of this chapter):
1. The bottom of each trench and its distribution line shall be level.
2. There shall be a minimum of six inches (6") of earth backfill over the bedding material or chamber system or the gravelless pipe in the
trenches.
3. The trench shall follow the ground surface contours so that variation in trench depth will be minimized.
4. There shall be a minimum of five feet (5') of undisturbed earth between the septic tank and the nearest trench.
5. Adjacent trenches shall be connected with a relief line or a drop box arranged so that each trench is completely filled to the full depth of the
gravel or gravelless pipe or chamber system before effluent flows to the succeeding trench.
6. The relief lines connecting the trenches shall have watertight joints and direct connections to the distribution lines in adjacent trenches. Tight
joint Ts and forty five degree (45°) ells, or a drop box arrangement shall be used to connect adjacent trenches.
7. Where the relief pipe trench connects with the higher trench, it shall not be deeper than the top of the gravel or gravelless pipe or chamber
system in the higher trench. Relief lines shall rest on undisturbed earth and the backfill shall be carefully tamped.
8. The invert of the first relief line shall be at least one inch (1") lower than the invert of the septic tank or aerobic treatment plant outlet.
9. All other construction features of the serial distribution field shall comply with subsections A through D of this section.
E. Seepage Beds: The total bottom area of the seepage bed shall be one and one-half (11/2) times the area specified in appendix A, illustration H,
exhibit A or illustration M, exhibit A of this chapter. Construction features shall conform to subsections A and B of this section. Distribution lines
shall be spaced no farther than six feet (6') center to center and shall be equally spaced. Lines adjacent to the bed sidewalls shall be eighteen
inches (18") from the bed sidewall (see appendix A, illustration L of this chapter). Seepage beds shall be constructed so that construction
equipment does not drive over the bottom of the bed.
F. Chamber Systems: Chamber systems shall be sized and installed in accordance with the following:
1. Center to center spacing for chamber systems shall be in compliance with appendix A, illustration I, exhibit D of this chapter.
2. Chamber systems shall be sized in accordance with appendix A, illustration I, exhibit E of this chapter.
3. Chamber systems shall be designed to support all weight of earth backfill without collapsing.
4. Chamber systems shall be designed to prevent earth backfill from restricting flow within the chamber.
G. Subsurface Drip Irrigation Systems: Subsurface drip irrigation systems shall be designed, installed and maintained in accordance with the
following:
1. The drip irrigation system shall be designed, installed and operated as a subsurface seepage system, and no portion of the drip irrigation
system shall have a surface discharge.
a. Pretreatment:
(1) The drip irrigation system shall be preceded by a pretreatment process designed to reduce the CBOD5 (carbonaceous 5 day
biochemical oxygen demand) to a maximum concentration of twenty five milligrams per liter (25 mg/l) and total suspended solids to a
maximum concentration of thirty milligrams per liter (30 mg/l). Drip irrigation systems shall not be installed following a septic tank without
any pretreatment process capable of meeting this chapter's requirements.
(2) The total flow from the property plus the backwash water from the drip irrigation system shall not exceed the treatment capacity of the
pretreatment device.
(3) The installation contractor, designer or homeowner, in consultation with the manufacturer or the manufacturer's representative, shall
assure that the pretreatment process meets the requirements of this chapter.
b. Dosing Tank:
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 296/366
(1) A minimum liquid capacity of one thousand (1,000) gallons shall be provided below the inlet in the dosing tank for a residential or
nonresidential site.
(2) For homes larger than three (3) bedrooms and nonresidential systems with a daily design flow greater than six hundred sixty seven (667)
gallons/day, a dosing tank with a minimum capacity of 1.5 days' design flow shall be provided.
c. Dosing Pump:
(1) A high head/low volume pump shall be used.
(2) The pump shall be sized based upon the design flow rate of the drip irrigation field, which shall be based on the number of emitters times
the flow rate of each emitter in gallons per minute.
(3) The minimum head requirement of the pump shall be based upon the pressure requirements for the operation and flushing of the drip
field plus the total static and friction head requirements of the supply lines and manifolds.
(4) Pump specifications used for drip irrigation systems shall be provided by the pump manufacturer.
(5) The installation contractor, designer or homeowner, in consultation with the manufacturer or the manufacturer's representative, shall
assure that the pump used is in compliance with this chapter.
d. Time Dosing:
(1) Drip irrigation systems shall be provided with a timer to activate the dosing pump equally throughout a twenty four (24) hour period.
(2) Systems shall be dosed a minimum of six (6) equal doses over a twenty four (24) hour period and shall be capable of delivering the
maximum daily design flow to the drip irrigation system in a twenty four (24) hour period. More frequent doses of eight (8) to twenty four
(24) equal doses over a twenty four (24) hour period are recommended and shall be required in soils that have a loading rate of less than
0.5 gallons/square foot/day.
(3) The dosing frequency shall be such that the soil surrounding the drip irrigation system does not become saturated.
(4) The dosing specifications shall be provided by the drip irrigation manufacturer or the manufacturer's representative in accordance with
this chapter.
e. Effluent Filtration:
(1) Wastewater effluent shall be filtered to the drip tubing manufacturer's specifications to ensure proper operation of the distribution system.
(2) The effluent filtration device shall be easily accessible for maintenance and inspection.
f. Drip Distribution System:
(1) The drip distribution tubing manufacturer or the manufacturer's representative shall provide written specifications for all components
used in conjunction with the drip irrigation system.
(2) The manufacturer or the manufacturer's representative shall assure that all manufacturer specifications for the drip irrigation system are
in compliance with this chapter.
(3) The manufacturer shall incorporate measures to prevent root intrusion into the emitters.
g. Drip Emitters And Flow Rates:
(1) The manufacturer of the drip tubing shall specify the number of drip emitters per linear foot and the flow rates through each emitter for
different pressures.
(2) The installation contractor or homeowner, in consultation with the manufacturer or the manufacturer's representative, shall assure that
the number of emitters to be used in a drip irrigation system and the types of emitters used, flows and flow rates into the soil comply with
all of the manufacturer's specifications and requirements and with this chapter.
h. Absorption Field Sizing:
(1) A soil investigation shall be conducted in accordance with section 905.55(a).
(2) The soil loading rate (gallons/square foot/day) shall be based upon the least permeable soil condition encountered within twenty four
inches (24") below the proposed depth of the drip irrigation tubing.
(3) The system size shall be based upon appendix A, illustration M, exhibits A and B of this chapter.
i. Drip Tubing Installation And Configuration:
(1) The drip tubing shall be installed in the natural soil using installation equipment and procedures specified by the manufacturer.
(2) Drip irrigation tubing shall be installed at a depth of six inches (6") to twelve inches (12") below the final graded surface.
(3) Drip irrigation tubing shall be installed on a minimum of two foot (2') centers.
(4) When the drip irrigation piping is installed on slopes exceeding twenty percent (20%), the spacing between the drip irrigation piping shall
be three feet (3') or greater.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 297/366
(5) The drip irrigation system shall be configured so that the length of the area of the drip irrigation tubing system is at least two (2) times its
width. If this is not possible, the drip irrigation tubing trench separation distance shall be doubled.
(6) The length of individual drip distribution tubing shall not exceed the manufacturer's specifications and shall be installed at a uniform
depth that follows the contour of the site.
(7) The drip irrigation tubing shall be installed a minimum of twelve inches (12") above a limiting layer.
j. Considerations To Prevent Freezing:
(1) The distribution and return manifolds shall be installed to drain back to the pretreatment tank after the field has been dosed.
(2) If the elevations of the pretreatment tank and dosing tank do not allow gravity flow to the pretreatment tank, the lines shall be installed to
drain back to the dosing tank.
(3) All piping and components shall be installed to allow water to drain back to the pretreatment tank or dosing tank.
(4) To allow for drain back, a check valve shall not be installed in the supply and return lines.
k. Fill Soils: Fill soils may be used in accordance with subsection A of this section, except that the soil surface shall not be plowed.
l. Pressure Requirements:
(1) The manufacturer of the drip tubing shall specify the operating pressure requirements of the drip irrigation system and provide the
specifications of any pressure regulator that may be required with the drip irrigation system.
(2) A pressure gauge shall be provided or a method of connecting a pressure gauge shall be provided on the distal end of the drip irrigation
system to ensure that field pressure can be checked during inspection, evaluation and maintenance. The installation contractor or
manufacturer shall ensure that the irrigation system is operating at the required specifications.
m. Flush Valves:
(1) An automatic or manual flush valve shall be provided on the filter and drip distribution system to allow for periodic flushing of both the
drip distribution system and the filter.
(2) The drip distribution system manufacturer shall provide the specifications for the flush valves that are acceptable to use with the system.
The manufacturer shall also provide specifications on the number of flush valves to be used and their location, with specifications about
how this is to be determined and the backwash velocity required to clean the drip tubing piping.
(3) A chemical injection port shall be installed to facilitate cleaning and flushing the drip distribution system.
(4) Backwash water shall be directed into the building sewer at the inlet end of the pretreatment system.
n. Air Relief:
(1) The manufacturer of the drip tubing shall specify the air relief requirements of the drip distribution system and provide the specifications
of any air relief devices that may be required with the drip irrigation system to ensure that the distribution piping can drain back to the
dosing chamber when the system is not pressurized.
(2) The air relief device shall be installed at the highest point of the feed and return manifolds.
o. Alarm:
(1) An audible and visual alarm shall be provided to warn of a high water condition in the dosing tank.
(2) The alarm shall be on a separate dedicated circuit.
(3) The alarm control device shall be a sealed float or diaphragm switch and shall be located to activate two (2) to three inches (3") above
the pump turn on level or siphon activation level.
(4) The alarm shall be located outside of the structure served by the system and shall be provided with an electrical disconnect that is
located within sight of and not more than fifty feet (50') away from the device.
(5) If an alarm is being used by another component within the private sewage disposal system, is compliant with subsections G1o(1)
through G1o(4) of this section, and is able to connect additional devices, it may be used without the need for an additional alarm.
p. Access:
(1) Access openings to the pretreatment system, effluent filtration system, and dosing tanks shall have a minimum inside dimension of
eighteen inches (18"), shall be watertight and shall extend to three inches (3") or more above the ground surface.
(2) Access openings to all other system components shall be large enough to allow easy access from the ground surface.
q. Maintenance:
(1) The manufacturer shall provide specifications for the maintenance of all components within the drip irrigation system.
(2) The manufacturer shall provide a maintenance plan to ensure that maintenance is conducted as required to achieve the proper function
of the system.
2. The installation contractor or manufacturer shall provide the following information to the owner of the system:
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 298/366
a. An operation manual;
b. The maintenance plan for the drip irrigation system;
c. The manufacturer of the components and a description of the function of the components;
d. The service contract information;
e. A troubleshooting repair guide;
f. A list of safety concerns;
g. Manufacturer's cut sheets for all electrical and mechanical components; and
h. An as built drawing of the system.
(Source: Amended at 37 Ill. reg. 14994, effective August 28, 2013) (Ord. 15-961, 4-14-2015)
9-4-12: BURIED SAND FILTERS (IDPH SECTION 905.70):
Buried sand filters are not permitted except under subsection 9-4-15J4 of this chapter. (Ord. 15-961, 4-14-2015)
9-4-13: RECIRCULATING SAND FILTER (IDPH SECTION 905.80):
The recirculating sand filter system is not permitted. (Ord. 15-961, 4-14-2015)
9-4-14: WASTE STABILIZATION PONDS (IDPH SECTION 905.90):
Waste stabilization ponds are not permitted. (Ord. 15-961, 4-14-2015)
9-4-14-1: ILLINOIS RAISED FILTER BEDS (IDPH SECTION 905.95):
Illinois raised filter beds are not permitted. (Ord. 15-961, 4-14-2015)
9-4-14-2: PEAT FILTER SYSTEMS (IDPH SECTION 905.96):
Peat filter systems are not permitted. (Ord. 15-961, 4-14-2015)
9-4-15: AEROBIC TREATMENT PLANTS AND NSF INTERNATIONAL/ANSI STANDARD 40 WASTEWATER TREATMENT
SYSTEMS (IDPH SECTION 905.100):
A. General: Aerobic treatment plants and NSF International/ANSI standard 40 wastewater treatment systems shall be tested and listed by NSF
International or a laboratory approved by ANSI and certified compliant with the International Organization For Standardization (ISO)/International
Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) guide 65 to determine compliance with the requirements of NSF International/ANSI standard 40, "Residential
Wastewater Treatment Systems". To assure compliance with certification requirements and the act and this chapter, the department will obtain
and retain from NSF International a complete list of approved systems, approved components and approved component parts for each NSF
International/ANSI standard 40 wastewater treatment system installed or currently existing within the state. Until the department receives the
NSF approval information, the system shall not be considered approved in accordance with the act and this chapter. Standard 40 is a standard
that covers an organized and coordinated system of components that functions to treat wastewater generated by individual residences. This
chapter shall allow approved aerobic treatment plants and NSF International/ANSI standard 40 wastewater treatment systems to serve
residential property that is occupied on a year round or full time basis. Aerobic treatment plants shall not be used to serve residential property
that is used as a seasonal, weekend or part time residence.
B. Class II Effluent: Aerobic treatment systems listed by NSF International or a laboratory approved by ANSI to determine compliance with NSF
International/ANSI standard 40 for class II effluent shall discharge to one of the following:
1. A subsurface seepage system designed and constructed in accordance with the requirements of section 905.60.
2. A sand filter designed and constructed in accordance with the requirements of section 905.70 or 905.80.
3. A waste stabilization pond designed and constructed in accordance with the requirements of section 905.90.
C. Class I Effluent: NSF International/ANSI standard 40 wastewater treatment systems listed by NSF International or a laboratory approved by ANSI
to determine compliance with NSF International/ANSI standard 40 for class I effluent shall discharge to one of the following:
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 299/366
1. A subsurface seepage field designed and constructed to be at least two-thirds (2/3) the size determined necessary by section 905.60. The
subsurface system shall be installed as shallow as possible while maintaining a minimum of six inches (6") of cover. There shall be at least
twelve inches (12") between the bottom of the subsurface seepage system (soil interface) and the shallowest limiting layer.
2. A surface discharge in accordance with section 905.110.
D. Sizing: Aerobic treatment plants that are listed by NSF International or a laboratory approved by ANSI to determine compliance with NSF
International/ANSI standard 40 as class I and rated at five hundred (500) gallons per day will be allowed for the treatment of sewage from
residential property having up to and including four (4) bedrooms. Other aerobic treatment plants that are listed by NSF International or a
laboratory approved by ANSI to determine compliance with NSF International/ANSI standard 40 as class I shall be sized as follows:
Bedrooms
Minimum Rated Treatment
Capacity - Gallons
1 400
2 400
3 500
4 500
5 750
6 900
7 1,000
8 1,200
9 1,350
10 1,500
E. Installation: All components of aerobic treatment plants shall be installed at the time of the original installation. If this is not possible, a solid end
cap shall be securely placed over the end of the discharge line until the system can be completed. This will prevent the discharge of raw sewage
to the ground surface.
F. Accessibility For Inspection And Maintenance: The aerobic treatment plants or NSF International/ANSI standard 40 wastewater treatment
systems shall be equipped with one or more grade level access manholes having a minimum inside dimension of eighteen inches (18") that
extend to three inches (3") or more above the ground surface. The manhole shall be equipped with a lid that is secured in compliance with
section 5.7.2 of NSF International/ANSI standard 40. These manholes shall be located to permit periodic physical inspection and maintenance of
all compartments and component parts. Component parts include submerged bearings, moving parts, tubes, intakes, slots, filters, and other
devices.
G. Service: Devices falling within the scope of NSF International/ANSI standard 40 require periodic maintenance to achieve performance consistent
with demonstrated capabilities. Implicit in NSF International/ANSI standard 40 is the recognition that assured professional service is imperative.
NSF International/ANSI standard 40 and this chapter require a two (2) year service policy to be provided as part of the initial service agreement.
(Note: The following initial service policy includes items not included in the NSF International/ANSI standard 40 service policy.)
1. Initial Service Policy: The private sewage disposal installation contractor, through the manufacturer or the distributor of the aerobic treatment
unit, shall furnish a two (2) year initial service policy to the purchaser. This policy shall provide for:
a. Four (4) inspection/service calls, at least one every six (6) months, that include inspection, adjustment and servicing of the mechanical and
the applicable component parts to ensure proper function;
b. An effluent quality inspection consisting of a visual check for color, turbidity, scum overflow, and an examination for odors;
c. Reporting to the owner immediately any improper operation that cannot be corrected at the time of the inspection or service call. This shall
be followed by a written report to the owner that includes the date by which the condition will be corrected.
2. Continuing Service Policy: Each manufacturer shall make available for purchase by the owner a continuing service policy with terms equal to
the initial service policy.
3. Standby Parts: The local distributor shall stock standby mechanical and electrical component parts for use when the plant's mechanical or
electrical components must be removed from the site for repairs.
4. Component Parts: The mechanical and electrical component parts shall be guaranteed against any defects in materials and workmanship as
warranted.
5. Service: Service shall be available within two (2) working days following a request.
6. Owner's Manual: The manufacturer shall provide an owner's manual with each unit. The manual shall include the following information:
a. Model numbers;
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 300/366
b. Functional description of unit, including a statement of minimum performance requirements as established by test;
c. Design and flow diagrams;
d. Warranty;
e. Replacement policy and service policy;
f. Installation instructions;
g. Detailed operation and maintenance requirements (including user responsibility, parts and service);
h. Rated service flow in gpm (gallons per minute) or gpd (gallons per day);
i. Energy source and energy required for proper operation of the plant; and
j. Specification of models tested under NSF International/ANSI standard 40.
7. Service Label: A clearly visible, permanently attached label or plate giving instructions for obtaining service shall be placed at the audible and
visual alarm.
8. Responsibility Of Property Owner: The property owner shall be responsible for maintaining and operating the plant in accordance with this
chapter and the manufacturer's specifications.
H. Operation: Aerobic treatment plants and NSF International/ANSI standard 40 wastewater treatment systems shall produce an effluent meeting
the physical, chemical and biological requirements of section 905.110. Under normal operation and, if an electrical or mechanical failure or other
performance failure or malfunction occurs, the design and construction of the aerobic treatment plant or NSF International/ANSI standard 40
wastewater treatment systems shall prevent the discharge of wastewater from any opening that is not part of the designed flow path of the entire
treatment process and shall prevent the discharge of wastewater that is not in compliance with section 905.110.
I. Maintenance: If a routine service call indicates an electrical, mechanical or performance failure or malfunction or if routine laboratory test results
indicate improper treatment, the property owner shall immediately take action to bring the aerobic treatment plant or NSF International/ANSI
standard 40 wastewater treatment systems into compliance with this chapter.
J. Nonresidential Use: Aerobic treatment plants and NSF International/ANSI standard 40 wastewater treatment systems that are listed by NSF
International or a laboratory approved by ANSI to determine compliance with NSF International/ANSI standard 40 as class I will be considered
for use to serve a nonresidential property, provided that all of the following are met:
1. Total daily flows from the wastewater source into the plant are at least seventy five percent (75%) of the rated hydraulic capacity and do not
exceed the rated hydraulic capacity of the plant.
2. Wastewater influent shall not exceed the manufacturer's design specifications for BOD5 loading as established by NSF International or a
laboratory approved by ANSI to determine compliance with NSF International/ANSI standard 40 during testing of the plant.
3. Hourly flows from the wastewater source into the plant are less than or equal to the treatment capacity of the plant divided by twenty four (24).
This may require the installation of a flow equalization device.
4. A buried sand filter sized with a surface area equal to two (2) gallons per square foot per day and dosed at least once but not more than four
(4) times per day shall immediately follow the aerobic treatment plant.
K. Splitting Of Flows: Splitting of flows from a wastewater source or the use of multiple aerobic treatment plants or NSF International/ANSI standard
40 wastewater treatment systems shall be prohibited unless subsurface disposal of the effluent is used. Where allowed, splitting of flows shall be
done by pumps.
L. Private Sewage Disposal: Private sewage disposal installation contractors or homeowners who maintain or service aerobic treatment plants and
NSF International/ANSI standard 40 wastewater treatment systems shall be required to maintain the integrity of the NSF International seal or the
seal of a laboratory approved by ANSI to determine compliance with NSF International/ANSI standard 40. Only component parts approved for
use in an individual plant may be used. No design changes or component part changes may be made that will void the NSF International seal or
the seal of a laboratory approved by ANSI to determine compliance with NSF International/ANSI standard 40. Any person who voids the NSF
International seal or the seal of a laboratory approved by ANSI to determine compliance with NSF International/ANSI standard 40 shall be
responsible for repairing the plant so it can bear the NSF International seal or the seal of a laboratory approved by ANSI to determine
compliance with NSF International/ANSI standard 40 or shall replace the plant with an approved private sewage disposal system.
(Source: Amended at 37 Ill. reg. 14994, effective August 28, 2013) (Ord. 15-961, 4-14-2015)
9-4-16: EFFLUENT DISCHARGES (IDPH SECTION 905.110):
Surface discharge from an on site sewage disposal system shall not be permitted. (Ord. 15-961, 4-14-2015)
9-4-17: PUMPS, PUMPING/DOSING CHAMBERS, AND ANCILLARY EQUIPMENT (IDPH SECTION 905.125):
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 301/366
A. Pumps: Pumps shall meet the following requirements:
1. The pump shall be submersible.
2. The pump shall be designed to handle wastewater and a minimum of one-half inch (1/2") diameter solids.
3. The pump shall be capable of delivering the required flow at the design total dynamic head. The discharge pipe shall be the same size or
larger than the discharge of the pump.
4. The pump shall be constructed of corrosion resistant materials.
5. Performance curves and specification sheets indicating that the criteria of this subsection A have been met shall be submitted with the plan
review application when pumps are to be used in a system.
B. Pumping Chambers:
1. The pumping chamber shall be watertight, meaning that all joints shall be sealed. The pumping chamber shall be filled with water after being
installed and backfilled to prevent the pumping chamber from floating out of position because of hydrostatic pressures, unless the tank is
installed in dry soil.
2. The volume of the pumping chamber shall be sufficient to provide the desired dosing volume, space for controls, space for setting the pump,
reserve capacity malfunction and flow back after the pump shuts off (volume of manifold and laterals).
3. A reserve capacity above the active pumping volume equal to one-half (1/2) day's design flow shall be provided if single pumps are used. A
reserve volume is not needed if siphons or dual pumps are used.
4. An access riser shall extend at least six inches (6") above the ground surface.
5. The dosing volume shall be at least five (5) times the pipe volume of the dosing network and provide for filling and drainback of the network.
The average flow shall be used to determine the dosing volume.
6. The pump control device shall be adjustable so that the required dosing volume is discharged during each pumping cycle. The control system
for the pumping chamber shall consist of a control for operating the pump and an alarm system to detect when the system is malfunctioning.
Pump controls shall allow flexibility in adjusting the on-off depth. An example of acceptable controls is shown in appendix A, illustration Q of
this chapter.
7. A high water alarm shall be provided with audible and visual signals and a test function. The alarm shall be on a separate circuit. The alarm
control device shall be a sealed float or diaphragm switch and shall be located to activate two (2) to three inches (3") above the pump turn on
level or siphon activation level. After January 1, 2014, all electrical devices for new and repaired private sewage disposal systems shall comply
with section 905.20(k).
C. Ancillary Equipment:
1. A quick disconnect device shall be included in the discharge piping to facilitate removal of the pump for inspection, repair or replacement. The
disconnect device shall be a threaded union, pitless adapter or lift out rail system.
2. A corrosion resistant rope or cable of adequate strength shall be affixed to the pump to facilitate installation and removal so that personnel
need not enter the chamber to disconnect the pump.
3. A pump control device shall be adjustable so that the desired dosing volume can be discharged during each pumping cycle. The control
device may consist of one or more sealed float or diaphragm switches that may cooperate with a relay or contact. Separate control panels
located outside the chamber shall be protected from the weather and shall provide no air path between the panel and the pumping chamber.
4. A check valve between the pump and the piping network shall not be allowed unless this piping system is below the frost line.
(Source: Amended at 37 Ill. reg. 14994, effective August 28, 2013) (Ord. 15-961, 4-14-2015)
9-4-18: HUMAN WASTE DISPOSAL (IDPH SECTION 905.130):
A. General: Privies, portable toilets, recirculation toilets, incinerator toilets and compost toilets are not approved for private sewage disposal of
human wastes. Portable toilets are required on construction sites. Other domestic wastes shall be disposed of in a conventional system. (Ord.
15-961, 4-14-2015)
9-4-18-1: PORTABLE SANITATION (IDPH SECTION 905.135):
A. License Required: Any person operating in Illinois who sells, rents, leases, transports, services, cleans, sanitizes or maintains a portable toilet or
portable potable hand washing unit or pumps, transports or disposes of waste from portable toilets or portable potable hand washing units shall
be licensed as a portable sanitation business.
B. Certified Personnel: Only a portable sanitation technician or portable sanitation technician trainee certified by the department as working for a
portable sanitation business may service, clean, sanitize or maintain a portable toilet or portable potable hand washing unit, or pump, transport
or dispose of waste from portable toilets or portable potable hand washing units.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 302/366
C. Licensing And Certification: Any person licensed as a private sewage disposal system pumping contractor on or after January 1, 2014, may
submit to the department a completed application and fee, within six (6) months after January 1, 2014, requesting to be licensed as a portable
sanitation business. A person licensed as a private sewage disposal system pumping contractor on January 1, 2014, may submit to the
department a completed application and fee to be certified as a portable sanitation technician without taking the examination or initial training
required for the portable sanitation technician certification. After July 1, 2014, all persons wanting to become certified as a portable sanitation
technician shall complete the training requirements of this section.
D. Licensing Requirements: Any person wishing to obtain a license as a portable sanitation business shall:
1. Submit to the department a completed application on forms provided by the department;
2. Provide a copy of the business' education and training materials and protocol for educating and training for all employees requiring
certification by the department;
3. Provide a written statement signed by the owner or authorized representative specifying that only certified portable sanitation technicians and
portable sanitation technician trainees will be transporting, servicing, cleaning, sanitizing or maintaining portable toilets or portable potable
hand washing units, or pumping, transporting or disposing of waste from portable toilets or portable potable hand washing units for the
business; and
4. Submit a nonrefundable fee for the license as established in section 905.200.
E. License Expiration: A portable sanitation business license shall expire on June 30 of each year, except that a license issued after April 1 and
before June 30 shall expire on June 30 of the following year.
F. Certification Of Employees:
1. A portable sanitation business shall submit the following materials to the department as part of the certification process of a portable sanitation
technician trainee:
a. A completed application on a form provided by the department;
b. A nonrefundable fee as established in section 905.200; and
c. For initial application, a copy of the individual's certificate of completion from an approved training course; and for annual renewal of the
certification, documentation of attendance at an approved continuing education course.
2. A portable sanitation business shall submit the following materials to the department as part of the certification process of a portable sanitation
technician:
a. A completed application on a form provided by the department;
b. A nonrefundable fee as established in section 905.200; and
c. For initial application, a copy of the individual's certificate of completion from an approved training course; and for annual renewal of the
certification, documentation of attendance at an approved continuing education course.
G. Portable Sanitation Technician Trainee:
1. To become certified as a portable sanitation technician trainee, an individual shall:
a. Be an owner or employee of a licensed portable sanitation business; and
b. Complete an initial training or an education course provided by the portable sanitation business and approved by the department.
2. The application shall be submitted on forms provided by the department and accompanied by the fee established in section 905.200.
3. The portable sanitation technician trainee certification is valid for only one year. A portable sanitation technician trainee certification shall
expire on June 30 of each year, except that a certification issued after April 1 and before June 30 shall expire on June 30 of the following year.
H. Portable Sanitation Technician:
1. To become certified as a portable sanitation technician, an individual shall:
a. Be an owner or employee of a licensed portable sanitation business;
b. Complete training and an education course provided by and specific to the portable sanitation business; this training shall be preapproved
by the department; and
c. For the original certification, provide a copy of the employee's documentation of attendance and passing grade for the training and
examination offered by the department or a training and testing program approved by the department. For renewal of the certification, the
employee shall provide copies of the employee's documentation of attendance at a continuing education course in accordance with section
905.200.
2. The application shall be submitted on forms provided by the department and accompanied by the fee established in section 905.200.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 303/366
I. Education Courses: For the attendee to receive credit to be used for obtaining or renewing certification, education courses and continuing
education course curricula shall have department approval prior to the attendee attending the course. Courses not preapproved by the
department shall not be counted toward training or continuing education.
J. Testing: The examination for a portable sanitation technician certification shall test the applicant's knowledge of safely pumping, cleaning and
sanitizing portable toilets and portable potable hand washing units and hauling and disposing of wastes removed from portable toilets and
portable potable hand washing units.
K. Passing Grade: An individual shall achieve a grade of seventy percent (70%) or higher to pass an examination for a portable sanitation technician
certification.
L. Certification Renewal: The portable sanitation technician certification shall be renewed annually. A portable sanitation technician certification shall
expire on June 30 of each year, except that an original certification issued after April 1 and before June 30 shall expire on June 30 of the
following year. If a renewal application is mailed or received after June 30, a nonrefundable reinstatement fee will be required as provided in
section 905.200.
M. Work Conducted: The portable sanitation business is accountable for the following work conducted by individuals certified by the business:
1. Cleaning, servicing and replenishing required items or chemicals for each portable toilet or portable potable hand washing unit serviced,
inspected or maintained;
2. Pumping, transporting or disposing of waste from portable toilets or portable potable hand washing units.
N. Standards For Constructing And Servicing Portable Toilets Or Portable Potable Hand Washing Units: Portable toilets or portable potable hand
washing units shall be constructed and serviced in the following manner:
1. Construction: Rooms, buildings or shelters housing portable toilets shall be of solid construction, easy to clean and providing shelter and
privacy. The portable toilet room shall be ventilated to the outside, with the vent covered with 16-mesh screen. Internal latches shall be
provided for the doors to the portable toilets to prevent inadvertent entry.
2. Containers: Waste containers and portable potable water containers shall be fabricated from impervious materials such as plastic, steel,
fiberglass or their equivalents. Containers shall be watertight and capable of containing the waste and portable potable water.
3. Number Of Portable Toilets And Portable Potable Hand Washing Units At A Site:
a. An adequate number of portable toilets and portable potable hand washing units shall be provided to be used by the number of persons
anticipated.
b. The portable toilets and portable potable hand washing units shall be serviced at a frequency that maintains the units in a sanitary condition
and free of odors.
c. The employer, property owner or event coordinator shall acquire more units or adjust the service and maintenance frequently to ensure
sanitary conditions.
d. The property owner's failing to provide a sufficient number of portable toilets or portable potable hand washing units or a frequency of
service and maintenance capable of ensuring a sanitary condition is a violation of the act and this chapter.
4. Servicing: Servicing shall include removing waste from containers; recharging containers with an odor controlling solution; installing a supply
of toilet tissue, sanitary single use towels, and liquid soap and refilling hand sanitizing solution, based on the unit's intended use; and cleaning
and sanitizing the portable toilets and hand washing units.
a. Each portable toilet and portable potable hand washing unit shall be thoroughly cleaned and sanitized after each pumping or as part of the
routine service. Areas that shall be cleaned and sanitized include all internal parts of the unit, which include the urinal, seat, counters,
shelves, tank, walls, floor, door and ceiling, in addition to the exterior of the door and handle.
b. The portable toilet system contractor shall have two (2) separate sets of cleaning equipment, which shall be labeled and stored so that they
are physically separated from each other. One set shall be used to clean and sanitize the walls, counters, shelves, handle, door and ceiling
of the portable toilets and the portable potable hand washing units. The second set of cleaning and sanitizing equipment shall be used for
the floors, urinals, seat and tank of the portable toilet. If the units are cleaned and sanitized with a power washer, separate sets of cleaning
equipment are not needed.
c. Antibacterial hand sanitizer shall be provided at each unit and shall be refilled at each pumping, as needed. One portable potable hand
washing unit with a supply of sanitary single use towels and soap may be provided for up to five (5) portable toilets in lieu of refilling
antibacterial hand sanitizer at each unit. The hand washing facility shall be located within twenty feet (20') of the portable toilets. The
dispensers and hand washing facilities shall be cleaned and sanitized after each pumping, and then refilled with potable water from an
approved source.
5. Inspection: After a unit is cleaned and sanitized, it shall be inspected by the person designated by the business to ensure that the unit is in
compliance with this section and all other applicable sections of this chapter.
6. Defective Units: Any defective portable toilets or portable potable hand washing units shall be repaired or withdrawn from service by locking or
removal.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 304/366
7. Waste Removal: Waste shall be removed in a sanitary manner by means of a vacuum hose and discharged to a leakproof tank truck. All ports
on the tank shall be valved and capped.
8. Service Truck Access: Service trucks shall have access to the toilets to be serviced.
9. Disposal Of Waste: The service trucks and disposal of waste from tank trucks shall be in accordance with section 905.170(g).
10. Representative: A business shall designate at least one representative who shall be responsible for ensuring that each unit maintained by
the business meets the standards of cleanliness set forth in the act and this chapter.
11. Protective Equipment And Proper Procedures: Persons engaged in cleaning and sanitizing units shall wear protective equipment and be
trained in proper procedures for cleaning, sanitation and self-protection.
12. Certification Of Personnel: All portable sanitation businesses shall certify that the portable sanitation technicians and portable sanitation
technician trainees are capable of properly cleaning and sanitizing a portable toilet and portable potable hand washing unit. At a minimum, the
business shall annually inspect each portable sanitation technician's and portable sanitation technician trainee's work to ensure that he or she
is capable and can effectively clean and sanitize the portable toilets and portable potable hand washing units to be serviced.
O. Violation: Violations of the act, the rules, or any section of this chapter may result in a fine, civil penalty and suspension, revocation or refusal to
issue a license or certification for both the portable sanitation business and the certified portable sanitation technician or portable sanitation
technician trainee.
(Source: Added at 37 Ill. reg. 14994, effective August 28, 2013) (Ord. 15-961, 4-14-2015)
9-4-19: HOLDING TANKS (IDPH SECTION 905.140):
Utilizing septic tanks as holding tanks in lieu of the septic field shall not be permitted. Neither temporary occupancy permits nor occupancy permits
shall be issued for any house which does not have a complete and functioning sewage disposal system. (Ord. 15-961, 4-14-2015)
9-4-20: SANITARY DUMP STATIONS (IDPH SECTION 905.150):
Sanitary dump stations are not permitted. (Ord. 15-961, 4-14-2015)
9-4-21: SWIMMING POOL WASTEWATER (IDPH SECTION 905.160):
A. General: Wastewater generated from the operation of a swimming pool includes clear wastes, such as drainage from the pool proper, deck
drainage, and perimeter overflow system drainage, and turbid wastes, such as filter wash and backwash water.
B. Approved Treatment And Disposal: Wastewater from swimming pools may not be discharged to a private sewage disposal system receiving
domestic sewage. It shall be disposed of in the following manner:
1. Clear water wastes may be discharged directly to storm sewers, natural drainage areas, or to the ground surface without additional treatment.
Such drainage shall not result in nuisance conditions which create an offensive odor, or which produce a stagnant wet area, or which produce
an environment for the breeding of insects. These discharges will require an NPDES permit from IEPA if contaminants are added to the
discharge that will cause any water quality violation.
2. Wash or backwash water from sand filters may be discharged to natural drainage areas, storm sewers, seepage pits, or to the ground surface.
Diatomaceous earth filter wash or backwash water may be discharged to one of the above after treatment consisting of one of the following:
a. Passing the wastewater through a separation tank designed for removal of the diatomaceous earth and suspended solids.
b. Settling the wastewater in a tank which is capable of holding the volume of one backwash. "One backwash" is defined as the amount of
water generated from the backwash of the filters for a period of two (2) minutes for diatomaceous earth filters, at the required backwash flow
rate. The tank shall be dewatered after settling and prior to subsequent backwashes. Settled sludge shall be periodically removed to prevent
flushing of solids during backwashing. (See appendix A, illustration W of this chapter.)
c. A separate private sewage disposal system designed and constructed in accordance with the applicable sections of this chapter.
(Source: Amended at 20 Ill. reg. 2431, effective March 15, 1996) (Ord. 15-961, 4-14-2015)
9-4-22: SERVICING, CLEANING, TRANSPORTING AND DISPOSING OF WASTES FROM PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL
SYSTEMS (IDPH SECTION 905.170):
A. General: The collection, storage, transportation, and disposal of all septage shall be handled in accordance with this section and in accordance
with 40 CFR 503, standards for the use or disposal of sewage sludge.
B. Truck Identification: The name under which the business is conducted and the town of company origin and telephone number of the business
shall be painted on each side of every pumper truck. The company name shall be easily legible and the letters shall be at least eight inches (8")
high in contrasting colors.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 305/366
C. Equipment Inspection: Equipment shall be subject to inspection and approval by a representative of the department or local authority at any
reasonable time and, upon request, shall be available for inspection at a designated location.
D. Vehicle Construction And Equipment: Each vehicle used for collection and transportation of waste shall be equipped with a leakproof and tightly
sealed tank for septage hauling. The interior and exterior sections of all portable containers, pumps, hoses, tools, or other implements that have
been contaminated shall be rinsed clean after each use and the rinsings shall be disposed of such that no health hazard or nuisance results.
Trucks and tanks shall comply with the following:
1. The vehicle shall be equipped with either a vacuum pump or other type of pump that is self-priming and will not allow any seepage from the
diaphragm or other packing glands.
2. The discharge nozzle shall be located so that there is no flow or drip onto any portion of the truck.
3. The discharge nozzle shall be capped when not in use.
E. Notification Of Disposal Site: Annually, the private sewage disposal system pumping contractor shall:
1. Notify the department and local authority of the sites utilized for disposal. Information to be reported shall be: county, township, range, and
section, with a description to the nearest quarter section; name and address of the owner of the property; and purpose for which the disposal
site is otherwise used, such as pasture, grain crops, mowing crops, or timber.
2. Provide an annual estimate of the total gallons of septage disposed of at each site.
3. Describe the methods of disposal at each site.
F. Disposal Methods: Methods of septage disposal approved by the department are as follows:
1. Discharge To A Municipal Sanitary Sewer System: Discharge to a municipal sanitary sewer system is approved when the municipality has
approval from the Illinois environmental protection agency to receive septage from private sewage disposal systems; and the contractor has
written approval from the municipality to discharge septage into the system.
2. Application To Agricultural Land: Septage may be applied to agricultural land provided the following criteria are met:
a. The depth to the groundwater table or to fractured limestone formations is at least four feet (4') below the ground surface.
b. The septage is disposed of in the following manner:
(1) It originates from private sewage disposal systems that treat only domestic sewage as that term is defined in section 3 of the private
sewage disposal licensing act6;
(2) It is not applied to land that has been saturated by rainfall during the twenty four (24) hour period preceding the intended application
time;
(3) It is not applied to land with water ponded upon it;
(4) It is not applied to land within two hundred feet (200') of wells, homes, the rim of a sinkhole, underground mine, cave, tunnel, other water
supplies, ponds or streams;
(5) It is not applied to land having greater than five percent (5%) slope;
(6) It is not applied to land that is intended to grow root vegetables, or other low growing fruits or vegetables that may be eaten raw;
(7) It is applied at a rate that does not exceed the agronomic rate required by USEPA regulations (40 CFR 503);
(8) It is applied from a vehicle moving at least one mile per hour (88 feet per minute);
(9) Where it is determined by the department or local authority that a nuisance condition (see section 905.160(b)(1)) exists, then the septage
shall be incorporated into the soil.
3. Discharge To Sludge Lagoons Or Sludge Drying Beds: Discharge to a sludge lagoon or drying bed must be approved by the Illinois
environmental protection agency (IEPA) (35 Ill. adm. code 309) or the owner/operator of the lagoon or drying bed must have a permit from the
IEPA to receive septage from the contractor. If the contractor is going to construct a sludge lagoon or drying bed, a permit will be necessary
from the IEPA to construct and operate the proposed facility.
4. Discharge To An Incinerator Device: Discharge of septage to an incinerator must be approved by the IEPA or the owner/operator of the
incinerator must have a permit from the IEPA to receive septage from the contractor.
5. Discharge To A Sanitary Landfill: Discharge of septage to a sanitary landfill must be approved by the IEPA or the owner/operator of the landfill
must have a permit from the IEPA to receive the septage from the contractor.
G. Disposal Of Waste From Portable Toilets: Methods for the disposal of waste from portable toilets shall be as follows:
1. Discharge To A Municipal Sanitary Sewer System: Discharge to a municipal sanitary sewer system is approved from private sewage disposal
systems when the contractor has written approval from the municipality to discharge septage into the system.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 306/366
2. Discharge To Sludge Lagoons Or Sludge Drying Beds: Discharge to a sludge lagoon or drying bed must be approved by the Illinois
environmental protection agency (IEPA) (35 Ill. adm. code 309) or the owner/operator of the lagoon or drying bed must have a permit from the
IEPA to receive septage from the contractor. If the contractor is going to construct a sludge lagoon or drying bed, a permit will be necessary
from the IEPA to construct and operate the proposed facility.
3. Discharge To An Incinerator Device: Discharge of septage to an incinerator must be approved by the IEPA or the owner/operator of the
incinerator must have a permit from the IEPA to receive septage from the contractor.
4. Discharge To A Sanitary Landfill: Discharge of septage to a sanitary landfill must be approved by the IEPA or the owner/operator of the landfill
must have a permit from the IEPA to receive the septage from the contractor.
H. Other Wastes: The following shall not be disposed of by application to agricultural land:
1. Waste from a portable toilet; and
2. Holding tank waste as provided in section 905.140(a)(4).
(Source: Amended at 27 Ill. reg. 3074, effective February 10, 2003) (Ord. 15-961, 4-14-2015)
9-4-23: INSTALLATION APPROVAL/PERMITS REQUIRED (IDPH SECTION 905.190):
A. Plan Approval: Plan approval shall be obtained from the department or local authority prior to beginning any construction of a new private sewage
disposal system. A new private sewage disposal system shall consist of, but not necessarily be limited to, the following:
1. A system where a septic tank is replaced or where a major component of the system is removed or added. Examples of major components
would be the replacement or addition of an aeration unit, recirculating sand filter, sand filter, seepage pit, seepage bed or waste stabilization
pond.
2. A system where the size of the absorption field is increased by twenty five percent (25%) or more or where twenty five percent (25%) or more
of the existing absorption field is removed and replaced with new piping and backfill material.
B. Request For Approval: Requests for approval shall be submitted on the forms provided by the department or local authority. At a minimum, the
necessary information that shall be submitted to the department or local authority for approval shall consist of:
1. Plans or drawings to scale indicating lot size with dimensions showing the location of the system and type of system to be constructed; the
dimensions and the length of lateral pipe to be installed, showing type of backfill material if applicable; distances to water lines, water wells,
potable water storage tanks and buildings; site elevations and ground surface elevations sufficient to determine the elevation of system
components and the slope of the ground surface; location of sanitary sewer, if available, within three hundred feet (300') of the property; and
typical cross section of the system.
2. Number of bedrooms or design volume.
3. Soil investigation results or percolation test results and the separation distance from the trench bottom to a limiting layer. The private sewage
disposal system installation contractor or homeowner shall submit information with the plan approval application or local authority permit
application that a limiting layer does not exist within the distances provided in section 905.60(a)(7).
4. Owner's name and address.
5. Name and signature of applicant.
C. Acknowledgment Of Responsibility: The applicant's signature serves as written acknowledgment that the property owners are aware of and
accept the responsibility to service and maintain the private sewage disposal system in accordance with the private sewage disposal licensing
act and this chapter. If the owner of the site is a developer or contractor, he or she shall notify the purchaser and the department or the
department's agent of the transfer of ownership and responsibility for maintenance.
D. Notification Of Department: Persons who construct, install, repair or modify a private sewage disposal system shall notify the department or local
authority at least forty eight (48) hours prior to commencement of the work.
E. Noncompliance: If any person constructs, installs, repairs or modifies a private sewage disposal system without complying with the requirements
of subsections A through D of this section and backfills any portion of the system or covers any portion of the system with earth, cinders, gravel,
shale or any other material that will prevent the department or local authority from viewing the system to determine compliance with this chapter,
the property owner or private sewage disposal installation contractor shall uncover the backfilled or covered portions of the system.
F. Contractor Responsibility: The private sewage disposal installation contractor is responsible for percolation test results and the sewage disposal
system that is designed and constructed using those results. Acceptance of percolation tests from other sources does not relieve the installation
contractor from responsibility. The private sewage disposal system installation contractor is also responsible for the following:
1. Constructing, installing, repairing, modifying, or maintaining the private sewage disposal system in accordance with this chapter;
2. Providing the results of soil classification information or percolation tests used to design a private sewage disposal system to the property
owner and retaining copies of this information for at least five (5) years;
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 307/366
3. Providing service to aerobic treatment plants at least equal to section 905.100(g); and
4. Assuring compliance with all codes that may apply to the system, including the national electrical code.
G. Soil Classifier Responsibility: The soil classifier or Illinois licensed professional engineer shall be responsible for the accuracy of the information
from soil investigations used to design private sewage disposal systems.
Additional village specific permit requirements:
H. Valid Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or make any alterations or repairs to private sewage disposal systems
within the village unless he holds a valid permit issued by the enforcement officer in the name of such person for the specific construction or
alteration or repair proposed. The permit issued by the enforcement officer is in addition to any building permit required and must be obtained
prior to application for the building permit for the construction or alteration or repair proposed.
I. Application: Each application for a permit shall be in writing, signed by the applicant or his agent, and submitted to the enforcement officer on
forms prescribed by the enforcement officer, who shall review said application and shall, if he finds that the applicant has complied with all the
provisions of this chapter, other applicable village ordinances and state laws, issue a permit within a reasonable time after receipt of the
application.
J. Application Requirements: Applications for permits shall be accompanied by:
1. A drawing of a scale not smaller than one inch equals thirty feet (1" = 30'), of the proposed private sewage disposal system or alteration or
repairs thereto. Said drawings shall be prepared, certified and approved by a licensed professional engineer.
The drawing shall show the name of the property owner, legal description of property, the location and elevation of all existing and proposed
buildings, wells, water lines, sewage disposal systems, expansion sewage disposal systems, driveways, culverts, drains, lakes, streams,
stormwater detention facilities, surface and subsurface drainageways within one hundred feet (100') of the property, and any other pertinent
information. Existing and proposed ground contour lines shall also be shown at one foot (1') intervals. All existing and proposed elevations
shall be to USGS datum and shall be related to a fixed permanent bench mark that cannot be disturbed or destroyed during construction. The
bench mark shall be located within three hundred feet (300') of the site and an adequate description thereof shall be noted on the drawing.
2. Results of soils investigations.
3. Design calculations.
K. Bond Required: Prior to the issuance of any permit hereunder for any alterations or repairs to an existing individual sewage disposal system, or
for installation of each such new individual sewage disposal system, the applicant for such permit shall post and deposit, for the benefit of the
village, a cash performance bond in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
The cash performance bond required in connection with each such permit shall be refunded to the applicant if the enforcement officer
determines that all requirements of this chapter and all other applicable ordinances or state statutes have been complied with in connection with
the installation, repair or alteration of said individual sewage disposal system and that the system has been replaced or repaired in the event of
any failure thereof occurring, within one year after an occupancy permit is issued, if one was required within one year after the initial installation,
repair or alteration is completed whichever is later; otherwise, said cash performance bond shall be forfeited to the village in the manner
hereinafter provided, without prejudice to the rights of the village to require compliance with all its rules, regulations, ordinances and state
statutes.
L. Site Development Permit: Prior to the commencement of any construction operations, including, but not limited to, any building, grading,
excavation, or fill, or any work which requires a site development permit pursuant to title 4, chapter 8 of this code, on a parcel or lot on which will
be located on one or more proposed subsurface seepage fields, the permit applicant or agent shall erect and maintain a temporary fence or
barrier to exclude any vehicles or construction equipment from the proposed subsurface seepage system area, except that equipment necessary
for the installation of said seepage system.
M. Record Drawing: Before a certificate of occupancy or approval is issued, the permittee shall provide the enforcement officer with a record
drawing showing the location and elevations of the components of the completed system. Adequate dimensions locating the buried components
of the system to buildings and property lines shall be indicated.
N. Forfeiture: Any failure to comply with the specifications of this chapter or any other applicable provisions of this code or other applicable
ordinances of this village shall result in the forfeiture of any such cash bond held by the village; provided, however, that prior to any such
forfeiture, the village shall give thirty (30) days' written notice to the applicant by United States mail, postage prepaid, at his last known address,
that such action is contemplated and that the applicant has the right to request a hearing before the enforcement officer on the question of such
forfeiture within that time period, and that if such applicant fails to do so, said bond shall be automatically forfeited. If any such cash bond is
unclaimed for two (2) years, the same may be forfeited to the village by resolution adopted by the village board; provided, however, that prior to
the passage of such a resolution, the applicant shall be given thirty (30) days' written notice by United States mail, postage prepaid, at his last
known address, that such forfeiture is contemplated if such applicant fails to claim the funds in question within that time period.
O. Hearings: Any person affected or aggrieved by any order, notice or decision issued by the enforcement officer in connection with the enforcement
of any provision of this chapter may file with the village president a written request for a hearing before the village board. The village board shall
hold a hearing within thirty (30) days from the date on which the written request was filed. The petitioner for the hearing shall be notified of the
time and place of the hearing not less than five (5) days prior to the date on which the hearing is to be held. If, as a result of the hearing, the
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 308/366
village board finds that strict compliance with the order or notice would cause undue hardship on the petitioner, and that the public health would
be adequately protected and substantial justice done by varying or withdrawing the order, notice or decision, the village board may modify or
withdraw the order or notice and, as a condition for such action may, where it deems it necessary, make requirements which are additional to
those prescribed in this chapter for the purpose of properly protecting the public health. The village board shall render a decision within ten (10)
days after the date of the hearing which shall be reduced to writing and placed on file in the office of the village administrator as a matter of
public record.
(Source: Amended at 37 Ill. reg. 14994, effective August 28, 2013) (Ord. 15-961, 4-14-2015)
9-4-24: ENFORCEMENT/CIVIL PENALTIES AND TIME ALLOWANCES FOR CORRECTIVE ACTION (IDPH SECTION
905.205):
A. Amount Of Penalty:
1. The department or village may assess civil fines against any person or licensee who constructs, installs, repairs, modifies, maintains or fails to
provide for required maintenance of a private sewage disposal system, or any person or licensee who pumps, hauls or disposes of wastes
from a private sewage disposal system in violation of any section of the act, the rules or this chapter.
2. The department and/or village shall determine the amount of the fine based upon the seriousness of the violation. The seriousness of the
violation will be determined as follows:
a. Type A: Violations considered the most grievous, which shall be grounds to assess a larger fine, shall be activities that create a health
hazard, unlicensed activities and repeat violations. Examples of these activities include violations of vertical or horizontal separation
distances, falsifying information on permits or reports, addition of prohibited materials to a private sewage disposal system, use of improper
septage disposal methods and prohibited discharges. The amount of the fine shall not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each
violation in addition to one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day for each day the violation continues.
b. Type B: Violations relating to improper construction practices, the use of improper materials, failure to install a system according to the
approved plan, any violation of section 905.135 and pumper equipment violations shall be considered more serious. The maximum fine shall
not exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each violation in addition to one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day for each day the
violation continues.
c. Type C: Administrative violations involving paperwork, such as failure to obtain a permit or improper pumping truck lettering, shall be
considered the least serious. The maximum fine shall not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation, in addition to one
hundred dollars ($100.00) per day for each day the violation continues.
d. For the purposes of determining a repeat violation, an "initial violation" means the first violation of a particular section of the act or this
chapter within the previous three (3) years. An identical or similar violation (example: a violation of vertical or horizontal separation distance
or septage disposal) that occurs within a three (3) year period will be considered a repeat violation.
B. Correction Of Violation: Correction of violations that are considered serious health hazards as determined by the department or local health
department shall begin immediately and be completed within seven (7) days. Other violations shall be corrected within thirty (30) days after
notification by the department or the local health department. An exception to this requirement may be authorized by the department or local
health department when extenuating circumstances prevent correction in a timely manner. Examples of extenuating circumstances include
weather, physical conditions that prevent construction or repair, or lack of adequate materials. The department or local health department may
also grant an extension of time for correction, based on the type and seriousness of the violation and the violator's demonstrated progress in
correcting the violation.
C. Prosecution: Any violation may be enforced by the village or referred to the state's attorney of the county in which it occurs or to the attorney
general for prosecution.
D. Compliance With Chapter: When any private sewage disposal system constructed prior to the effective date of this chapter is reconstructed,
altered or extended, or subject to any change in any condition affecting its operation or functioning, it shall comply with the provisions of this
chapter.
E. Enforcement Officer To Inspect: The enforcement officer is hereby authorized and directed to make such inspections as are necessary to
determine satisfactory compliance with this chapter.
F. Approval Before Operation: No individual sewage disposal system shall be covered or placed in operation until the system has been inspected
and written approval of the system has been issued by the enforcement officer.
G. Inspection Before Backfilling: If any person constructs, installs, repairs or modifies a private sewage disposal system without complying with the
requirements of this chapter and backfills any portion of the system or covers any portion of the system with earth, cinders, gravel, shale or any
other material that will prevent the enforcement officer from viewing the system to determine compliance with this chapter, the property owner
and/or private sewage disposal installation contractor shall uncover the backfilled or covered portions of the system.
H. Notice: Whenever the enforcement officer determines that a violation of any provision of this chapter has occurred, he shall give notice to the
person or persons responsible for such violation. The notice shall:
1. Be in writing.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 309/366
2. Include a statement of the reasons for issuance of the notice.
3. Allow reasonable time as determined by the enforcement officer for performance of any act required for compliance.
4. Be served upon the person responsible for the violation(s); provided, that such notice shall have been properly served upon the person
responsible for the violations when a copy thereof has been sent by regular or registered or certified mail, postage prepaid, to the last known
address as furnished to the enforcement officer or when he has been served with such notice by any other reasonable method; and
5. Contain a brief description of remedial action which is required to effect compliance with this chapter.
(Source: Amended at 37 Ill. reg. 14994, effective August 28, 2013) (Ord. 15-961, 4-14-2015)
9-4-25: APPENDIX A, ILLUSTRATIONS AND EXHIBITS (IDPH SECTION 905):
ILLUSTRATION A
QUANTITY OF SEWAGE FLOWS
Type Of Establishment Unit (Per) Gallons Per Day
Permanent residential dwellings:
Single-family Bedroom 200
Multi-family Bedroom 200
Individual mobile homes Bedroom 200
Mobile home parks Space 400
Boarding houses Person 50
Rooming houses Resident 40
Institutions:
Hospitals, medical Bed 250
Hospitals, medical Employee 15
Hospitals, mental Bed 150
Hospitals, mental Employee 15
Long term care institutions Bed 125
Long term care institutions Employee 15
Prison Inmate 150
Prison Employee 15
Schools:
Boarding school Person 150
Schools without cafeteria or showers Person 15
Schools with cafeteria and showers Person 25
Schools with cafeteria or showers Person 20
Travel:
Airports Passenger 5
Railway stations Passenger 5
Bus stations Passenger 5
Highway rest areas Traveler 5
Recreational and seasonal areas:
Campgrounds with mobile homes Site 150
Swimming pools and bathing beaches Person 10
Comfort station with toilets and showers Space 35
Comfort station without showers Space 25
Day camps without meals Person 25
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 310/366
Day camps with meals Person 35
RV parks with water and sewer hookups Space 50
Cottages and/or small dwellings with seasonal occupancy Bedroom 150
Picnic parks with toilet facilities only Person 10
Youth camps without cafeteria Person 50
Youth camps with cafeteria Person 60
Migrant labor camps Person 150
Sanitary dump station for unsewered site Site 20
Campground with central bath and toilet facilities Person 35
Commercial, industrial and miscellaneous:
Country clubs, no kitchen Member 25
Hotels and motels Bed 50
Places for public assembly Person 5
Theaters Seat 5
Churches without kitchen Seat 3
Churches with kitchen Seat 6
Restaurants Meal 10
Restaurants with bar and cocktail Meal 12
Offices and day workers Person 15
Shopping centers (Per 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area) 250
Stores Toilet 400
Service stations (served) Vehicle 10
Laundries Customer 50
Construction camps or sites, factories with toilets and showers Person 35
Factories with toilets, no showers Person 20
(Source: Amended at 20 Ill. reg. 2431, effective March 15, 1996)
ILLUSTRATION C
LIST OF APPROVED PLASTIC PIPE
FOR PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM
X - Indicates approved use
Types Of Pipes
ASTM
Standard3
Building Sewer1
Or Common
Collector Sewer Lines1
All
Subsurface
Seepage
Systems
5' from building to septic aeration tank to 5'
beyond the septic tank, aeration tank or
distribution box
Additional treatment facilities and sand
filter distribution lines and collection
lines
ABS (DWV
schedule 40)
F628-06 X X X
ABS (DWV
schedule 40)
D2661-06 X X X
ABS D1527-99
(2005)
X X X
ABS (sewer
pipe)
D2751-05 X2 X2 X2
PVC D1785-06 X X X
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 311/366
PVC (DWV
schedule 40)
D2665-07 X X X
PVC (DWV
schedule 40)
F891-04 X X X
PVC (type
PSM) (SDR 35)
D3034-06 X2 X2 X2
PVC (sewer
and drain PS-
50)
F891-04 X X X
PVC (sewer
and drain PS-
25)
F891-04 X X
PVC
(corrugatedsmooth
wall)
F949-06 X X
PVC (std. or
perforated)
D2729-03 X X
PE (smooth
wall)
R810-07
AASHTO
standard
M252-06
X X
PE
(corrugatedperforated)
F405-05
(heavy duty
only)
X
PE
(corrugatedperforated)
F667-06 X
Notes:
1. Plastic materials shall not be commingled within this area except through the use of proper adapters. (See Illinois plumbing code.) When
the building sewer is of a type of material that is different from the building drain, proper transition fittings shall be used.
2. Pipe shall be SDR (standard dimension ratio) 35 only.
3. The last 2 numbers of the ASTM standard indicate the date of the edition.
(Source: Amended at 37 Ill. reg. 14994, effective August 28, 2013) (Ord. 15-961, 4-14-2015)
ILLUSTRATION D
LOCATION OF COMPONENTS OF
PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS
Component
Part Of System
Minimum Distance Allowable From1,2
Cistern Well,
Or Suction
Line From
Pump To Well
Water
Supply
Line3
Pressure
Lake, Stream,
Inground
Swimming Pool
Or Other
Body Of Water
Property
Dwelling
Property
Line4
Artificial
Drain
Building sewer5 50' 10' 25' - - -
Septic tank or aerobic treatment plant 50' 10' 9 25' 5' 5' -
Distribution box 75' 10' 25' 10' 5' -
Subsurface seepage system 75' 25' 25' 10' 5' 10'
Sand filter 75' 25' 15' 10' 5' 10'
Privy 75' 25' 25' 20' 5' 10'
Waste stabilization pond 75' 25' 25' 20' 5' 10'
Surface discharge effluent line 50' 10' - - 5' -
Effluent receiving trench 75' 25' 15' 10' 5' 10'
Treated effluent discharge point6 50' 10' - 20' 25' 25'
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 312/366
Class V injection wells7 200' 8 25' 25' 10' 5' 10'
Notes:
1. These distances have been determined for use in clay, silt and loam soils only. The minimum distances required for use in sand or other
types of soil shall be determined for the proposed private sewage disposal system and approved by the department. Approval will be given if
the department determines that the soil will provide treatment of the sewage.
2. For separation distances to closed loop wells, see 77 Illinois administrative code 920.180.
3. See section 905.20(d) for additional details on water line and sewer separation.
4. If a common property is used, the boundary of the common property shall be used.
5. The building sewer or surface discharge effluent line may be located to within 10 feet of a well or suction line from the pump to the well
when cast iron pipe with mechanical joints or schedule 40 PVC pipe with watertight joints is used for the building sewer or surface discharge
effluent line.
6. Any surface discharging system installed, repaired or renovated after January 1, 2014.
7. Class V injection wells are defined in Illinois pollution control board rules. They are typically a shallow well used to place fluids directly
below the land surface. See, e.g., 35 Illinois administrative code 704.105, 704.106 and 704.280.
8. A lesser separation distance may be obtained with approval or a waiver from IEPA.
9. There shall be 25 feet separation from public water supply, water mains and water service lines. The terms public water supply, water
main and water service line shall have the same meaning as in the Illinois pollution control board's public water supplies rules. See, e.g., 35
Illinois administrative code 653.118 and 653.119.
10. A 10 foot minimum separation is required from any septic component to a drain tile, open ditch, swale, driveway, fence or deck.
(Source: Amended at 37 Ill. reg. 14994, effective August 28, 2013) (Ord. 15-961, 4-14-2015; amd. Ord. 2015-966, 12-8-2015)
ILLUSTRATION E
SEPTIC TANKS
Exhibit A: Septic Tank With Slip-In Baffles
(Source: Amended at 20 Ill. reg. 2431, effective March 15, 1996) Exhibit B: Septic Tank With T-Baffles
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 313/366
(Source: Amended at 20 Ill. reg. 2431, effective March 15, 1996)
Exhibit C: Typical Gas Deflection Devices
(Source: Added at 20 Ill. reg. 2431, effective March 15, 1996)
ILLUSTRATION F
MINIMUM VOLUMES FOR SEPTIC
TANKS SERVING RESIDENTIAL UNITS
Number Of
Bedrooms
Minimum Liquid
Capacity Of Tank
(Gallons)
Minimum Liquid Capacity
Of Tank (Gallons) When
Garbage Grinder Is Used
2 or less 750 1,125
3 1,000 1,500
4 1,250 2,000
5 1,500 2,200
6 1,750 2,600
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 314/366
7 2,000 3,000
(Source: Amended at 20 Ill. reg. 2431, effective March 15, 1996)
ILLUSTRATION G
INSTRUCTIONS FOR CONDUCTING PERCOLATION TESTS
Percolation tests shall not be made in frozen ground or ground that has been filled in the preceding 12 months. Percolation tests shall be performed
in accordance with the following procedures:
1. Number And Location Of Percolation Tests: Select an area where the seepage field will be located. When digging the holes, avoid animal
burrows, large root channels, etc. At least 3 separate percolation tests shall be performed at the site of each proposed disposal area. The
percolation test holes shall be at least 50 feet apart. At least one hole shall be located at the lowest elevation of the proposed absorption field area.
The 2 holes with the highest results shall be used to determine percolation rate.
2. Depth Of Percolation Test Hole: Dig or bore the holes with horizontal dimensions approximately 4 to 6 inches in diameter to the depth of the
proposed seepage field or seepage bed.
3. Preparation Of Test Hole:
a) Carefully pick the bottom and sides of the hole with a knife blade or sharp pointed instrument to remove smeared or smoothed soil and to provide
a natural soil interface into which water may percolate.
b) Remove all loose material from the hole.
c) Add 2 inches of coarse gravel to protect the bottom from scouring and sediment. A removable hardware cloth screen to line the lower part of the
hole also helps prevent sloughing of the hole sides during testing.
4. Saturation And Swelling Of Soil: It is important to distinguish between saturation and swelling. Saturation means the void spaces between soil
particles are full of water. This can be accomplished in a very short period of time. Swelling is caused by the intrusion of water into the individual soil
particle. This is a slow process, especially in a clay type soil and is the reason for requiring a prolonged soaking period.
a) On the day prior to conducting the percolation test, carefully fill the hole with water and keep it full for at least 4 hours. The percolation test shall
be conducted on the day following this presoaking at least 18 hours after presoaking is completed but prior to 30 hours after presoaking is
completed. Cover the hole during this 18 - 30 hour waiting period. In sandy soils with greater than 70% sand and less than 15% clay (sand and
loamy sand), after the 4 hour presoak, a percolation test may be attempted without the 18 hour waiting period. If the percolation test results are
greater than 45 minutes for a 6 inch drop in water, the test must be repeated after the 18 hour waiting period. If the percolation test results are 45
minutes or less, the percolation rate shall be used to size the system.
b) On the day of conducting the percolation test, carefully fill the hole with water to 12 inches above the gravel.
c) Allow the water level to drop to a point 6 inches above the gravel. If the water does not fall from 12 inches to 6 inches in 6 hours, the percolation
test is terminated and an alternate system is required.
d) Measure the last 6 inch drop in water level at thirty minute intervals until all the water has seeped away. Warning: Under no conditions shall
measurements be taken from water filled to the top of the hole or on water 12 inches deep in the hole. Such results are completely invalid and will
not be accepted. Results from the last 6 inches of drop in water are the only results that will be accepted.
5. Recording Of Results: Record results of all tests as the total minutes required for the last 6 inches of seepage. If the last 6 inches of water has not
seeped away at the end of 6 hours, the soil must be considered unsuitable for seepage field disposal and the appropriate statement marked on the
results form. If there is more than a 30 minute difference between the highest 2 percolation tests, use the larger result or perform additional
percolation tests.
6. Calculating The Percolation Rate: Add the total minutes required for the last 6 inches of water to fall from the 2 holes with the highest result and
divide by 2. If the average is less than 60 minutes, use the percolation rate of 60 minutes. If the average is greater than 60 minutes, refer to
illustration H of this appendix. Locate in the first column (time (minutes) required for last 6 inches of water to fall) where the highest 2 hole average
fits and use the next highest result as the percolation rate for sizing and design. An example of this procedure is as follows: If 3 percolation tests are
conducted with results of 120 minutes, 140 minutes, and 155 minutes, the highest 2 hole average would be (140 + 155)/2 or 147.5 minutes. Looking
at illustration H of this appendix, the next highest result would be 150 minutes. The 150 minute rate would be used to size and design the
subsurface seepage system.
7. Distribution Of Results: The results of the percolation tests shall be given to the homeowner and shall be retained by the contractor for at least 5
years. The percolation test data report shall be returned to the appropriate regional office or local authority.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 315/366
Test Hole:
Test Hole #1 Test Hole #2 Test Hole #3
Reading #
Time
(In Min.)
Water
Level
(In Inches)
Time
(In Min.)
Water
Level
(In Inches)
Time
(In Min.)
Water
Level
(In Inches)
1 0 0 0
2 30 30 30
3 60 60 60
4 90 90 90
5 120 120 120
6 150 150 150
7 180 180 180
8 210 210 210
9 240 240 240
10 270 270 270
11 300 300 300
12 330 330 330
13 360 360 360
(Source: Amended at 20 Ill. reg. 2431, effective March 15, 1996)
ILLUSTRATION H
SUBSURFACE SEEPAGE SYSTEM SIZE DETERMINATION
Exhibit A: Gravel System1,2,3,4
Time (Minutes)
Required For Last 6"
Of Water To Fall
For Residential Use
Required
Absorption Area
(Sq. Ft./Bedroom)
For Institutional
Or Commercial Use
Allowable Application
Rate (GPD/Sq. Ft.)5
Recommended
Depth From Bottom
Of The Trench To
The Limiting Layer
18 - 60 200 1.0
90 210 0.95 3'
120 235 0.85
150 265 0.75
180 290 0.69
240 320 0.62
300 350 0.57 2'
360 385 0.52
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 316/366
Notes:
1. Absorption area is figured as trench bottom area in absorption trenches and bottom area in seepage beds.
2. Seepage beds require 11/2 times the seepage field absorption area specified.
3. Over 360 is unsuitable for subsurface seepage systems.
4. Under 18 is unsuitable for subsurface seepage systems.
5. Divide the required total gallons per day by this number to get the number of square feet required.
(Source: Amended at 20 Ill. reg. 2431, effective March 15, 1996)
Exhibit B: Gravelless System1,2
Time (Minutes)
Required For Last 6"
Of Water To Fall
For Residential Use
Required
Absorption Area
(Sq. Ft./Bedroom)
For Institutional
Or Commercial Use
Allowable Application
Rate (GPD/Sq. Ft.)3
Recommended
Depth From Bottom
Of The Trench To
8" 10" 8" 10" The Limiting Layer
18 - 60 100 70 2.00 3.00
90 105 70 1.90 2.86 3'
120 120 80 1.66 2.50
150 135 90 1.48 2.22
180 145 100 1.38 2.00
240 160 110 1.25 1.82
300 175 120 1.14 1.66 2'
360 195 130 1.0 1.54
Notes:
1. Over 360 is unsuitable for subsurface seepage systems.
2. Under 18 is unsuitable for subsurface seepage systems.
3. Divide the required total gallons per day by this number to get the number of linear feet required.
(Source: Amended at 20 Ill. reg. 2431, effective March 15, 1996)
ILLUSTRATION I
SEEPAGE FIELD CONSTRUCTION
Exhibit A: Gravel System
Trench length, maximum length from point of discharge into seepage trench 100'
Trench bottom, minimum width 8"
Trench bottom, maximum width 36"
Trench bottom, minimum depth 18"
Trench bottom, maximum depth 36"
Trench bottom, slope Level
Distribution line, minimum diameter 4"
Distribution line, minimum earth cover 6"
Distribution line, maximum earth cover 24"
Distribution line, maximum slope Level
(Source: Amended at 20 Ill. reg. 2431, effective March 15, 1996)
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 317/366
Exhibit B: Size And Spacing; Gravel System
Width Of Trench
At Bottom
Minimum Center To
Center Spacing Of
Distribution Lines
Effective Absorption
Area Per Linear
Foot Of Trench
8" 6.0' 0.67 sq. ft.
12" 6.0' 1.0 sq. ft.
18" 6.0' 1.5 sq. ft.
24" 6.0' 2.0 sq. ft.
30" 7.5' 2.5 sq. ft.
36" 9.0' 3.0 sq. ft.
(Source: Amended at 9 Ill. reg. 20738, effective January 3, 1986)
Exhibit C: Gravelless System
STANDARDS FOR SEEPAGE FIELD CONSTRUCTION
(GRAVELLESS)
Trench length, maximum length from point of discharge into system 100'
Trench bottom, minimum width 18"
Trench bottom, maximum width 24"
Trench bottom, minimum depth 18"
Trench bottom, maximum depth 36"
Trench bottom, slope Level
Distribution line, minimum inside diameter 8"
Distribution line, maximum inside diameter 10"
Distribution line, minimum earth cover 6"
Distribution line, maximum earth cover 24"
Distribution line, maximum slope Level
(Source: Amended at 20 Ill. reg. 2431, effective March 15, 1996)
Exhibit D: Spacing - Gravelless And Chamber Systems
SPACING FOR SEEPAGE FIELD CONSTRUCTION
(GRAVELLESS AND CHAMBER SYSTEMS)
Gravelless And Chamber Dimensions
Minimum Center To
Center Spacing Of
Distribution Lines
8 inch inside diameter of gravelless pipe system 7.0'
10 inch inside diameter of gravelless pipe system 7.0'
12 inch wide chamber system 7.0'
18 inch wide or wider chamber system 9.0'
(Source: Amended at 37 Ill. reg. 14994, effective August 28, 2013)
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 318/366
Exhibit E: Chamber Sizing Requirements
Example: Chamber systems shall be sized on the absorption area of the chamber that is equivalent to the bottom area of a gravel system. The
equivalent chamber absorption area per linear foot is equal to the average inside width of the chamber times an equivalency factor of 2.5. For
example, a chamber that has an average inside width of 1.25 feet provides an equivalent absorption area of 3.125 square feet per linear foot. (1.25
feet times the 2.5 equivalency factor equals 3.125 square feet per linear foot.)
To determine the length of chambers required, first calculate the absorption area required for a gravel system based on illustration H, exhibit A or
illustration M, exhibit A of this appendix. Then divide this area by the equivalent chamber absorption area per linear foot. For example, if a 3
bedroom house requires 870 square feet of absorption field and chambers 1.25 feet wide are being used, then the length of chambers needed is
278 feet. (870 square feet divided by 3.125 square feet per linear foot equals 278 feet.)
Chamber systems with an average inside dimension equal to or greater than 20 inches shall not be designed to receive an equivalent absorption
area of greater than 54 square feet per linear foot.
(Source: Amended at 37 Ill. reg. 14994, effective August 28, 2013)
ILLUSTRATION J
SEPTIC TANK SUBSURFACE SEEPAGE FIELD
Exhibit A: Plan View - Gravel System
(Source: Amended at 27 Ill. reg. 2431, effective March 15, 1996)
Exhibit B: Section View - Gravel System
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 319/366
(Source: Amended at 27 Ill. reg. 2431, effective March 15, 1996)
Exhibit C: Plan View - Gravelless And Chamber System
(Source: Amended at 37 Ill. reg. 14994, effective August 28, 2013)
Exhibit D: Section View - Gravelless And Chamber System
(Source: Amended at 37 Ill. reg. 14994, effective August 28, 2013)
ILLUSTRATION K
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 320/366
SERIAL DISTRIBUTION
Exhibit A: Plan View #1 - Gravel System
(Source: Amended at 20 Ill. reg. 2431, effective March 15, 1996)
Exhibit B: Section View #1 - Gravel System
Note: Invert of the first relief line must be at least 1 inch lower than invert of the septic tank outlets.
(Source: Amended at 20 Ill. reg. 2431, effective March 15, 1996)
Exhibit C: Plan View #2 - Gravel System
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 321/366
(Source: Amended at 20 Ill. reg. 2431, effective March 15, 1996)
Exhibit D: Section View #2 - Gravel System
Note: Differing ground slopes over subsurface disposal fields may require use of various combinations of fittings.
(Source: Amended at 20 Ill. reg. 2431, effective March 15, 1996)
Exhibit E: Plan View #1 - Gravelless System
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 322/366
(Source: Amended at 20 Ill. reg. 2431, effective March 15, 1996)
Exhibit F: Section View #1 - Gravelless System
Note: Invert of the septic tank outlet shall be at least 1 inch higher than the top of the gravelless pipe.
(Source: Amended at 20 Ill. reg. 2431, effective March 15, 1996)
Exhibit G: Plan View #2 - Gravelless System
(Source: Amended at 20 Ill. reg. 2431, effective March 15, 1996)
Exhibit H: Section View #2 - Gravelless System
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 323/366
(Source: Amended at 20 Ill. reg. 2431, effective March 15, 1996)
ILLUSTRATION L
SEEPAGE BED
Exhibit A: Plan View
(Source: Amended at 20 Ill. reg. 2431, effective March 15, 1996)
Exhibit B: Side View
(Source: Amended at 20 Ill. reg. 2431, effective March 15, 1996)
Exhibit C: End View
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 324/366
(Source: Amended at 37 Ill. reg. 14994, effective August 28, 2013)
ILLUSTRATION M
SOIL SUITABILITY FOR ON SITE SEWAGE DESIGN
Exhibit A: Loading Rates In Square Feet Per Bedroom And Gallons/Square Feet/Day
NR = Subsurface disposal system not recommended
Design
Group
Soil Group
(Most Limiting Layer)
Minimum
Separation To
Limiting
Layer1
Permeability
Range
Size Of System
Residential
Required
Absorption
(Ft.2/Bedroom)
Institutional/Commercial
Allowable Application
Rate
(GPD/Ft.2)
I 1A NR Very rapid NR NR
II 2A; 2B; 2K 3 ft. Rapid 200 1.0
III 3B; 3K 3 ft. High moderately
rapid
220 0.91
IV 3A; 3L; 4D; 4K 3 ft. Low moderately
rapid
240 0.84
V 4A; 4B; 4H; 4L; 5D 3 ft. Very high moderate 265 0.75
VI 4F; 4M; 5B 3 ft. High moderate 290 0.69
VII 4N; 5A; 5C; 5H; 5K; 6D 2 ft. Moderate 325 0.62
VIII 4O; 5E; 5I; 5L; 6A; 6B; 6E; 6H;
6K
2 ft. Low moderate 385 0.52
IX2 5F; 5M; 6C; 6L; 7D; 7F 2 ft. High moderately
slow
445 0.45
X2 5G; 6F; 6I; 7E; 7C; 7H 2 ft. Low moderately
slow
500 0.40
XI2 5N; 6G; 6J; 6M; 7F; 7I 2 ft. Slow 740 0.27
XII2 7G; 7J; 7L; 8E; 8I 2 ft. Very slow 1,000 0.20
XII2 5O; 6N; 6O; 7M; 7N; 7O; 8J; 8M;
8O
NR NR NR 0.00
XIII 9 Subsurface disposal not recommended
Notes:
1. Limiting layers include fragipans; bedrock; compact glacial tills; seasonal high water table or other soil profile features that will materially
affect the absorption of liquid from the disposal field.
2. Soils in this group are less than the minimum percolation rate established in illustration H of this appendix as suitable for subsurface
seepage systems.
(Source: Amended at 37 Ill. reg. 14994, effective August 28, 2013)
Exhibit B: Key For Determining Sewage Loading Rates
(Gallons/Square Foot/Day)1
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 325/366
Structure And
Parent Material
Single
Grain;
Weak;
Platy2
Granular, Angular And Subangular Blocky; Prismatic Structureless Or Massive
Loess; Outwash; Alluvium; Lacustrine8 Till3 Loess; Outwash;
Alluvium;
Weak Lacustrine8 Till3
Moderate;
Strong Strong Moderate; Strong
Moist consistence lo vfr fr vfr fr
fi vfr fi vfr fr
fi fr fi vfi vfr fr fi vfr fr
fi vfi
Texture A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O
1. Fragmental; extreme
or very gravelly sand
>1.004 n/a5
n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a
2. Sand; loamy course
sand; loamy sand;
gravelly sand; coarse
sand; gravelly loamy
sand
1.00 1.00
n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 1.00
n/a n/a n/a n/a
3. Fine sand; loamy fine
sand; coarse sandy
loam
0.84 0.91
n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 0.91
0.84
n/a n/a n/a
4. Sandy loam; fine
sandy loam; gravelly
sandy loam; gravelly
loam; gravelly silt loam
0.75 0.75
n/a 0.84
n/a 0.69
n/a n/a 0.75 n/a 0.84
0.75
0.69
0.62
0.52
5. Loam; silt loam; very
fine sandy loam; sandy
clay loam; silt; very fine
sand; loamy very fine
sand; gravelly clay loam
0.62 0.69
0.62
0.75
0.52 0.456
0.406
0.62
0.52 n/a 0.62
0.52
0.456
0.276
N/R7
6. Silty clay loam (<35%
c); clay loam (<35% c)
.052 0.52
0.456
0.62
0.52 0.408
0.276
0.52
0.406 0.276
0.52
0.456
0.276
N/R N/R
7. Silty clay loam (>35%
c); clay loam (>35% c)
n/a n/a 0.406
0.456
0.406 0.276
0.206
0.406
0.276 0.206
n/a 0.206
N/R N/R N/R
8. Sandy clay; clay n/a n/a n/a n/a 0.206,9
n/a n/a n/a 0.206,9
N/R n/a n/a N/R n/a N/R
9. Organics; fragic; lithic;
paralithic
Soil properties have very severe limitations; subsurface disposal not recommended
Notes:
1.Disturbed soils are highly variable and require special on site investigations.
2. Moderate or strong platy structure for the soil textures in groups 4, 5 and 6 have a loading rate of 0.40 g/sq.ft./d. Platy structure having
firm or very firm consistency or caused by mechanical compaction has a loading rate of 0.0 g/sq.ft./d.
3. Basal glacial tills structured by geogenic processes have the same loading rates as structureless glacial till.
4. This soil group is estimated to have very rapid permeability and exceeds the maximum established rate in illustration H, exhibit A of this
appendix.
5. n/a means not applicable.
6. These soil groups are estimated to have moderately slow to very slow permeability and are less than the minimum established rate in
illustration H, exhibit A of this appendix.
7. N/R means not recommended. These soils have loading rates considered too low for conventional subsurface disposal.
8. In some areas, lacustrine material may have physical properties similar to glacial till and should be placed in the glacial till columns.
9. Nonswelling (1:1 lattice) clays formed in bedrock residuum have a loading rate of 0.27 g/sq.ft./d. Swelling (2:1 lattice) clays are not
recommended for subsurface disposal.
(Source: Amended at 37 Ill. reg. 14994, effective August 28, 2013)
ILLUSTRATION N
BURIED SAND FILTER
Exhibit A: Plan View
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 326/366
(Source: Amended at 37 Ill. reg. 14994, effective August 28, 2013)
Exhibit B: Section View
(Source: Amended at 37 Ill. reg. 14994, effective August 28, 2013)
Exhibit C: End View
(Source: Amended at 37 Ill. reg. 14994, effective August 28, 2013)
ILLUSTRATION O
RECIRCULATING SAND FILTER SYSTEM
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 327/366
Exhibit A: System Diagram
(Source: Amended at 20 Ill. reg. 2431, effective March 15, 1996)
Exhibit B: Flow Splitter Detail
(Source: Amended at 20 Ill. reg. 2431, effective March 15, 1996)
ILLUSTRATION P
RECIRCULATING SAND FILTER SIZING CHART
Number
Of
Bedrooms
Sewage Flow
Per Day
(Gal.)
Septic
Tank Size
(Gal.)
No Garbage
Grinder
Recirculation
Tank Size
(Gal.)
Area Of
Sand Filter
(Sq. Ft.)
Recommend-ed Size Of
Sand Filter
Number
Of Underdrains
Number Of
Distribution
Pipes
1 200 750 500 100 10' x 10' 1 3
2 400 750 500 133 11' x 12' 1 3
3 600 1,000 500 200 14' x 14' 1 4
4 800 1,250 500 266 16' x 17' 1 5
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 328/366
5 1,000 1,500 500 333 18' x 19' 2 6
6 1,200 1,750 500 400 20' x 20' 2 6
7 1,400 2,000 500 466 20' x 23' 2 6
8 1,500 2,250 500 500 20' x 25' 2 6
(Source: Amended at 20 Ill. reg. 2431, effective March 15, 1996)
ILLUSTRATION Q
RECIRCULATING TANK PUMP CONTROL
(Source: Amended at 20 Ill. reg. 2431, effective March 15, 1996)
ILLUSTRATION R
WASTE STABILIZATION POND
Exhibit A: Plan View
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 329/366
(Source: Amended at 20 Ill. reg. 2431, effective March 15, 1996)
Exhibit B: Section View
(Source: Amended at 20 Ill. reg. 2431, effective March 15, 1996)
Exhibit C: Waste Stabilization Pond Surface Area In Square Feet
With Septic Tank With Aeration
Depth 3 Feet 4 Feet 5 Feet 3 Feet 4 Feet 5 Feet
Bedrooms:
1 5331/3 400 320 160 120 96
2 1,067 800 640 320 240 192
3 1,600 1,200 960 480 360 288
4 2,133 1,600 1,280 640 480 384
5 2,667 2,000 1,600 800 600 480
6 3,200 2,400 1,920 960 720 576
7 3,733 2,800 2,240 1,120 840 672
(Source: Added at 20 Ill. reg. 2431, effective March 15, 1996)
ILLUSTRATION S
CHLORINE CONTACT TANK
Exhibit A: Minimum Required Chlorine Contact Tank Volume
Average Flow Rate
(GPD)
Minimum Required Volume
(Gallons)
100 30
200 30
300 30
400 30
500 30
600 30
700 36
800 42
900 47
1,000 52
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 330/366
1,100 57
1,200 63
1,300 68
1,400 73
1,500 78
Exhibit B: Chlorine Feeder, Contact Tank, And Sampling Port
(Source: Amended at 20 Ill. reg. 2431, effective March 15, 1996)
ILLUSTRATION T
SANITARY AND CONCRETE VAULT PRIVY
(Source: Amended at 20 Ill. reg. 2431, effective March 15, 1996)
ILLUSTRATION U
SEPTIC PRIVY DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM
Exhibit A: Plan View
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 331/366
(Source: Amended at 20 Ill. reg. 2431, effective March 15, 1996)
Exhibit B: Section View
(Source: Amended at 20 Ill. reg. 2431, effective March 15, 1996)
ILLUSTRATION V
SANITARY DUMP STATION
Exhibit A: Section View #1
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 332/366
(Source: Amended at 20 Ill. reg. 2431, effective March 15, 1996)
Exhibit B: Plan View
(Source: Amended at 20 Ill. reg. 2431, effective March 15, 1996)
Exhibit C: Section View #2
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 333/366
(Source: Amended at 20 Ill. reg. 2431, effective March 15, 1996)
ILLUSTRATION W
SWIMMING POOL BACKWASH WATER HOLDING TANK
(Source: Amended at 20 Ill. reg. 2431, effective March 15, 1996)
ILLUSTRATION X
ILLINOIS RAISED FILTER BED
Exhibit A: Sizing Requirements
Residential Nonresidential
U.S./Gals
Beds 4
Gal/Sq. Ft.
Minimum Sq. Ft.
Suggested
Bed Size
Minimum
Beds
2.5 Gals/Sq. Ft.
Minimum Sq. Ft.
Suggested
Bed Size
Minimum
300 75 sq. ft. 7'6" x 10'0" 120 sq. ft. 10'0" x 12'0"
450 112.5 sq. ft. 10'0" x 11'3" 180 sq. ft. 12'0" x 15'0"
500 125 sq. ft. 10'0" x 12'6" 200 sq. ft. 12'0" x 17'0"
600 150 sq. ft. 12'0" x 12'6" 240 sq. ft. 15'0" x 16'0"
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 334/366
800 200 sq. ft. 12'0" x 16'8" 320 sq. ft. 16'0" x 20'0"
1,000 250 sq. ft. 12'0" x 21'0" 400 sq. ft. 20'0" x 20'0"
1,100 275 sq. ft. 12'6" x 22'0" 440 sq. ft. 20'0" x 22'0"
1,200 300 sq. ft. 15'0" x 20'0" 480 sq. ft. 20'0" x 24'0"
1,300 325 sq. ft. 15'0" x 22'0" 520 sq. ft. 20'0" x 26'0"
1,400 350 sq. ft. 18'0" x 20'0" 560 sq. ft. 20'0" x 28'0"
1,500 375 sq. ft. 18'0" x 21'0" 600 sq. ft. 20'0" x 30'0"
1,600 640 sq. ft. 2 @ 16'0" x 20'0"
1,700 680 sq. ft. 2 @ 17'0" x 20'0"
1,800 720 sq. ft. 2 @ 18'0" x 20'0"
2,000 800 sq. ft. 2 @ 20'0" x 20'0"
2,100 840 sq. ft. 2 @ 20'0" x 21'0"
2,200 880 sq. ft. 2 @ 20'0" x 22'0"
2,400 960 sq. ft. 2 @ 20'0" x 24'0"
2,500 1,000 sq. ft. 2 @ 20'0" x 25'0"
3,000 1,200 sq. ft. 2 @ 24'0" x 25'0"
12,000 4,800 sq. ft. 8 @ 24'0" x 25'0"
(Source: Old illustration X repealed at 9 Ill. reg. 20738, effective January 3, 1986; new illustration X added at 27 Ill. reg. 3074, effective
February 10, 2003)
Exhibit B: Batch Treatment Aeration Tank Design Requirements
(Source: Added at 27 Ill. reg. 3074, effective February 10, 2003)
Exhibit C: Filter Bed Cross Section
(Side View)
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 335/366
(Source: Added at 27 Ill. reg. 3074, effective February 10, 2003)
Exhibit D: Filter Bed Cross Section
(End View)
Note: Crowning shown for torpedo sand applies to mantle area only.
(Source: Added at 27 Ill. reg. 3074, effective February 10, 2003)
Exhibit E: Sizing Requirements
Using Soils Investigation Information
Design Group Percolation Rate Equivalent
I Unsuitable
II 10 minutes/inch
III 15 minutes/inch
IV 20 minutes/inch
V 23 minutes/inch
VI 25 minutes/inch
VII 30 minutes/inch
VIII 35 minutes/inch
IX 40 minutes/inch
X 50 minutes/inch
XI 70 minutes/inch
XII 90 minutes/inch
(Source: Added at 27 Ill. reg. 3074, effective February 10, 2003) (Ord. 15-961, 4-14-2015)
9-4-26: APPENDIX B, CONTACT INFORMATION FOR THE CENTRAL AND REGIONAL OFFICES:
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 336/366
(Source: Amended at 37 Ill. reg. 14994, effective August 28, 2013) (Ord. 15-961, 4-14-2015)
Title 10
POLICE REGULATIONS
Footnotes - Click any footnote link to go back to its reference.
Footnote 1: The Village Zoning Ordinance has been inserted in this Code for convenience only and is not part of this Code.
Chapter 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT
10-1-1: DEPARTMENT CREATED:
There is hereby created the police department of the village of Inverness.
A. There shall be three (3) general classifications of police officers in the department:
1. Chief of police;
2. Watch commanders and/or sergeants; and
3. Patrol officers.
B. Notwithstanding anything in this code to the contrary, the number of watch commanders and patrol officers within each classification and each
police officer's compensation shall be determined by the village board of trustees, subject only to the limitations for total police department salary
expenditures set forth in the village's annual appropriation ordinance. The approval of a new appropriation ordinance, increasing or decreasing
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 337/366
total police salaries shall be automatically incorporated into and made a part of this chapter without requiring an additional amendment hereto.
(Ord. 2008-861, 2-12-2008)
10-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
MEMBER OF THE DEPARTMENT: Any person in the employ of the police department of the village who is not sworn and commissioned to perform
police duties.
POLICE OFFICER: Any employee of the police department of the village sworn and commissioned to perform police duties, including the chief of
police, watch commanders/sergeants and patrol officers. (Ord. 2008-861, 2-12-2008)
10-1-3: HOME RULE AUTHORITY:
Pursuant to the village's home rule authority, all aspects of the administration and operation of the police department, including the appointment,
discipline, promotion, or termination of police officers, shall be governed exclusively by the provisions of this chapter. To the fullest extent permitted
by law, any Illinois statutes with respect to the administration and operation of police departments, including the board of police and fire
commissioners act1, are hereby superseded by the provisions of this chapter and shall not apply to the village of Inverness police department. (Ord.
2008-861, 2-12-2008)
10-1-4: CHIEF OF POLICE:
A. The chief of police shall be appointed by the president, with the advice and consent of the board of trustees. The village board of trustees may
enter into an employment contract with the chief of police, provided that any such contract shall acknowledge the "at will" nature of the chief's
employment, as hereinafter provided. The chief of police shall be responsible for the performance by the police department of its functions. All
police officers and persons who are members of the police department shall serve subject to the orders of the chief of police.
B. The chief of police shall perform both patrol and departmental administrative duties.
C. The chief of police shall, under the supervision of the village president or his designee, organize the department in such manner as he may deem
necessary to efficiently and properly conduct the duties and responsibilities prescribed by law. He shall prescribe and enforce such
administrative rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of the ordinances of the village and any other law, the
enforcement and administration of which are vested in the department. The chief of police, in consultation with the village administrator, is
hereby authorized to establish and execute personnel rules and regulations within the department so as to effectively administer his
responsibilities.
D. The chief of police may be dismissed from the Inverness police department upon the recommendation of the village president, stating the
reasons for dismissal, and the concurrence of a majority of the corporate authorities then holding office, including the president.
E. The chief of police shall be responsible to the village president for the discharge of the duties and responsibilities herein conferred and shall
perform such other duties as may be directed by the president. (Ord. 2008-861, 2-12-2008)
10-1-5: INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENTS:
The village may enter into intergovernmental agreements with other units of local government for the provision of or receipt of specific police
department related services by the village. (Ord. 2008-861, 2-12-2008)
10-1-6: AT WILL EMPLOYMENT:
The chief of police and all other sworn full time and part time police officers of the village police department shall be "at will" employees and shall be
subject to dismissal at any time, with or without cause. No property rights shall attach to their positions nor shall the procedures set forth in this
chapter for the review of disciplinary decisions be construed to create any such property rights relative to continued employment. (Ord. 2012-922, 3-
13-2012)
10-1-7: FULL TIME POLICE OFFICER HIRING STANDARDS:
A. The chief of police, in consultation with the village administrator and subject to the president's prior review and approval, shall develop full time
police officer hiring standards, minimum qualifications and other appropriate employment criteria ("hiring criteria"). The hiring criteria shall be
designed to assure that the village police department's full time police officers are exceptionally well qualified to perform their duties and
responsibilities in a thoroughly professional and efficient manner. All full time village police officers shall be required to pass any testing or other
prerequisites established in the hiring criteria. Any person employed as a full time police officer must meet the following minimum standards:
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 338/366
1. Be of good moral character, of temperate habits, of sound health, and physically and mentally able to perform assigned duties.
2. Be at least twenty one (21) years of age.
3. Pass a medical examination.
4. Possess a high school diploma or GED certificate.
5. Possess a valid state of Illinois driver's license.
6. Possess no prior felony convictions.
7. Any individual who has served in the U.S. military must have been honorably discharged.
B. Every full time police officer must be certified by the Illinois law enforcement training standards board.
C. In accordance with the hiring criteria, the chief of police, in consultation with the village administrator and subject to the president's prior review
and approval, shall develop procedures concerning full time police officers for the initial evaluation of candidates for the positions of watch
commander and/or sergeant and patrol officer. Based on the results of the evaluations, the chief of police shall recommend one or more
candidates to the village president for employment as full time police officers. The village president may conduct further inquiry, as the president
may deem necessary or appropriate, into the candidates' qualifications. The president shall then determine whether one or more of the
recommended candidates shall be employed by the village.
D. No applicant for a position with the police department of the village shall be excluded by reason of unlawful discrimination, including race, creed,
color, religion, sex, or marital status. The police department shall be an equal opportunity employer and, as such, shall comply with applicable
state and federal statutes and regulations pertaining to employment practices. (Ord. 2013-935, 4-10-2013)
10-1-8: DISCIPLINE OF FULL TIME POLICE OFFICERS:
A. The chief of police shall be responsible for the discipline of full time police officers. The uniform peace officer's disciplinary act2 shall be
applicable to investigations of alleged police officer misconduct.
B. The chief of police may suspend a full time police officer for up to thirty (30) days, may demote a full time police officer to a lower classification, or
may discharge a full time police officer for disciplinary reasons. Discipline may be imposed for violation of departmental directives and orders or
for violation of any term or provision of the village personnel policy manual. Unless the full time police officer files an appeal of the discipline
imposed by the chief of police with the village president within five (5) calendar days of the date of the decision, the decision of the chief of police
shall be final.
C. The full time police officer may appeal the disciplinary decision by requesting a hearing before the village president. A timely notice of appeal
shall be filed with the village clerk by the full time police officer and shall be forwarded to the president. The president shall thereupon promptly
schedule a hearing at which the full time police officer may present evidence, witnesses and defenses as to the grounds for disciplinary action
set forth in the written decision of the chief of police. The hearing shall be conducted either by the president or by a hearing officer appointed by
the president. If a hearing officer conducts the hearing, the hearing officer shall prepare a recommended order. The village president may further
employ an attorney to represent and advise the president during the hearing process. Based upon the written disciplinary decision and other
matters presented at the hearing, including the hearing officer's recommended order, if any, the president shall enter a written, final decision
which affirms, rejects or modifies, as appropriate, the disciplinary decision of the chief of police. (Ord. 2013-935, 4-10-2013)
10-1-9: DUTIES OF FULL TIME POLICE OFFICERS:
A. Enforcement Of Law: It shall be the duty of the chief of police and full time police officers of the department to enforce all of the ordinances of the
village and state and federal statutes applicable therein, to preserve order, to prevent violation of the law and to arrest violators thereof.
B. Testimony As Witness: Every full time police officer and member of the department shall appear as a witness whenever necessary for the
prosecution of any violation of a village ordinance or state or federal statute. All witness fees received by an officer for testimony shall be
delivered to the village treasurer.
C. Service Of Process: The chief of police and full time police officers of the department shall serve process upon proper application or request
therefor.
D. Chain Of Command: The chief of police shall provide for a chain of command, including a list of those full time police officers who shall be
responsible to carry out the duties of the chief of police in his/her absence and to carry out such other duties as may be assigned by the chief of
police, village president or the village administrator. (Ord. 2013-935, 4-10-2013)
10-1-10: SALARIES AND WAGES:
The board of trustees shall, not less than annually, establish the salaries and wages for each police officer and other members of the village police
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 339/366
department by resolution. The total salaries and wages shall not exceed the appropriation for such expenses authorized by the village's annual
appropriation ordinance. In setting salaries and wages, the resolution may take into account the performance of the individual police officer or other
member of the police department during the prior fiscal year. (Ord. 2008-861, 2-12-2008)
10-1-11: OTHER EMPLOYMENT BENEFITS:
Other employment benefits for police officers and other members of the police department shall be provided in accordance with the pertinent
provisions of the village personnel policy manual. (Ord. 2008-861, 2-12-2008)
10-1-12: PART TIME POLICE:
A. Employment: The village of Inverness may employ part time police officers from time to time as it deems necessary. The chief of police, in
consultation with the village administrator, and subject to the president's prior review and approval, may employ such part time police officers.
B. Duties: A part time police officer shall have all the responsibilities of a full time police officer and such specific duties as delineated in the general
orders of the Inverness police department, but the number of hours a part time officer may work within a calendar year is restricted. Part time
police officers shall not be assigned to supervise or direct full time police officers. Part time police officers shall be trained in accordance with the
Illinois police training act3 and the rules and requirements of the ILETSB.
C. Hiring Standards: Any person employed as a part time police officer must meet the following standards:
1. Be of good moral character, of temperate habits, of sound health, and physically and mentally be able to perform assigned duties.
2. Be at least twenty one (21) years of age.
3. Pass a medical examination.
4. Possess a high school diploma or GED certificate.
5. Possess a valid state of Illinois driver's license.
6. Possess no prior felony convictions.
7. Any individual who has served in the U.S. military must have been honorably discharged.
D. Discipline: Part time officers shall be under the disciplinary jurisdiction of the chief of police. Part time police officers serve at the discretion of the
village authorities, shall not have any property rights in said employment, and may be removed by the village at any time. Part time police
officers shall comply with all applicable rules and general orders issued by the Inverness police department. (Ord. 2013-935, 4-10-2013)
Chapter 2
GENERAL OFFENSES
10-2-1: MISSILES; HARMFUL ITEMS ON STREETS:
A. It shall be unlawful to cast, throw or propel any missile on any street, road, highway or other public place.
B. It shall be unlawful to throw or deposit any glass, nails, tacks or other similar articles on any street, road, highway or other public place in the
village. (Ord. 86-287, 8-12-1986)
10-2-2: HUNTING AND TRAPPING:
A. Hunting Prohibited: No person shall hunt or engage in killing any animal in the village, except as provided in subsection D of this section.
B. No Unlawful Trapping: Except as provided in subsection D of this section, no person shall set traps of any kind or attempt to trap any animals,
wild or domestic, within the boundaries of the village.
C. Birds: No person shall kill, wound, or harass, or attempt to kill, wound, or harass, by the use of firearms, slingshot, bow and arrow, pelting with
stones or otherwise, any birds, or club, shoot an arrow, or throw a stone or other missile, at any birds within the village.
D. Exceptions: The provisions of this section shall not apply to any peace officer engaged in the discharge of their official duties, nor to any persons
lawfully employed by the police department serving this village to eliminate hazards to the public health and welfare. In addition, the provisions of
this section shall not apply to any persons authorized by the Illinois department of natural resources to eliminate nuisance wildlife, but such
persons shall be and remain subject to the provisions of section 10-3-6 of this title. The provisions of this section shall also not apply to the
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 340/366
trapping within the village of those species of rodents not listed as a "protected species" in section 2.2 of the Illinois wildlife code1, as that statute
may be amended from time to time.
E. Traps And Weapons Confiscated By Village: In addition to all other penalties, traps and weapons used in violation of this chapter shall be
confiscated by and forfeited to the village. (Ord. 04-775, 4-13-2004)
10-2-3: ILLEGAL ADVERTISING:
It shall be unlawful to advertise any unlawful business or article in the village. (Ord. 86-287, 8-12-1986)
10-2-4: MULTIPLE-FAMILY OCCUPANCY OF SINGLE-FAMILY BUILDINGS:
It shall be unlawful to use for multiple-family occupancy, any building constructed as a single-family building, unless such building is in full
compliance with all provisions of this code and all other applicable ordinances of the village relating to the construction of new multiple-family
buildings before being used for occupancy by more than one family. (Ord. 86-287, 8-12-1986)
10-2-5: BARBED WIRE, ELECTRIC FENCES:
It shall be unlawful to maintain or construct any fence composed in whole or part of barbed wire, or with any similar materials, designed or
reasonably likely to cause injury to person, or any wire charged with electrical current, anywhere within the village except to protect industrial
property, in which case barbed wire must be at least six feet (6') above the sidewalk and extend inward of property and except on a railroad right of
way. (Ord. 86-287, 8-12-1986)
10-2-6: CURFEW FOR CHILDREN:
(Rep. by Ord. 95-553, 12-12-1995)
10-2-7: POSSESSION AND USE OF CANNABIS:
A. As used in this section, unless the context otherwise requires:
CANNABIS: Includes marijuana, hashish and other substances which are identified as including any parts of the plant Cannabis sativa, whether
growing or not, the seed thereof, the resin extracted from any part of such plant; and any compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or
preparation of such plant, its seeds, or resin, including tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and all other cannabinol derivatives, including its naturally
occurring or synthetically produced ingredients, whether produced directly or indirectly by extraction, or independently by means of chemical
synthesis or by a combination of extraction and chemical synthesis; but shall not include the mature stalks of such plant, fiber produced from
such stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of such plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of such
mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil or cake, or the sterilized seed of such plant which is incapable of germination.
CASUAL DELIVERY: The delivery of not more than ten (10) grams of any substance containing cannabis without consideration.
PERSON: Any individual, corporation, government or governmental subdivision or agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership or
association, or any other entity.
B. This section shall only apply to the possession, use and/or casual delivery of such substance not exceeding ten (10) grams.
C. It is unlawful for any person to knowingly use or possess cannabis or to make or attempt to make a casual delivery of cannabis.
D. It is unlawful for any person to knowingly suffer, permit, or allow the violation of the provisions of this section in any motor vehicle, conveyance,
vessel, house, apartment, room, shed, yard, premises, or other area of which such person is the owner, lessee, permittee, bailee, legal
possessor or occupier thereof.
E. It is unlawful for any parent or guardian to permit his or her residence to be used by an invitee of the parent's child or the guardian's ward in a
manner that constitutes a violation of this section. A parent or guardian is deemed to have permitted his or her residence to be used in violation
of this section if he or she knowingly authorizes, enables, or permits such use to occur by failing to control access to the residence.
F. Whenever a person is present within any motor vehicle, conveyance, vessel, house, apartment, room, shed, yard, premises, or other area of
which such person is the owner, lessee, permittee, bailee, legal possessor or occupier at the time that a violation of the provisions of this section
occurs therein, said presence shall be prima facie evidence that such person had knowledge of such violation.
G. It is unlawful for any person to remain in any motor vehicle, conveyance, vessel, house, apartment, room, shed, yard, premises, or other area
when said person knows, or reasonably should know, that one or more other persons located in such motor vehicle, conveyance, vessel, house,
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 341/366
apartment, room, shed, yard, premises, or other area are in possession of any cannabis or controlled substance prohibited by Illinois statute.
(Ord. 95-553, 12-12-1995)
10-2-8: SALE, USE OR EXPLOSION OF FIREWORKS PROHIBITED; PUBLIC DISPLAYS, PERMIT REQUIRED:
A. The term "fireworks" shall mean and include any explosive composition, or any substance or combination of substances, or article prepared for
the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect of a temporary exhibitional nature by explosion, combustion, deflagration or detonation, and
shall include blank cartridges, toy cannons, in which explosives are used, the type of balloons which require fire underneath to propel the same,
firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, Roman candles, bombs, or other fireworks of like construction and any fireworks containing any explosive
compound, or any tablets or other device containing any explosive substance, or containing combustible substances producing visual effects;
provided, however, that the term "fireworks" shall not include snake or glowworm pellets; smoke devices; trick noisemakers known as "party
poppers", "booby traps", "snappers", "trick matches", "cigarette loads" and "auto burglar alarms"; sparklers; toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns, or
other devices in which paper or plastic caps containing twenty five hundredths (0.25) grains or less of explosive compound are used, providing
they are so constructed that the hand cannot come in contact with the cap when in place for the explosion; and toy pistol paper or plastic caps
which contain less than twenty hundredths (0.20) grains of explosive mixture; the same and use of which shall be permitted at all times.
B. Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly possess, offer for sale, expose for sale, sell at retail, or use or
explode any fireworks, provided that the president and board of trustees shall have power to adopt reasonable rules and regulations for the
granting of permits for supervised public displays of fireworks. Every such display shall be handled by a competent individual approved by the
president and board of trustees and shall be of such a character and so located, discharged or fired, as not to be hazardous to property or
endanger any person or persons. The president and board of trustees shall require a certificate of insurance in form and with coverage approved
by the president and board of trustees or their designate. Application for permits shall be made in writing at least fifteen (15) days in advance of
the date of the display and action shall be taken on such application within forty eight (48) hours after such application is made. After such
privilege shall have been granted, sales, possession, use and distribution of fireworks for such display shall be lawful for that purpose only. No
permit hereunder shall be transferable.
C. Such permit shall be issued only after inspection of the display site by the applicable fire protection district to determine that such display shall
not be hazardous to property or endanger any person or persons. Forms for such application and permit may be obtained from the office of the
state fire marshal. One copy of such permit shall be on file with the village, the applicable fire protection district, and one copy forwarded to the
office of the state fire marshal.
D. The use of what are technically known as fireworks showers or any mixture containing potassium chlorate, and sulphur in theaters or public halls
is hereby prohibited.
E. Nothing in these regulations shall be construed as prohibiting the manufacture, storage or use of signals or fuses necessary for the safe
operation of railroads, trucks, aircraft, or other instrumentalities of transportation. (Ord. 86-287, 8-12-1986)
Chapter 3
OFFENSES AGAINST THE PEACE
10-3-1: ASSAULT, BATTERY, FIGHTING:
A. A person commits an assault when, without lawful authority, he engages in conduct which places another in reasonable apprehension of
receiving a battery.
B. A person commits battery if he intentionally or knowingly without legal justification and by any means:
1. Causes bodily harm to an individual; or
2. Makes physical contact of an insulting or provoking nature with an individual.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to fight in any public place in the village or to commit any assault or battery. (1983 Code)
10-3-2: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
A person commits disorderly conduct when he knowingly:
A. Does any act in such unreasonable manner as to alarm or disturb another and provoke, make or aid in making a breach of peace; or
B. Does or makes any unreasonable or offensive act, utterance, gesture or display which under the circumstances, creates a clear and present
danger of a breach of peace or imminent threat of violence; or
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 342/366
C. Refuses or fails to cease and desist any peaceful conduct or activity likely to produce a breach of peace where there is an imminent threat of
violence, and where the police have made all reasonable efforts to protect the otherwise peaceful conduct and activity and have requested that
said conduct and activity be stopped and explained the request if there be time; or (1983 Code)
D. Fails to obey a lawful order of dispersal by a person known by him to be a peace officer under circumstances where three (3) or more persons
are committing acts of disorderly conduct in the immediate vicinity, which acts are likely to cause substantial harm. Substantial harm is a
situation in which imminent property damage or violence is readily apparent; or (Ord. 2013-934, 3-12-2013)
E. Assembles with three (3) or more persons for the purpose of using force or violence to disturb the public peace; or
F. Appears in any public place manifestly under the influence of narcotics or other drugs, not therapeutically administered, to the degree that he may
endanger himself or other persons or property, or annoys persons in his vicinity; or
G. Carries in a threatening or menacing manner, without authority of law, any pistol, revolver, dagger, razor, dangerous knife, stiletto, knuckles,
slingshot, an object containing noxious or deleterious liquid, gas or substance or other dangerous weapon or conceals said weapon on or about
the person or any vehicle; or
H. Enters upon the property of another and for a lewd or unlawful purpose deliberately looks into a dwelling on the property through any window or
other opening in it; or
I. Is on any municipal, school district, park district, county or state property without permission or in violation of the rules and regulations of such
municipality, school district, park district, county or state, or is loitering on any publicly dedicated street adjacent to such municipal, school
district, park district, county or state property; or (1983 Code)
J. Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner to any peace officer, public officer or public employee a report to the effect that an offense
will be committed, is being committed, or has been committed, knowing at the time of the transmission that there is no reasonable ground for
believing that the offense will be committed, is being committed, or has been committed; or
K. Transmits or causes to be transmitted a false report to any public safety agency without the reasonable grounds necessary to believe that
transmitting the report is necessary for the safety and welfare of the public; or
L. Calls the number "911" for the purpose of making or transmitting a false alarm or complaint and reporting information when, at the time the call or
transmission is made, the person knows there is no reasonable ground for making the call or transmission and further knows that the call or
transmission could result in the emergency response of any public safety agency; or
M. Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner to the police department or fire department of any municipality or fire protection district, or
any privately owned and operated ambulance service, a false request for an ambulance, emergency medical technician-ambulance or
emergency medical technician-paramedic knowing at the time there is no reasonable ground for believing that the assistance is required. (Ord.
2013-934, 3-12-2013)
10-3-3: MENDICANTS AND VAGRANTS:
A. It shall be unlawful for any mendicant or vagrant to frequent any depot, store, theater, street, alley, sidewalk, park or other public place or any
place frequented by the public in the village.
B. Any person found sleeping in such place, and who has no established domicile or residence, shall be considered to be a vagrant. (1983 Code)
10-3-4: DISTURBING ASSEMBLAGES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb any lawful assemblage or gathering in the village. (1983 Code)
10-3-5: UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLAGES:
It shall be unlawful to collect, gather or be a member of any disorderly crowd, or any crowd gathered together for any unlawful purpose. (1983 Code)
10-3-6: DISCHARGING FIREARMS, OTHER WEAPONS:
A. Discharge Prohibited: No person shall discharge within the village, except as provided in subsection B of this section, any gun, pistol, revolver,
rifle, shotgun, or other firearm of any description, arrows from a bow or crossbow, or any air gun, air rifle, BB gun, gas operated gun or spring
operated gun, or any instrument, toy, or weapon commonly known as a peashooter, slingshot or beany, or fire, explode or set off fireworks or any
combustible or explosive material within the limits of the village, except as may be specifically hereinafter provided, whether that instrument is
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 343/366
called by any name set forth above or by any other name. The term "firearm" shall have the meaning ascribed to it in section 1.1 of the firearm
owner's identification card act, 430 Illinois Compiled Statutes 65/1.1, as it may be amended from time to time. The term "air gun" shall have the
meaning ascribed to the term "air rifle" in section 1 of the air rifle act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 535/0.01 et seq., as may be amended from
time to time.
B. Exceptions To Prohibition: Excepted from the prohibition in subsection A of this section shall be weapons used as follows:
1. In necessary defense of persons or in necessary defense of domestic pets;
2. Within a residence, in necessary defense of one's dwelling;
3. By a law enforcement officer in necessary performance of his duty;
4. By a member of a recognized military unit, in the necessary performance of his duty, or by members of a nationally recognized veterans'
organization for memorial services;
5. Any toy pistols capable of exploding only paper caps containing thirty five (35) grains or less explosive composition, including starter pistols
used in sporting or athletic events;
6. The discharge of firearms in an indoor shooting range, which is adequate to prevent the escape of a bullet or cartridge from the premises.
C. Unlawful Possession Of Weapons: It is unlawful and shall constitute disorderly conduct for any person to be in possession of, or for any parent or
guardian to permit any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to be in possession of, any of the following items:
1. Bowie, switchblade, ballistic knives, throwing stars, or other edged weapons as defined by 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/24-1(1);
2. Metallic knuckles or numchucks;
3. Slingshots;
4. Arrows designed for firing from a bow or crossbow device, except when such person is engaged in the otherwise legal transportation of such
devices;
5. Stun gun or taser;
6. Any device or attachment of any kind designed, used for or intended for use in silencing the report of a firearm;
7. Machine gun as defined by 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/24-11;
8. Any bomb, bombshell, grenade, bottle or other ordnance or container containing an explosive substance of over one-quarter (0.25) ounce for
like purposes, such as, but not limited to, black powder bombs, Molotov cocktails, pipe bombs or artillery projectiles;
9. Fireworks, as defined by 425 Illinois Compiled Statutes 30/2.
D. Unlawful Possession Of Firearms And Ammunition By Minors: It is unlawful and shall constitute disorderly conduct for any person under the age
of eighteen (18) years to be in possession of firearms, or the ammunition thereof, as defined by 430 Illinois Compiled Statutes 65/1.1, except
when such person is supervised by a responsible adult.
E. Violation And Penalty: Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) and/or sentenced to incarceration in a penal institution other than the penitentiary not to exceed six (6)
months. (Ord. 04-775, 4-13-2004)
10-3-7: TRANSMISSION OF OBSCENE MESSAGES PROHIBITED:
No person shall send a message or use language or terms which are obscene, lewd or immoral with the intent to offend by means of or while using
a telephone or telegraph facilities, equipment or wires of any person engaged in the transmission of news or messages to or from a location within
this village. The use of language or terms which are obscene, lewd or immoral is prima facie evidence of the intent to offend. (1983 Code)
10-3-8: HARASSMENT BY TELEPHONE:
Harassment by telephone is use of telephone communication for any of the following purposes:
A. Making any comment, request, suggestion or proposal which is obscene, lewd, lascivious, filthy or indecent with an intent to offend; or
B. Making a telephone call, whether or not conversation ensues, with intent to abuse, threaten or harass any person at the called number; or
C. Making or causing the telephone of another repeatedly to ring, with intent to harass any person at the called number; or
D. Making repeated telephone calls, during which conversation ensues, solely to harass any person at the called number; or
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 344/366
E. Knowingly permitting any telephone under one's control to be used for any of the purposes mentioned herein. (1983 Code)
Chapter 4
OFFENSES AGAINST AUTHORITY
10-4-1: FALSE ALARMS, CALLS OR REPORTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly:
A. Transmit in any manner to the fire department of any city, town, village or fire protection district a false alarm of fire knowing at the time of such
transmission that there is no reasonable ground for believing that such fire exists; or
B. Transmit in any manner to another a false alarm to the effect that a bomb or other explosive of any nature is concealed in such place that its
explosion would endanger human life, knowing at the time of such transmission that there is no reasonable ground for believing that such bomb
or explosive is concealed in such place; or
C. Transmit in any manner to any peace officer, police officer or public employee a report to the effect that an offense has been committed, knowing
at the time of such transmission that there is no reasonable ground for believing that such an offense has been committed. (1983 Code)
10-4-2: RESISTING OR OBSTRUCTING OFFICER, EMPLOYEES:
No person shall knowingly resist or obstruct the performance by one known to the person to be an officer or employee of the Village of any
authorized act within his official capacity. (1983 Code)
10-4-3: OBSTRUCTING SERVICE OF PROCESS:
No person shall knowingly resist or obstruct the authorized service or execution of any civil or criminal process or order of any court.
10-4-4: IMPERSONATING OFFICERS, EMPLOYEES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to impersonate without lawful authority any Village officer or employee.
10-4-5: REFUSING TO AID AN OFFICER:
No person shall upon command refuse or knowingly fail to aid a person known by him to be a peace officer of the Village in:
A. Apprehending a person whom the officer is authorized to apprehend; or
B. Preventing the commission by another of any offense.
10-4-6: USE OF FORCE IN RESISTING ARREST:
It shall be unlawful for any person to use force to resist an arrest which he knows is being made either by a peace officer or by a private person
summoned and directed by a peace officer to make the arrest, even if he believes that the arrest is unlawful and the arrest in fact is unlawful.
Chapter 5
OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
10-5-1: THEFT OF PROPERTY NOT EXCEEDING ONE HUNDRED FIFTY DOLLARS IN VALUE:
A person commits theft when, with respect to the property of another not exceeding one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) in value (other than a
firearm) he knowingly:
A. Obtains or exerts unauthorized control over such property of another; or
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 345/366
B. Obtains by deception control over such property of another; or
C. Obtains by threat control over such property of another; or
D. Obtains control over such stolen property knowing the property to have been stolen by another or under such circumstances as would
reasonably induce him to believe that such property was stolen, and;
1. Intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or benefit of such property; or
2. Knowingly uses, conceals or abandons such property in such manner as to deprive the owner permanently of such use or benefit; or
3. Uses, conceals, or abandons such property knowing such use, concealment or abandonment probably will deprive the owner permanently of
such use or benefit.
10-5-2: THEFT OF LOST OR MISLAID PROPERTY NOT EXCEEDING ONE HUNDRED FIFTY DOLLARS IN VALUE:
A person commits theft who obtains control over lost or mislaid property not exceeding one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) in value when he:
A. Knows or learns the identity of the owner or knows, or is aware of, or learns of a reasonable method of identifying the owner, and
B. Fails to take reasonable measures to restore such property to the owner, and
C. Intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or benefit of such property.
10-5-3: THEFT OF LABOR AS SERVICES OR USE OF PROPERTY NOT EXCEEDING ONE HUNDRED FIFTY DOLLARS
IN VALUE:
A person commits theft when he obtains the temporary use of property, labor or services of another where such property, labor or services does not
exceed one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) in value and where such property, labor or services which are available only for hire, by means of threat
or deception or knowing that such use is without the consent of the person providing the property, labor or services.
10-5-4: DECEPTIVE PRACTICES:
A person commits the offense of deceptive practices when with intent to obtain control over property or to pay for property, labor or services of
another, he issues or delivers a check or other order upon a real or fictitious depository for the payment of money, knowing that it will not be paid by
the depository. Failure to have sufficient funds or credit with the depository when the check or other order is issued or delivered is prima facie
evidence that the offender knows that it will not be paid by the depository.
10-5-5: DEFACING ADVERTISING:
It shall be unlawful to injure or deface any lawful advertisement or notice.
10-5-6: POSTING BILLS WITHOUT CONSENT:
It shall be unlawful to post any bill or advertisement on any public property without the authority of the President and Board of Trustees and it shall
be unlawful to post any bill or advertisement on private property without the written consent of the owner of the property thereof.
10-5-7: CRIMINAL DAMAGE TO PROPERTY:
A person commits the offense of criminal damage to property not exceeding one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) in value, when he, with respect to
such property:
A. Knowingly damages any such property of another without his consent; or
B. Recklessly by means of fire or explosive damages such property of another; or
C. Knowingly starts a fire on the land of another without his consent; or
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 346/366
D. Knowingly injures a domestic animal of another without his consent; or
E. Knowingly deposits on the land or in the building of another, without his consent, any stink bomb or any offensive smelling compound and thereby
intends to interfere with the use by another of the land or building;
F. Knowingly damages the property of another without his consent by defacing, deforming or otherwise damaging the property by the use of paint or
any other similar substance and the damage to the property does not exceed one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) in value.
10-5-8: CRIMINAL TRESPASS TO VEHICLES:
A person commits the offense of criminal trespass to a vehicle when he knowingly and without authority enters any vehicle, aircraft or watercraft or
any part thereof of another without his consent.
10-5-9: CRIMINAL TRESPASS TO LAND:
A. A person commits the offense of criminal trespass to land when he enters upon the land or any part thereof of another, after receiving,
immediately prior to such entry, notice from the owner or occupant that such entry is forbidden, or remains upon the land of another after
receiving notice from the owner or occupant to depart.
B. A person has received notice from the owner or occupant within the meaning of subsection A if he has been notified personally, either orally or in
writing, or if a printed or written notice forbidding such entry has been conspicuously posted or exhibited at the main entrance to such land or the
forbidden part thereof.
C. This Section does not apply to any person, whether a migrant worker or otherwise, living on the land with permission of the owner or of his agent
having apparent authority to hire workers on such land and assign them living quarters or a place of accommodations for living thereon, nor to
anyone living on such land at the request of, or by occupancy, leasing or other agreement or arrangement with the owner or his agent, nor to
anyone invited by such migrant worker or other person so living on such land to visit him at the place he is so living upon the land.
10-5-10: CRIMINAL DAMAGE TO PUBLIC PROPERTY:
A person commits the offense of criminal damage to public property in the following instances:
A. He knowingly damages any property supported in whole or in part with public funds or belonging to any governmental body;
B. He knowingly, by means of fire or explosive damages property supported in whole or in part with public funds or belonging to any governmental
body;
C. He knowingly starts a fire on property supported in whole or in part with public funds or belonging to any governmental body;
D. He knowingly deposits on land or in a building supported in whole or in part with public funds or belonging to any governmental body without the
consent of such governmental body any stink bomb or any offensive smelling compound and thereby intends to interfere with the use by another
of the land or building.
10-5-11: CRIMINAL TRESPASS TO PUBLIC PROPERTY:
A. Whoever enters upon land supported in whole or in part with public funds or belonging to any governmental body or any building on such land,
after receiving immediately prior to such entry, notice that such entry is forbidden, or remains upon such land or in such building after receiving
notice.
B. A person has received notice within the meaning of subsection A if he has been notified personally, either orally or in writing or if a printed or
written notice forbidding entry to him or a group of which he is a part, has been conspicuously posted or exhibited at the main entrance to such
land or the forbidden part thereof.
Chapter 6
OFFENSES AGAINST MORALS
10-6-1: INDECENT CONDUCT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any indecent or immoral act, or to appear in any public place or within public view in clothes properly
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 347/366
belonging to the opposite sex, or not properly or decently garbed.
10-6-2: OBSCENITY:
A. Elements of the Offense: A person commits obscenity when, with knowledge of the nature or content thereof, or recklessly failing to exercise
reasonable inspection which would have disclosed the nature or content thereof, he or she:
1. Sells, delivers or provides, or offers or agrees to sell, deliver or provide any obscene writing, picture, record or other representation or
embodiment of the obscene; or
2. Presents or directs an obscene play, dance or other performance or participates directly in that portion thereof which makes it obscene; or
3. Publishes, exhibits or otherwise makes available anything obscene; or
4. Performs an obscene act or otherwise presents an obscene exhibition of his or her body for gain; or
5. Creates, buys, procures or possesses obscene matter or material with intent to disseminate it in violation of this Section, or of the penal laws
or regulations of any other jurisdiction; or
6. Advertises or otherwise promotes the sale of material represented or held out by him to be obscene, whether or not it is obscene.
B. Obscene Defined: A thing is obscene if, considered as a whole, its predominant appeal is to prurient interest, that is, a shameful or morbid
interest in nudity, sex or excretion, and if it goes substantially beyond customary limits of candor in description or representation of such matters.
A thing is obscene even though the obscenity is latent, as in the case of undeveloped photographs.
C. Interpretation of Evidence: Obscenity shall be judged with reference to ordinary adults, except that it shall be judged with reference to children or
other specially susceptible audiences if it appears from the character of the material or the circumstances of its dissemination to be specially
designed for or directed to such an audience.
Where circumstances of production, presentation, sale, dissemination, distribution, or publicity indicate that material is being commercially
exploited for the sake of its prurient appeal, such evidence is probative with respect to the nature of the matter and can justify the conclusion that
the matter is utterly without redeeming social importance.
In any prosecution for an offense under this Section, evidence shall be admissible to show:
1. The character of the audience for which the material was designed or to which it was directed;
2. What the predominant appeal of the material would be for ordinary adults or a special audience, and what effect, if any, it would probably have
on the behavior of such people;
3. The artistic, literary, scientific, educational or other merits of the material, or absence thereof;
4. The degree, if any, of public acceptance of the material in the community;
5. Appeal to prurient interest, or absence thereof, in advertising or other promotion of the material;
6. Purpose of the author, creator, publisher or disseminator.
D. Prima Facie Evidence: The creation, purchase, procurement or possession of a mold, engraved plate or other embodiment of obscenity specially
adapted for reproducing multiple copies, or the possession of more than three (3) copies of obscene material shall be prima facie evidence of an
intent to disseminate.
E. Affirmative Defenses: It shall be an affirmative defense to obscenity that the dissemination:
1. Was not for gain and was made to personal associates other than children under eighteen (18) years of age;
2. Was to institutions or individuals having scientific or other special justification for possession of such material.
Chapter 7
GAMBLING
10-7-1: PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful to gamble or attend any gambling resort or to make any bet, lottery or gambling hazard, or to buy or sell any chances or tickets in
any gambling game, arrangement or device.
For the purpose of this Chapter, "gambling" shall be defined as in sections 28 and 28-1, as amended, of the Illinois Criminal Code.
The following activities shall not be considered as gambling:
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 348/366
A. Agreements to compensate for loss caused by the happening of chance including without limitation contracts of indemnity or guaranty and life or
health or accident insurance;
B. Offers of prizes, award or compensation to the actual contestants in any bona fide contest for the determination of skill, speed, strength or
endurance or to the owners of animals or vehicles entered in such contest;
C. Parimutuel betting as authorized by law of this State;
D. Manufacture of gambling devices, including the acquisition of essential parts therefor and the assembly thereof, for transportation in interstate or
foreign commerce to any place outside this State when such transportation is not prohibited by any applicable Federal law;
E. The game commonly known as "bingo", when conducted in accordance with "An act making lawful the conducting of bingo by certain nonprofit
organizations, requiring licensing and prescribing regulations therefor";
F. Lotteries when conducted by the State of Illinois in accordance with the "Illinois Lottery Law";
G. Possession of an antique slot machine that is neither used nor intended to be used in the operation or promotion of any lawful gambling activity
or enterprise;
H. Raffles when conducted by any bona fide religious, charitable, public service, fraternal, educational, labor or veteran's organization.
10-7-2: DEVICES:
It shall be unlawful to possess any gambling device or paraphernalia with the intent to use the same for an unlawful purpose; and any such device
or paraphernalia kept with such intent may be confiscated by any member of the Police Department.
10-7-3: TABLE GAMES:
It shall be unlawful to maintain for the use of the public or patrons in any place or public resort, including any place where alcoholic liquor is sold,
any store, meeting hall, clubroom, bowling alley, theater, or other place of amusement, or any other place where the public is invited or permitted to
attend:
A. Any mechanical pinball amusement device which is so constructed that the result of its operation depends upon chance, or upon the skill of the
operator, or upon both, or
B. Any mechanical device which in its operation shoots or propels an electric light, ray, or impulse to a target, or
C. Any table bowling, shuffleboard, or other mechanical table game or amusement device involving the propulsion of spheres or other projectiles,
mechanically or by hand, or
D. Any coin operated or coin-in-the-slot table amusement device or game.
10-7-4: MAINTAINING, PATRONIZING GAMBLING HOUSES:
It shall be unlawful to maintain or patronize any establishment maintained for a gambling house or resort anywhere in the Village.
10-7-5: ADVERTISING GAMBLING HOUSE:
It shall be unlawful to advertise any gambling house or resort in any street, alley or other public place within the Village.
10-7-6: RAFFLES, DEFINED:
For the purposes of this Chapter, "raffle" means a form of lottery, as defined in section 28-2(b) of the Illinois Criminal Code, in which:
A. The player pays or agrees to pay something of value for a chance, represented and differentiated by a number or by a combination of numbers or
by some other medium, one or more of which chances is to be designated the winning chance;
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 349/366
B. The winning chance is to be determined through a drawing or by some other method based on an element of chance by an act or set of acts on
the part of persons conducting or connected with the lottery, except that the winning chance shall not be determined by the outcome of a publicly
exhibited sporting contest.
Chapter 8
MINORS
10-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR/BEVERAGES: Any spirits, wine, beer, ale, or other liquid containing more than one-half of one percent (0.5%) of alcohol by
volume, which is fit for beverage purposes.
GUARDIAN: See definition of Legal Guardian.
KNOWINGLY: Having general knowledge of, or reason to know, or a belief or ground for belief which warrants further inquiry or inspection.
LEGAL GUARDIAN: A person appointed guardian, or given custody, of a minor by a circuit court of this state but does not include a person
appointed guardian or given custody of a minor under the juvenile court act.
PARENT: A natural or adoptive parent or a court designated guardian.
RECKLESSLY: Acting in a manner or under circumstances such as evince disregard of, or indifference to, consequences involving danger to the
property, life or safety of others.
UNDERAGE PERSON/MINOR: As defined in each section.
UNEMANCIPATED MINOR: A person under the age of eighteen (18) years still under the care and custody of his or her parents.
UNSUPERVISED: A lack of visual or oral oversight coupled with lack of sufficient proximity to obtain immediate control over the item or minor.
WILFUL: Proceeding from a conscious and voluntary intentional motion of the will. (Ord. 95-553, 12-12-1995)
10-8-2: PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY FOR CODE VIOLATIONS:
A. It is unlawful for any person, including, but not limited to, a parent or legal guardian, to knowingly or wilfully cause, aid or encourage any
unemancipated minor to violate or attempt to violate any provision of this code or to knowingly or wilfully act in such a manner as to directly
cause a minor to violate or attempt to violate any provision of this code.
B. The parent or legal guardian of an unemancipated minor who has custody of such minor shall be liable for any fine, condition, or restitution or
reparation imposed by a court upon the minor for a violation of this code, provided, however, that the liability specified herein shall apply only if:
1) the minor has not paid the fine or made restitution or reparation within the time ordered by the court; and 2) said parent or guardian has been
served with summons or notice to appear in the original cause as provided by law. Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to limit the liability
herein imposed to the parent named as custodial parent in a decree of dissolution of marriage, and the liability specified herein shall attach to a
noncustodial parent if the minor violating this code committed the violation while in the temporary custody of the said parent. (Ord. 95-553, 12-
12-1995)
10-8-3: CURFEW:
A. Age And Hour Restrictions Generally: It is unlawful for any person within the corporate boundaries of the village who is less than seventeen (17)
years of age to be present at or upon any public assembly, building, place, street, or highway at the following times unless said person is: 1)
accompanied by the child's parent or guardian; 2) accompanied by a person at least eighteen (18) years of age with the written approval by the
child's parent or guardian; 3) participating in, going to, or returning by the most direct route from: a) lawful employment, occupation which the
laws of the state authorize a person less than seventeen (17) years of age to perform, b) an activity sanctioned by his or her school, c) a
religious event, d) an emergency involving the protection of a person or property from an imminent threat of serious bodily injury or substantial
damage, e) an activity involving the exercise of the child's rights protected under the first amendment to the United States constitution or the
constitution of the state of Illinois, or both, such as freedom of speech and the right of assembly, or f) an activity conducted by a nonprofit or
governmental entity that provides recreation, education, training, or other care under the supervision of one or more adults; or 4) engaged in
interstate or international travel from a location outside Illinois to another location outside Illinois:
1. Between one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M., Saturday;
2. Between one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M., Sunday; and
3. Between eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. Sunday to Thursday, inclusive, and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. the following day.
B. School Hours:
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 350/366
1. Restrictions: It is unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) who is enrolled in any public, private or parochial elementary or
secondary school to be present in or upon any public place, street, building, or assembly, other than school, during any hours when his or her
school is in session during the regular school term, unless he or she is:
a. Traveling to or from school by the most direct route; or
b. Engaged in an activity sanctioned by his or her school; or
c. Engaged in personal business, including, but not limited to, employment, medical care, education and/or religious activities, with prior notice
to school authorities from a parent or legal guardian; or
d. Participating in, going to, or returning by the most direct route from: 1) an activity sanctioned by his or her school, 2) a religious event, 3) an
emergency involving the protection of a person or property from an imminent threat of serious bodily injury or substantial damage, 4) an
activity involving the exercise of the child's rights protected under the first amendment to the United States constitution or the constitution of
the state of Illinois, or both, such as freedom of speech and the right of assembly; or
e. Engaged in interstate or international travel from a location outside Illinois to another location outside Illinois.
2. Penalties:
a. If a person between the age of ten (10) years old and the age of eighteen (18) years violates this subsection 10-8-3B, such offense shall be
punishable by a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first offense and/or community service, and one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a second
or any subsequent offense and/or community service.
b. If a person under the age of ten (10) years old violates this subsection 10-8-3B, the parent, legal guardian, or other person having custody
or control of such person shall be subject to a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first offense and/or community service, and one hundred
dollars ($100.00) for a second or any subsequent offense and/or community service.
3. Detention By Police Officer: A police officer may stop and detain a person whom the officer reasonably suspects to be violating this subsection
for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes for the purpose of verifying the person's identity, age, school enrollment, and authority to be
absent from school. The police officer shall immediately inform the person of the reason for the detention and that he or she will be released
upon verification of authorization to be absent from school. The person shall not be removed from the scene of the investigatory detention
unless he or she refuses to provide the officer with the necessary information.
4. Violation: A person violating this subsection B shall, if practical, be taken to school authorities or a parent or legal guardian, and may be
issued a notice to appear in a court. In addition, or in the alternative to such a course of action, the officer may issue the person in question a
notice to appear in municipal court.
C. Parental Responsibility: It shall be unlawful for a parent, legal guardian, or other person having custody or control of any person subject to this
section to knowingly permit such person to violate this section. (Ord. 07-840, 2-13-2007)
10-8-4: RESERVED:
(Ord. 95-553, 12-12-1995)
10-8-5: RESERVED:
(Ord. 04-775, 4-13-2004)
10-8-6: LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES TO PERSONS OR PROPERTY:
In the absence of evidence to the contrary, the parent or legal guardian of an unemancipated minor residing with such parent or legal guardian shall
be presumed to have failed to exercise proper parental responsibility and said minor shall be deemed to have acted with the knowledge and
permission of the parent or guardian in violation of this section whenever such minor shall:
A. Be adjudicated to be in violation of any ordinance, law or statute prohibiting wilful or malicious acts causing injury to a person or property, or
B. Have incurred nonjudicial sanctions from another governmental agency resulting from an admission of guilt or violation of any ordinance, law or
statute which prohibits wilful or malicious acts causing injury to a person or property. However, said parent or legal guardian shall first receive
from the police department a written notice following said minor's adjudication or nonjudicial sanction, by registered or certified mail, return
receipt requested, or by personal service with a certificate of such service, and the acts of said minor in violation of any ordinance, law or statute
prohibiting wilful or malicious acts causing injury to a person or property which causes such presumption of failure to exercise proper parental
responsibility shall have occurred within one year following receipt of said written notice.
C. Any person violating the provision of this section including any parent who has failed to exercise proper parental responsibility as provided in this
section shall pay the actual damages resulting therefrom, but not exceeding any limit provided by section 5 of "an act to authority recovery of
damages from parents or legal guardians due to the wilful injury to person or property by minor children", in addition to such fines as otherwise
provided by this code. (Ord. 95-553, 12-12-1995)
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 351/366
Chapter 9
REGULATIONS FOR USE OF VILLAGE PROPERTY
10-9-1: VEHICLES:
No person, other than authorized personnel, shall bring or use any motorized vehicle, including but not limited to any automobile, truck, recreational
vehicle, snowmobile, motorcycle, motor scooter, motorized bicycle, go-cart, golf cart or lawn mower, upon any portion of any Village property except
in designated parking areas. This Section shall not apply to public highways, streets and alleys which are regulated by other provisions of this Code.
10-9-2: OFFERING ARTICLES FOR SALE:
No person shall offer or exchange for sale any article or thing, or do any hawking, peddling, or soliciting, or buy or offer to buy an article or thing, or
take up any collection, or solicit to receive contributions of money or anything of value on any Village street or road or any other Village property,
except when authorized to do so by permit from the Village Board of Trustees.
10-9-3: PUBLIC MEETINGS:
No person shall call or hold any public meeting or give any concert or public entertainment of any kind on any Village property without express
consent of the Village Board of Trustees.
10-9-4: RESTRICTED AREAS:
No person shall enter upon any portion of any Village property where persons are prohibited from going by direction of any officer or employee of
the Village as indicated by sign or notice.
10-9-5: SLEEPING ON VILLAGE PROPERTY:
No person shall sleep on any Village property between ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and sunrise, except when authorized to do so by permit from the
Village Board of Trustees or its designate.
10-9-6: TENTS AND TRAILERS:
No person shall use on any Village property any tent, camp trailer, mobile home, the like or any other temporary dwelling, residence or structure
except by permit from the Village Board of Trustees.
10-9-7: FIRES:
No person shall light or make use of any fire on any Village property, except in such portions thereof as may be indicated for such purpose by the
Village by a posting of signs or the installation of appropriate structures.
10-9-8: DUMPING:
No person shall deposit, dump, throw, or place any rubbish, including clippings of trees, shrubs or grass, or junk of any kind, in or upon any part of
any Village property. Paper, garbage, or refuse matter shall not be so deposited except in receptacles provided for that purpose.
10-9-9: ADVERTISEMENTS:
No person shall display any placard or advertisement of any kind on any Village property, or right of way nor shall any person cast, throw or place
any handbill, pamphlet, circular, advertisement, notice of any kind, nor post, stencil, or otherwise affix any notice, or bills, advertisements, or other
papers, upon any structure or thing in or about any Village property, or right of way.
10-9-10: PROTECTION OF BIRDS AND ANIMALS:
No person shall trap, catch, wound, or treat cruelly, or attempt to trap, catch, wound, or kill any bird or animal, or to molest or rob any nest of any
bird or animal on any Village property.
10-9-11: DAMAGE TO VILLAGE PROPERTY:
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 352/366
No person shall cut, break, climb on, or in any way deface any tree, shrub, plant, turf, or any buildings, fences or bridges, lamps, posts, signs or any
other structure on any Village property. (1983 Code)
Chapter 10
DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS
10-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
In construing the provisions of this Chapter, except where otherwise stated or clearly apparent from the context, words used herein shall be given
their common and ordinary meaning except the following definitions shall apply:
DOG: All members of the canine family.
HAS BEEN BITTEN: Has been seized with the teeth or jaws or scratched by the teeth or nails or wounded or pierced, and includes contact of saliva
with any break or abrasion of the skin.
OWNER: Any person having a right of property in a dog or who keeps or harbors a dog or has it in his care or acts as its custodian or who
knowingly permits a dog to remain on or about any premises occupied by him.
STRAY DOGS: Those dogs found in the public way or on private property other than that of the owner or which do not have tags as prescribed by
this Chapter. (Ord. 92-447, 5-12-92)
10-10-2: CRUELTY TO ANIMALS:
No person shall cruelly treat any animal. Any person who inhumanely beats, mistreats, underfeeds or abandons any animal shall be deemed guilty
of a violation of this Section.
10-10-3: ANIMALS DISTURBING THE PEACE:
It shall be unlawful for any owner of a dog or other animal to permit it to disturb the peace by repeated noise.
10-10-4: DANGEROUS ANIMALS AT LARGE; PERMIT FOR WILD ANIMAL EXHIBITIONS:
It shall be unlawful to permit any dangerous animal or any vicious animal of any kind to run at large within the Village. Exhibitions or parades of
animals that are wild by nature in the eyes of the law may be conducted only upon securing a permit from the Chief of Police.
10-10-5: KILLING DANGEROUS ANIMALS:
The members of the Police Department or any other person in the Village, are authorized to kill any dangerous animal of any kind when it is
necessary for the protection of any person or property. (1983 Code)
10-10-6: DOGS RUNNING AT LARGE; LEASH REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to permit any dog to run at large, which is hereby defined as being off the property of the owner or keeper of the dog, unless
such dog is secured on a leash. Any dog running at large shall be impounded as hereafter provided in this Chapter. (Ord. 92-465, 10-13-92)
10-10-7: REGISTRATION, LICENSE REQUIRED, FEE:
For each license year beginning on July 1, 1992, and beginning on each July 1 thereafter, every person owning, keeping or harboring any dog
(except seeing eye dogs) within the Village shall register it with and obtain a license therefor from the Village Administrator, who shall keep a record
for that purpose, and it shall be the further duty of such person to pay to the Village Collector before September 1 of each license year, or upon
acquiring any unlicensed dog thereafter, a tax of five dollars ($5.00) for each dog so owned, kept or harbored by such person. Each such license
thereafter shall be valid for the period (license year) of twelve (12) months from July 1 through the following June 30. (Ord. 92-468, 12-8-92)
10-10-8: DOG TAGS:
A. Tags Required:
1. The Village Administrator shall provide each license period or license year such number of tags as may be necessary, of such size and shape
as the Village Administrator shall deem expedient, having thereon the words "Dog License", the license number and the license year or period
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 353/366
for which the tax is paid. It shall be the duty of the Village Administrator to deliver or forward by mail one tag to each qualified applicant paying
the required tax.
2. The Village Administrator shall keep a record of the name and address of the owner of each dog for which a tag is issued.
B. Tag to be Worn: Every person keeping or harboring any dog so licensed in accordance with this Chapter shall keep and maintain a collar around
its neck with the tag, as hereinbefore described, securely fastened thereto.
C. Lost Tags: In the event that any person to whom a dog license has been issued shall present to the Village Administrator satisfactory evidence
that the tag previously issued for the then current year has been lost and pays to the Village Collector a fee of one dollar ($1.00), the Village
Administrator shall issue a substitute license and tag. (Ord. 92-468, 12-8-92)
10-10-9: IMPOUNDING:
A. It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police or other police officer to capture and impound any stray dog in one or more pounds to be designated by
the Village. Such police officer is authorized to enter upon private property for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this Chapter but shall
not enter into any residence without permission or a warrant.
B. The Chief of Police shall notify the owner of any dog so taken, if the name of the owner is ascertained, and the owner shall be permitted to
redeem the dog within five (5) days, by paying all license and other fees and charges then due upon said dog, including the minimum fines as
provided for under this Chapter, provided however, that such owner may elect not to pay the minimum fine as hereinafter provided, but shall then
be arrested or issued a citation for a violation of this Chapter and upon his or her conviction for such violation shall thereupon pay not less than
the minimum fine as hereinafter set forth.
C. Should no redemption be made of any dog thus impounded, it shall be the duty of the poundkeeper to euthanize such dog so unredeemed at the
end of the fifth day.
10-10-10: PROCEDURE IN CASE OF ANIMAL BITE:
A. Whenever any human being has been bitten by any dog or other animal, the owner of the dog or other animal shall immediately notify the Police
Department and hold the dog or other animal on the owner's premises for observation or shall have it impounded for a period of ten (10) days
commencing from twenty four (24) hours of the biting incident.
B. If any animal is not currently vaccinated against rabies, the animal will be impounded in accordance with State Statutes. The owner will then be
liable for payment of an inoculation fee, plus the cost of the animal's stay at the pound, and, in addition, for such fines as are otherwise provided
by this Code.
C. The owner of an animal currently vaccinated against rabies which has bitten any person in lieu of impoundment, may keep the animal at home
under strict confinement and away from the public, and shall take his animal to a licensed veterinarian to be examined on the first day, fifth day
and tenth day of a ten (10) day observation period. If the animal bites again during the confinement period, it will be impounded for the full ten
(10) day period commencing from the date of the second bite.
10-10-11: PENS:
Dogs may be quartered in enclosed pens or runs on the premises of their owners, provided however, that such runs or pens, whether permanently
affixed to the ground or movable, may not be located, placed, or permitted to remain in the front or side yards of such premises but shall only be
located or placed or permitted to remain in the rear yard thereof and then not less than fifty feet (50') from the rear lot line and not less than twenty
five feet (25') from any side lot line of said lot, and shall not exceed four hundred (400) square feet in ground area; and, if constructed of wire, shall
be chain link fencing and shall be screened from view of neighboring properties by shrubbery to the full height of the enclosure.
10-10-12: RESTRICTIONS ENUMERATED:
A. Number of Dogs Kept: No person shall keep or maintain more than three (3) dogs of more than four (4) months in age on the premises owned by
such person.
B. Breeding: It is unlawful within the corporate limits of the Village to conduct a breeding operation for the purpose of raising dogs for sale. (1983
Code)
10-10-13: NOISY ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful to harbor or keep any animal which disturbs the peace by loud noises at any time of the day or night.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 354/366
10-10-14: LIVESTOCK, POULTRY AT LARGE; TYING ON STREETS:
It shall be unlawful to permit any cattle, horse, swine, sheep, goats or poultry to run at large in the Village. Any such animal running at large in any
public place in the Village shall be impounded in the manner provided for dogs by this Chapter. It shall be further unlawful to picket or tie any such
animal in any of the streets of the Village for the purpose of grazing or feeding.
10-10-15: DISEASED ANIMALS:
A. No domestic animal afflicted with a contagious or infectious disease shall be allowed to run at large, or be exposed in any public place whereby
the health of man or beast may be affected; nor shall such diseased animal be shipped or removed from the premises of the owner thereof,
except under the supervision of the health officer.
B. It is hereby made the duty of the health officer to secure such disposition of any diseased animal and such treatment of affected premises as to
prevent the communication and spread of contagion or infection, except in cases where the State veterinarian is empowered to act.
10-10-16: CLEANLINESS OF PREMISES; CERTAIN ANIMALS TO BE ON FARMS:
No person shall cause or allow any stable or place where any animal is or may be kept to become unclean, or unwholesome. It shall be unlawful to
keep any live cattle, horse, swine, goats, sheep or poultry in the Village except on properties classified and zoned as part of the M (Miscellaneous
Special Use) District or the F (Farming) District according to the official Zoning Map of the Village which is part of the Zoning Ordinance of the
Village. (Ord. 86-283, 5-13-86)
10-10-17: ANIMAL WASTE:
A. It shall be unlawful for an animal owner, keeper or other person having control of any animal to permit such animal to defecate or deposit excreta
upon any public property or upon any private premises not belonging to said owner without the consent of the owner of such property.
B. The owner, keeper or other person having control of any animal which defecates or deposits excreta upon any public property or upon any
private premises not belonging to the owner or keeper of such animal shall immediately remove such excreta from any public property or private
premises as aforesaid.
C. This Section shall not apply to a blind person while walking his or her guide dog. (Ord. 92-465, 10-13-92)
Chapter 11
POLICE PENSION FUND
10-11-1: PENSION FUND BOARD CREATED:
A. There is hereby created a board of trustees of the police pension fund of the village ("board"), composed of five (5) members, to administer the
police pension fund. The board shall convene its first meeting upon receipt by the village of a police officer's application for participation in the
fund.
B. The board of trustees of the police pension fund shall have all the powers and authority and shall perform such duties as are provided and set
forth in 40 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-101 et seq., as now existing or hereafter amended. (Ord. 2008-861, 2-12-2008)
10-11-2: MEMBERSHIP IN POLICE PENSION FUND:
As required by law, any person appointed as a police officer in and for the village after the effective date hereof shall make application to participate
in the police pension fund within three (3) months after such appointment. (Ord. 2008-861, 2-12-2008)
10-11-3: BOARD MEMBERSHIP AND PROCEDURES:
A. Appointed Trustees: Two (2) members of the board shall be appointed by the village president. The two (2) appointed trustees shall serve for the
term provided by law and until their successors are duly appointed and qualified.
B. Elected Trustees: Two (2) members of the board shall be elected from active participants in the pension fund by such active participants. One
member shall be elected by and from beneficiaries of the pension fund. Elected members of the board shall be selected in the manner provided
by law and shall serve until their successors have been duly elected and qualified. (Ord. 2008-861, 2-12-2008)
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 355/366
10-11-4: OFFICERS OF THE BOARD; QUORUM:
A. At the regular July meeting, the board shall elect from its members a president, vice president, secretary and assistant secretary to serve for a
term of one year and until his/her respective successor is elected and qualified.
B. The vice president of the board shall perform the duties of the president during any vacancy in that office or during such time as the president is
absent from the village or for any other reason is disqualified or by reason of illness or other causes is unable to perform his duties.
C. The assistant secretary shall act for the secretary whenever necessary to discharge the functions of that office.
D. A majority of the board constitutes a quorum for the conduct of all business. (Ord. 2008-861, 2-12-2008)
10-11-5: MEETINGS OF THE BOARD:
The board shall hold regular quarterly meetings in July, October, January and April annually and special meetings as called by the president of the
board. (Ord. 2008-861, 2-12-2008)
10-11-6: COMPENSATION OF MEMBERS OF BOARD; EMPLOYMENT OF PENSIONERS:
Members of the board shall not receive or have any right to receive any salary from the pension fund for services performed as a member of the
board. No person drawing a pension under this chapter shall be employed by the board in any capacity. (Ord. 2008-861, 2-12-2008)
Title 11
MOTOR VEHICLE REGULATIONS
Footnotes - Click any footnote link to go back to its reference.
Footnote 1: The Village Zoning Ordinance has been inserted in this Code for convenience only and is not part of this Code.
Chapter 1
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
11-1-1: ADOPTION OF THE ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE:
There is hereby adopted by reference as part of the this chapter, the following provisions of the Illinois vehicle code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/1-100 et seq., as same may be amended from time to time, the same being a public record of the state, subject to additions, amendments or
modifications hereinafter set forth.
The following provisions of the Illinois vehicle code are hereby expressly adopted by reference:
A. Chapters 1, 3, 5, 6, 11, 12, 13, 15, 16, and 18A1 in their entirety, as they may be amended from time to time.
B. Snowmobile registration and safety act, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 40/1-1 through 40/11-1, inclusive.
C. Child passenger protection act, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 25/1 through 25/9, inclusive.
Excluded from adoption by reference and hereby deleted are chapters 2, 4, 7, 8, 9, 10, 13A, 13B, 17, 18B, 18C, 19 and 202 except as specified
above.
The following amendments, modifications and/or additions are hereby made in the provisions in the Illinois vehicle code otherwise herein
adopted by reference: "State" and "Department" shall mean the "Village of Inverness", provided, however, that the village does not assume any
power or authority which, by law, can only be undertaken by the state or the Illinois department of transportation. It is not intended that any
penalty for a violation of this code exceed that which is permitted by law. To the extent such amendments, modifications and/or additions or any
other provisions of this code are inconsistent with any of the provisions of the Illinois vehicle code herein adopted, the more restrictive and
specific regulation shall apply, but otherwise this code shall be so construed as to favor the effectiveness of the regulations and intent of the
Illinois vehicle code.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 356/366
Any citation to the above and foregoing provisions shall be designated as set forth in the Illinois vehicle code and prefixed by reference to this
title. (Ord. 96-560, 2-13-1996)
11-1-1A: PENALTIES:
Every person convicted of violating any provision of section 11-1-1 of this chapter (the Illinois vehicle code as incorporated by reference into this
code by the foregoing section) shall be punishable by one or more of the following dispositions as are authorized for such offense by reference to
the Illinois vehicle code and as may be determined by the court:
A. Such maximum fine as authorized by reference to the Illinois vehicle code;
B. A term of incarceration, either periodic or continuous, in a penal institution other than the penitentiary for a period not to exceed three hundred
sixty four (364) days as authorized by reference to the Illinois vehicle code;
C. A term of supervision or conditional discharge as authorized by reference to the Illinois vehicle code and the Illinois unified code of corrections.
(Ord. 88-331, 6-14-1988)
11-1-2: SPECIAL SIZE, WEIGHT, AND LOAD RESTRICTIONS:
A. Special Axle Load and Gross Weights: No vehicle or combination of vehicles, regardless of number of axles, shall exceed a maximum weight of
ten thousand (10,000) pounds, whether said vehicle or combination of vehicles is unladen or with load, on the following streets, provided that
such limitations shall only be effective when signs are erected giving notice thereof:
Ardmore Avenue, from Williams Road east to its terminus.
Arlington Road, from Wood Street to Florence Avenue, and from Palatine Road south to Ardmore Avenue.
Bradwell Road, from Jules Road to its terminus east of Ela.
Canterbury Lane, from Ela Road to the cul-de-sac at its terminus.
Florence Avenue, from Ela Road to Williams Road.
Haman Road, from Wood Street to Baldwin Road, and from Palatine Road south to its terminus.
Harmening Avenue, from Poteet Avenue to Roberts Road.
Jules Road, from Wood Street to Bradwell Road.
Poteet Avenue, from Wood Street to its terminus north of Bradwell, and from Palatine Road south to Freeman Court.
Roberts Road, from Wood Street to its terminus north of Bradwell, from
Florence Avenue to Baldwin Road, and from Palatine Road south to its terminus.
Rosemary Avenue, from Haman Road to Williams Road.
Stratford Lane, from Canterbury Lane to Roberts Road.
Sunset Drive, from Ela Road west to its terminus.
Warren Avenue, from Roberts Road east to its terminus.
Willow Street, from Jules Road to Haman Road.
Windsor Lane, from Florence Avenue to Canterbury Lane.
Wood Street, from Jules Road to Roberts Road.
Said weight limitations shall not apply to vehicles operated by a public utility when required for the installation or repair of public service facilities
or properties, and shall not apply to fire apparatus, equipment designed for snow and ice removal, garbage or refuse equipment, moving vans or
trucks with a delivery or pickup destination on such street, school buses picking up or discharging passengers on such streets, or vehicles
operating under a special permit as provided in this Section.
B. Temporary Prohibition of Certain Classes of Vehicles:
1. Whenever any highway or road, or parts thereof, under the jurisdiction of this Village, by reason of deterioration, rain, snow or other climatic
conditions, will be seriously damaged or destroyed by the use of trucks or other commercial vehicles in excess of a certain maximum weight
whether unladen or with load, as determined by the Village Administrator, the operation of said vehicles thereon shall be prohibited.
2. The Village President is hereby authorized to determine and designate the time and the highways or roads, or parts thereof, which shall be so
seriously damaged or destroyed as above provided, and shall so advise the Board of Trustees of the Village. The Board of Trustees, by
resolution, may prohibit the operation of trucks or other commercial vehicles which are in excess of said maximum weight over and upon such
roads or highways, or parts thereof, so designated, provided that said prohibition shall not exceed ninety (90) days in any one calendar year.
3. If the Village President shall determine that any roads or highways, or parts thereof, might suffer serious damage prior to the time in which the
Board of Trustees could meet for the purpose of taking remedial action as provided above, then in such emergency the Village President, or in
his absence, President Pro Tem, may act alone in prohibiting the operation of trucks or other commercial vehicles which are in excess of a
certain maximum weight, based on the recommendation of the Chief of Police or Village Engineer, over and upon such roads or highways, or
parts thereof, and may direct the erection of signs at each end of such road or highway, or parts thereof, affected thereby. The Board of
Trustees, at its next regular meeting called after action taken by the Village President as provided above, shall either confirm said action by
resolution and extend said prohibition for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days (including within such 90 days the period covered by such
emergency action), or, by resolution, direct that the signs be removed and declare that no emergency exists.
C. Applications for Special Permits:
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 357/366
1. Each vehicle exceeding the size, weight and load limitations of this Chapter may be operated on the roads and streets under the jurisdiction of
the Village only with a police escort and special written permit issued by the Village President.
2. Application for such a special permit shall be made in writing to the Police Department, and shall:
a. State if the applicant is an authorized carrier under the Illinois Motor Carrier of Property Act; if so, his certificate, registration or permit
number issued by the Illinois Commerce Commission;
b. Specifically describe the vehicle or vehicles and the load to be operated or moved, and whether such permit is requested for a single trip or
for limited continuous operation;
c. State the points of origin and destination of the vehicle or vehicles to be operated under the special permit;
d. State if the vehicles or loads will be transported for hire.
D. Issuance of Special Permits: The Village President is authorized to issue permits hereunder subject to the following conditions:
1. No such permit shall be issued until the applicant shall have supplied the Village President with a surety bond to compensate for any injury to
any road or road structure. The form of bond and the surety shall be approved by the Village President. The amount of said bond shall be
determined by the product of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) multiplied by the number of miles the vehicle, or vehicles, propose to travel on
the Village roads or streets.
2. In establishing the routes to be traveled, the Chief of Police shall establish the most direct and shortest route consistent with the public safety,
and take into consideration existing traffic, the character of the road or roads, and the configuration of the terrain.
3. Every permit shall be in writing and shall be carried in the vehicle or one of a combination of vehicles to which it refers, and shall be open to
inspection by any police officer or authorized agent of the Village. (1983 Code)
4. The Village President, or his or her designee, shall report the number and nature of all permits issued each month to the Board of Trustees.
E. Fees For Special Permits:
Single trip permits $10.00
Limited continuous operation permits; for a
period not to exceed 30 days $25.00
Limited continuous operation permits; for a
period not to exceed 60 days $50.00
In addition, a fee shall be charged for police escorts based upon the hourly rate charged for police services under any then current
intergovernmental agreement for cooperative police services to which the village is a party, based upon an estimate of the time of movement
prepared by the chief of police or his representative at an assumed speed of fifteen (15) miles per hour. Payment of fees authorized by this section
shall be made to the village collector. No permit shall be issued until such fee has been paid, and no refund shall be made to applicant following the
issuance of a permit if the move is not completed. (Ord. 92-468, 12-8-1992)
F. Weighing Of Vehicles And Removal Of Excess Loads:
1. Any police officer having reason to believe that the weight of a vehicle and load is unlawful shall require the driver to stop and submit to a
weighing of the same either by means of portable or stationary scales. If such scales are not available at the place where such vehicle is
stopped, the police officer shall require that such vehicle be driven to the nearest public scales.
2. Whenever an officer upon weighing a vehicle and load as above provided, determines that the weight is unlawful, such officer shall require the
driver to stop the vehicle in a suitable place and remain standing until such portion of the load is removed as may be necessary to reduce the
gross weight of such vehicle to such limit as permitted under this section, and shall forthwith arrest the driver. All material so unloaded shall be
cared for by the owner or operator of such vehicle at the risk of such owner or operator.
3. Any driver of a vehicle who fails or refuses to stop and submit the vehicle and load to a weighing, or who fails or refuses when directed by an
officer upon weighing of the vehicle to otherwise comply with the provisions of this section, shall be guilty of a violation hereof. (1983 Code)
11-1-3: SPEED LIMITS:
A. The reasonable, safe and absolute maximum speed limit upon any road, street or highway within the village of Inverness subject to the
jurisdiction of the village except those hereinafter specified is hereby established at thirty five (35) miles per hour. It shall be unlawful to drive any
motor vehicle on any such road, street or highway within the village at a speed in excess of thirty five (35) miles per hour.
B. The reasonable and safe absolute maximum speed limits upon those roads, streets or highways within this village and subject to the jurisdiction
of the village as hereinafter specified is hereby established as twenty five (25) miles per hour. It shall be unlawful to drive any motor vehicle on
any of the following roads, streets or highways in the village at a speed in excess of twenty five (25) miles per hour:
Abbotsford Drive
Aberdeen Lane
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 358/366
Aberdeen Road
Afton Circle
Alnwick Court
Appleby Road
Applecross Road
Ardmore Avenue
Arlington Road
Ayrshire Lane
Baldwin Road
Balmoral Circle
Balmoral Drive
Balmoral Lane
Banbury Road
Bannockburn
Beaver Pond Road
Bedlington Drive
Berwick
Betty Drive
Blackburn Drive
Blyth Court
Bonnie Lane
Bonny Glen Gates
Braeburn Road
Camphill Circle
Canterbury Lane
Carlisle Drive
Cheviot Drive
Chimney Rock
Clover Drive
Colony Drive
Common Ridings Way
Cortbridge Road
Cumnock Road
Dairy Lane
Dewey Road
Dover Circle
Drummond Circle
Dublin Court
Dumfries Court
Dunbar Road
Dunheath Circle
Dunheath Drive
Durham Drive
Edinburgh Court
Ela Road, north of Dundee Road
Fife Court
Firth Road
Florence Avenue
Fox Trail
Freeman Court
Freeman Road
Galloway Circle
Galloway Drive
Glen Eagles Court
Glenmore Court
Grayfriars Lane
Great Glen
Greenock
Guthrie Circle
Guthrie Drive
Halbert Lane
Halkirk Circle
Haman Road
Harmening Avenue
Harrow Gate Drive
Heather Lane
Highland Road
Huntly
Inverray Road
Inverway
Jules Road
Julie Drive
Kilrenny
Kirkwall Court
Kirkwood Drive
Kitson Circle
Lanark Lane
Lauder Lane
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 359/366
Lillian Avenue
Lomond Drive
Mac Bain Way
Marie Drive
Milton Road
Muirfield Road
Mulguy Court
Mulguy Drive
Pheasant Trail
Plymouth Court
Plymouth Drive
Poteet Avenue
Prestwick Drive
Quail Run
Rob Roy Court
Roberts Road
Rosemary Avenue
Saint Andrews Lane
Sanday Lane
Scots Court
Selkirk Court
Shetland Road
Skye Lane
Sterling Road
Stonefield Circle
Stonehaven
Stratford Lane
Stuart Lane
Summer Isle Lane
Sunset Drive
Tarbat Court
Thomas Atkinson Road
Thompson's Way
Thor Drive
Thornhill Road
Thyra Lane
Turkey Court
Turkey Trail
Tweed Road
Tyne Court
Valley Lake Drive
Warren Avenue
Whispering Pines Court
Williams Road
Willow Street
Windsor Court
Windsor Lane
Windsor Road
Withorn Lane
Wood Street
C. Any speed limit established and posted by the applicable authority which differs from those limits herein set forth shall govern any road, street or
highway within the Village which is under the jurisdiction of the Illinois Department of Transportation or for which a County Highway
Commissioner has maintenance responsibility. (1983 Code)
11-1-4: STOP INTERSECTIONS:
The following intersections are hereby designated as stop intersections and all vehicles on the roads specified below are required to stop prior to
entering the respective intersections, unless otherwise directed by a police officer, and the installation and maintenance of appropriate stop signs is
hereby authorized:
Abbotsford Drive southbound at its intersection with Bradwell Road.
Aberdeen Road northbound at its intersection with Baldwin Road.
Aberdeen Road eastbound at its intersection with Roselle Road.
Aberdeen Road westbound at its intersection with Roselle Road.
Appleby Road eastbound at its intersection with Plymouth Drive.
Appleby Road westbound at its intersection with Plymouth Drive.
Appleby Road eastbound at its intersection with Roselle Road.
Ardmore Avenue eastbound at its intersection with Haman Road.
Ardmore Avenue westbound at its intersection with Haman Road.
Ardmore Avenue eastbound at its intersection with Poteet Avenue.
Ardmore Avenue westbound at its intersection with Poteet Avenue.
Ardmore Avenue eastbound at its intersection with Roberts Road.
Ardmore Avenue westbound at its intersection with Roberts Road.
Arlington Road northbound at its intersection with Bradwell Road.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 360/366
Arlington Road southbound at its intersection with Bradwell Road.
Baldwin Road westbound at its intersection with Ela Road.
Baldwin Road eastbound at its intersection with Roselle Road.
Baldwin Road westbound at its intersection with Roselle Road.
Balmoral Drive eastbound at its intersection with Roselle Road.
Balmoral Lane northbound at its intersection with Clover Drive.
Balmoral Lane southbound at its intersection with Clover Drive.
Banbury Road southeastbound at its intersection with Baldwin Road.
Banbury Road westbound at its intersection with Ela Road.
Barclay Circle eastbound at its northerly intersection with Carlisle Drive.
Barclay Circle eastbound at its southerly intersection with Carlisle Drive.
Bedlington Drive southbound at its intersection with Dundee Road.
Bonny Glen Gates eastbound at its intersection with Ela Road.
Bradwell Circle northbound at its intersection with Bradwell Road.
Braeburn Road southbound at its intersection with Baldwin Road.
Braymore Drive westbound at its intersection with Barrington Road.
Camphill Circle westbound at its intersection with Ela Road.
Canterbury Lane eastbound at its intersection with Ela Road.
Carlisle Drive southbound at its intersection with Dundee Road.
Carnoustie Lane eastbound at its intersection with Ela Road.
Cheviot Drive southbound at its intersection with Bradwell Road.
Clover Drive eastbound at its intersection with Balmoral Lane.
Clover Drive westbound at its intersection with Balmoral Lane.
Colony Drive southbound at its intersection with Bradwell Road.
Common Riding Way northbound at its intersection with Bradwell Road.
Cumnock Road northbound at its intersection with Baldwin Road.
Dewey Road northbound at its intersection with Inverway.
Dewey Road southbound at its intersection with Palatine Road.
Dunheath Drive westbound at its intersection with Carlisle Drive.
Dunheath Drive southbound at its intersection with Dundee Road.
Durham Drive eastbound at its intersection with Firth Road.
Durham Drive westbound at its intersection with Firth Road.
Firth Road northbound at its intersection with Palatine Road.
Firth Road northbound at its intersection with Pheasant Trail.
Firth Road southbound at its intersection with Pheasant Trail.
Florence Avenue eastbound at its intersection with Ela Road.
Florence Avenue eastbound at its intersection with Haman Road.
Florence Avenue westbound at its intersection with Haman Road.
Freeman Court eastbound at its intersection with Freeman Road.
Freeman Road eastbound at its intersection with Ela Road.
Glencrest Drive northbound at its easterly intersection with Dundee Road.
Glencrest Drive northbound at its westerly intersection with Dundee Road.
Grayfriars Lane southwestbound at its intersection with Pheasant Trail.
Guthrie Drive northbound at its intersection with Dundee Road.
Haman Road northbound at its intersection with Bradwell Road.
Haman Road southbound at its intersection with Bradwell Road.
Haman Road northbound at its intersection with Florence Avenue.
Haman Road southbound at its intersection with Florence Avenue.
Haman Road northbound at its intersection with Palatine Road.
Harrow Gate Drive northbound at its intersection with Bradwell Road.
Highland Road southbound at its intersection with Palatine Road.
Hillshire Drive northbound at its intersection with Dundee Road.
Inverway northbound at its intersection with Baldwin Road.
Inverway southbound at its intersection with Baldwin Road.
Inverway southbound at its intersection with Palatine Road.
Kirkwood Drive eastbound at its intersection with Ela Road.
Lauder Lane northbound at its intersection with Freeman Road.
Macalpin Drive southbound at its intersection with Bradwell Road.
MacBain Way southbound at its intersection with Bradwell Road.
New Abbey Drive southbound at its intersection with Palatine Road.
Pheasant Trail northwestbound at its intersection with Appleby Road.
Pheasant Trail eastbound at its intersection with Firth Road.
Pheasant Trail westbound at its intersection with Firth Road.
Pheasant Trail eastbound at its intersection with Roselle Road.
Plymouth Drive northbound at its intersection with Appleby Road.
Plymouth Drive southbound at its intersection with Appleby Road.
Plymouth Drive northbound at its intersection with Pheasant Trail.
Poteet Avenue northbound at its intersection with Ardmore Avenue.
Poteet Avenue southbound at its intersection with Ardmore Avenue.
Poteet Avenue northbound at its intersection with Bradwell Road.
Poteet Avenue northbound at its intersection with Palatine Road.
Poteet Avenue northbound at its intersection with Warren Avenue.
Poteet Avenue southbound at its intersection with Warren Avenue.
Poteet Avenue northbound at its intersection with Willow Street.
Poteet Avenue southbound at its intersection with Willow Street.
Poteet Avenue northbound at its intersection with Wood Street.
Poteet Avenue southbound at its intersection with Wood Street.
Regalia Drive southbound at its intersection with Bradwell Road.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 361/366
Roberts Road northbound at its intersection with Bradwell Road.
Roberts Road northbound at its intersection with Palatine Road.
Roberts Road northbound at its intersection with Willow Street.
Roberts Road southbound at its intersection with Willow Street.
Shetland Road northbound at its intersection with Bradwell Road.
Stuart Lane eastbound at its intersection with Inverway.
Sunset Drive eastbound at its intersection with Ela Road.
Valley Lake Drive eastbound at its intersection with Roselle Road.
Warren Avenue eastbound at its intersection with Poteet Avenue.
Warren Avenue westbound at its intersection with Poteet Avenue.
Willow Street eastbound at its intersection with Ela Road.
Willow Street westbound at its intersection with Ela Road.
Willow Street eastbound at its intersection with Poteet Avenue.
Willow Street westbound at its intersection with Poteet Avenue.
Willow Street eastbound at its intersection with Roberts Road.
Willow Street westbound at its intersection with Roberts Road.
Windsor Lane southbound at its intersection with Florence Avenue.
Withorn Lane northbound at its intersection with Baldwin Road.
Wood Street eastbound at its intersection with Ela Road.
Wood Street westbound at its intersection with Ela Road.
Wood Street eastbound at its intersection with Poteet Avenue.
Wood Street westbound at its intersection with Poteet Avenue.
Woodview Lane eastbound at its intersection with Ela Road. (Ord. 05-802, 6-14-2005; amd. Ord. 14-953, 8-12-2014; Ord. 15-958, 1-13-2015; Ord.
17-983, 9-12-2017)
11-1-5: OVERNIGHT PARKING PROHIBITED:
In addition to any other restriction now or hereafter imposed, it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on any street, alley or public right-of-way within
the Village, between the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. except upon approval of the Chief of Police. Whenever any
vehicle shall have been parked in violation of this section the person in whose name such vehicle is registered shall be prima facie responsible for
such violation and subject to the penalty therefor, provided, however, no person who is the lessor of a vehicle pursuant to a written lease agreement
shall be liable for the violation of any ordinance prohibiting or restricting parking involving such vehicle during the period of the lease unless such
lessor fails to provide the name, address, and driver's license number of the lessee within sixty (60) days of receipt by such lessor of a request by
the Village for such information made within one hundred twenty (120) days after the violation occurred. (Ord. 87-296, 3-10-1987)
11-1-6: HANDICAPPED PARKING:
A motor vehicle bearing registration plates issued to a handicapped person, as defined by section 1-159.1 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, pursuant to
section 3-616 or to a disabled veteran pursuant to section 3-609 or a special decal or device issued pursuant to section 3-616 or pursuant to section
11-1301-2 (all sections of the Illinois Vehicle Code), or a motor vehicle registered in another jurisdiction upon which is displayed a registration plate,
special decal or device issued by the other jurisdiction, designating the vehicle is operated by or for a handicapped person, shall be exempt from the
payment of parking meter fees and exempt from all provisions of this Code or rules and regulations adopted hereunder imposing time limitations on
parking, except limitations of one-half (1/2) hour or less, on any street or highway, or any parking lot or parking place which is owned, leased or
owned and leased by the Village; but, such vehicle shall be subject to the laws which prohibit parking in "no stopping" and "no standing" zones in
front of or near fire hydrants, driveways, public building entrances and exits, bus stops and loading areas, and is prohibited from parking where the
motor vehicle constitutes a traffic hazard, whereby such motor vehicle shall be moved at the instruction and request of a law enforcement officer to a
location designated by the officer. Parking privileges granted by this section are strictly limited to the person to whom the special registration plates,
special decal or device were issued and to qualified operators acting under his express direction while the disabled person is present.
No person shall use any area for the parking of any motor vehicle where prohibited pursuant to section 11-1303 of the Illinois Vehicle Code or this
Code or where an official sign controlling such area expressly prohibits parking at any time or during certain hours.
Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be fined not less than three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) for each offense, and a separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 06-821, 2-14-2006)
11-1-7: PARKING PROHIBITED AT SPECIFIED TIMES ON CERTAIN STREETS:
Parking of vehicles is prohibited on the following roads and streets within the corporate limits of the village at the times specified; provided, however,
that this section shall not be applicable to police vehicles:
A. At all times on both sides of Dundee Road (Route 68) at its intersection with Ela Road, for a distance of two hundred fifty feet (250') west from the
eastbound stop bar; and for a distance of two hundred fifty feet (250') east from the westbound stop bar.
B. At all times on both sides of Ela Road at its intersection with Dundee Road (Route 68) for a distance of two hundred fifty feet (250') south from
the northbound stop bar; and for a distance of two hundred fifty feet (250') north from the southbound stop bar.
C. On Sundays, on the west side of Haman Road between Ardmore Avenue and Palatine Road.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 362/366
D. On Sundays, from seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. until twelve o'clock (12:00) noon, on the east side of Haman Road between Ardmore Avenue and
Palatine Road. (Ord. 89-346, 3-14-1989)
E. At all times on both sides of Highland Road.
F. At all times on both sides of Thomas Atkinson Road between Highland Road and Dewey Road.
G. At all times on both sides of Cumnock Road.
H. At all times on both sides of Jules Road and Willow Road. (Ord. 90-384, 4-10-1990)
I. At all times on both sides of Ela Road from Freeman Road south to the corporate limits of the village, which are one thousand feet (1,000') south
of Bonny Glen Gates. (Ord. 92-473, 12-8-1992)
J. Parking of vehicles with expired registration prohibited. No person may stop, park, or leave standing upon a public street, highway, or roadway a
vehicle upon which is displayed an Illinois registration plate or plates or registration sticker after the termination of the registration period for
which the registration plate or plates or registration sticker was issued or after the expiration date set under section 3-141 or 3-414.1 of the
Illinois vehicle code. Any person violating this subsection shall be fined twenty five dollars ($25.00) for each offense. Each day on which a
violation occurs or continues shall be considered a separate offense. (Ord. 00-668, 5-9-2000)
K. At all times on the west side of Arlington Road between Florence Avenue and Bradwell Road. (Ord. 00-675, 7-11-2000)
L. At all times on both sides of Roberts Road from Bradwell Road north to its terminus. (Ord. 10-902, 7-13-2010)
M. At all times on both sides of Bonny Glen Gates between Ela Road and Chimney Rock. (Ord. 12-925, 6-12-2012)
11-1-8: SPECIAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS:
A. Streets Closed To Vehicular Traffic:
1. The following village streets within the village are hereby closed to all vehicular traffic except as permitted by this section:
a. Arlington Road and Lillian Road at their intersection;
b. Clover Drive at Ela Road; and
c. Pheasant Trail at Ela Road.
2. Such closing shall be applicable to those areas of such streets as reasonably required by the street improvements which are or may in the
future be present at these locations, but such closing shall not be considered a vacation or an abandonment of these streets by the village.
The only exceptions of these street closings shall be as follows:
a. Authorized emergency vehicles and emergency personnel at all times.
b. Any person or persons specifically authorized to use said village streets for vehicular access or to perform maintenance on said village
streets by the board of trustees, by the village president, by the village administrator, or by the village engineer.
B. Traffic On Certain Paver Block Streets:
1. Definition: For purposes of this section, a "vehicle" is defined as every device in or upon or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved or used by human power. The term "vehicle" includes, but is not limited to, both
motor vehicles and trailers.
2. Restrictions On Traffic On Certain Paver Block Streets: It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle, designed primarily or used for carrying
freight, goods, merchandise, equipment, and/or machinery for commercial purposes, or any vehicle of the second division as defined in 1-146
of the Illinois vehicle code, on certain village streets which are improved with paver block surfaces. Operators of emergency vehicles and
village contractors are exempt from the provisions of this section.
3. Paver Block Streets Designated: For purposes of this subsection B3, the following streets are designated as "paver block streets" (i.e., village
streets improved with paver block surfaces) in the village:
Braymore Drive between Barrington Road and Braymore Drive north and south
C. Signs Authorized: The installation and maintenance of appropriate traffic control signs consistent with the foregoing regulations is hereby
authorized.
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 363/366
D. Penalties: Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with or resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this
section shall be subject to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each
offense, and each day a violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 2011-909, 3-8-2011)
11-1-9: BICYCLE HELMETS REQUIRED:
A. Every person under the age of sixteen (16) years shall wear a protective helmet that meets the standards promulgated by the American National
Standards Institute or the American Society For Testing And Materials or the Snell Memorial Foundation, Inc., whenever that person is upon a
public highway, sidewalk, bicycle path or other public right of way within the corporate limits of the village and is riding or being carried on any
bicycle or any carrier attached to or pulled by a bicycle.
B. Every person found guilty by a court of competent jurisdiction of a violation of any provision of subsection A of this section shall be punished by a
fine which shall not exceed fifty dollars ($50.00) and/or by the imposition of a requirement that such person perform some reasonable community
service work such as, but not limited to, the picking up of litter in public parks or along public highways or the maintenance of public facilities.
C. Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, compliance with this section may be demonstrated by proof of possession of a helmet
that meets the standards specified in subsection A of this section, and solely with respect to the first such violation, there shall be no fine if such
compliance is so demonstrated.
D. A violation of this section shall not constitute negligence, contributory negligence, assumption of risk, be considered in mitigation of damages of
whatever nature, be admissible in evidence, or be the subject of comment by counsel in any action for the recovery of damages arising out of the
operation of any bicycle, nor shall anything in this section change any existing law, rule, or procedure pertaining to any civil action. (Ord. 00-679,
9-12-2000)
Chapter 2
VEHICLE LICENSES
11-2-1: DEFINITION:
Whenever the term motor vehicle is used in this chapter, it shall be construed to mean automobiles and trucks, and motorcycles. (Ord. 96-559, 2-13-
1996, eff. 7-1-1996)
11-2-2: LICENSE REQUIRED, FEES AND LATE CHARGES:
A. License Required:
1. General: It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any motor vehicle, residing within the corporate limits of the village, to use or to cause
or permit any of his or her agents or employees to use such motor vehicle along, upon and over the public roads, streets, or highway within
the village unless the same is licensed as provided in this chapter.
2. Leased Vehicles: All vehicles for which a license is required by this chapter, not owned by persons residing in the village, but leased by a
person residing in the village for a longer period of time than thirty (30) days, are hereby declared to be within and subject to the provisions of
this chapter, if driven and operated over the public roads, streets, or highways of the village.
3. Exceptions: When a vehicle is validly registered in another Illinois municipality and has a current vehicle license from that municipality
displayed on the vehicle, an Inverness vehicle license shall not be required. (Ord. 96-559, 2-13-1996, eff. 7-1-1996)
B. Fees And Late Charges:
1. For each license year beginning on each July 1, every owner or operator of any motor vehicle residing in the village who operates said motor
vehicle on any public road, street or highway within the village shall, prior to July 1 of each such license year, secure the license provided for
herein, and each said license shall thereafter be valid for the period from July 1 through the following June 30. The annual fee to be paid to the
village collector for vehicle licenses shall be ten dollars ($10.00).
2. In the event a license applicant fails to pay said license fee on or before June 30 of each license year thereafter or on or before sixty (60) days
after the purchase of a vehicle or on or before sixty (60) days after establishing a residence within the village, based upon the submission of
reasonable evidence thereof to the village administrator, the applicant shall pay to the village collector, in addition to said license fee, a late
charge of fifteen dollars ($15.00) at the time of obtaining said license. (Ord. 2014-949, 4-8-2014)
11-2-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Every owner or operator required to secure a motor vehicle license as provided in this chapter shall file an application with the village administrator,
upon a form provided by the village administrator, setting forth the name and address of the applicant, the Illinois vehicle registration number, the
vehicle identification number, a description of the motor vehicle and such other information relative thereto required by the chief of police. (Ord. 96-
559, 2-13-1996, eff. 7-1-1996)
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 364/366
11-2-4: LICENSE STICKERS:
Every owner or operator required to have a motor vehicle license herein shall receive at the time of the payment of the fee, a village license sticker.
Said sticker shall be attached to the front windshield of the vehicle for which it is issued. If a motor vehicle license has been issued and affixed to an
automobile, which is subsequently sold or traded, a new vehicle license will be issued for that year at a cost of five dollars ($5.00). In the event that
any person to whom a vehicle license has been issued loses the sticker issued by the village or in the event that such sticker is destroyed or
mutilated, such person may receive a new sticker, at a cost of five dollars ($5.00), upon providing to the village administrator satisfactory evidence
of the loss or destruction of such sticker. (Ord. 96-559, 2-13-1996, eff. 7-1-1996)
11-2-5: USE OF VEHICLE LICENSE REVENUE:
License fees and late charges collected pursuant to this chapter may be deposited in the general corporate fund of the village and shall be used for
either the purposes of improving, paving, repairing and/or maintaining the streets and other public roadways within the village and/or for the purpose
of payment of the cost of the services of police officers engaged in the regulation of traffic. (Ord. 14-944, 1-14-2014)
Chapter 3
PAYMENTS FOR MINOR OFFENSES
11-3-1: CITATION INSTEAD OF COMPLAINT AUTHORIZED:
Whenever a police officer is authorized to arrest a person without a warrant because of a violation of this code in respect of any of the following
subjects, he may, in lieu of filing a complaint in court, in the first instance issue to the violator a citation:
A. Prohibiting the parking of a vehicle in a designated area and/or at the designated time;
B. Restricting the length of time a vehicle may be there parked;
C. Requiring the purchase and display of a vehicle sticker;
D. Regulating dogs and cats and licensing dogs;
E. Regulating and licensing businesses;
F. Regulating and licensing alarms1. (Ord. 87-312, 9-8-1987)
11-3-2: CONTENTS OF CITATIONS:
Citations issued pursuant to the preceding section shall contain language:
A. Advising said person that he has violated a specified ordinance;
B. Requesting him to make payment in an amount applicable to said alleged violation as set forth in section 11-3-5 of this chapter as settlement of
said violation claim; and
C. Informing him that upon failure to so settle, a complaint will be filed in the circuit court of the appropriate county, charging him with such violation.
(Ord. 86-292, 12-9-1986)
11-3-3: PAYMENT IN LIEU OF FINE AUTHORIZED:
A. Pursuant to a citation issued pursuant to this chapter, the person so accused of said violation may settle and compromise the violation claim in
respect of such ordinance violation by paying to the municipality the applicable amount as shown in the schedule set forth in section 11-3-5 of
this chapter, within a period to be specified in said citation but not more than ten (10) days from the time said alleged offense was committed.
(Ord. 2009-896, 11-10-2009)
B. Such payment shall be made in accordance with the instructions contained in the citation, at the office of the police department which shall issue
a receipt for the money so received and promptly remit said amount to the village treasurer to be credited to the proper municipal fund. (Ord. 86-
292, 12-9-1986)
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 365/366
11-3-4: PROCEDURE ON NONPAYMENT:
In the event that the person to whom a citation is issued pursuant to this chapter fails to settle and pay said violation claim within the prescribed
time, or within a period of time specified in a final notice, then the police officer is authorized to cause a notice to appear to be served upon said
alleged violator and is authorized to file a complaint and to prosecute the same in the circuit court of the appropriate county. (Ord. 2009-891, 7-14-
2009)
11-3-5: AMOUNTS OF PAYMENTS:
Any violation described in a citation issued pursuant to the terms of this chapter may be settled, compromised and paid in the respective amounts
set forth in the following schedule:
A. In the event that said payment is made within ten (10) calendar days after the date of the arrest ticket, the following amounts shall be accepted as
settlement:
Violations of handicapped parking or fire lanes $250.00
All other parking violations except as specified above 10.00
No vehicle sticker 25.00
No display of vehicle sticker 25.00
No dog license 25.00
Dog running at large or animal waste violations 25.00
No business license 25.00
False alarms In accordance with
section 3-7-8 of this
code
Any violation of the vehicle code adopted by reference in section 11-1-1 of this title, excluding violations that are
traffic regulations governing the movement of vehicles and except any reportable violations under section 6-204 of
said vehicle code
$25.00
B. In the event that payment has not been made within ten (10) calendar days after the date of the arrest ticket but prior to thirty (30) days
thereafter, the following amounts shall be accepted as settlement:
Violations of handicapped parking or fire lanes $350.00
All other parking violations except as specified above 25.00
No vehicle sticker 40.00
No display of vehicle sticker 40.00
No dog license 40.00
Dog running at large or animal waste violations 40.00
No business license 40.00
False alarms In accordance with
section 3-7-8 of this
code
Any violation of the vehicle code adopted by reference in section 11-1-1 of this title, excluding violations that are
traffic regulations governing the movement of vehicles and except any reportable violations under section 6-204 of
said vehicle code
$40.00
C. In the event that payment has not been made within the thirty (30) calendar days after the date of the arrest ticket but prior to sixty (60) days
thereafter, the following amounts shall be accepted as settlement:
Violations of handicapped parking or fire lanes $350.00
All other parking violations except as specified above 50.00
No vehicle sticker 100.00
1/14/2020 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=671 366/366
No display of vehicle sticker 100.00
No dog license 100.00
Dog running at large or animal waste violations 100.00
No business license 100.00
False alarms In accordance with
section 3-7-8 of this
code
Any violation of the vehicle code adopted by reference in section 11-1-1 of this title, excluding violations that are
traffic regulations governing the movement of vehicles and except any reportable violations under section 6-204 of
said vehicle code
$100.00
D. In the event that payment has not been made within sixty (60) calendar days after the date of the arrest ticket but prior to the filing of a complaint
in the circuit court, the following amounts shall be accepted as settlement:
Violations of handicapped parking or fire lanes $350.00
All other violations 250.00
(Ord. 2009-891, 7-14-2009)
11-3-6: AMOUNT OF FINE AND COSTS:
In the event that payment is not made within the time prescribed in the final notice, and a complaint filed in the circuit court, any person found guilty
of any of the violations set forth in section 11-3-5 of this chapter shall pay, as a minimum fine, the respective amount listed in such subsection for
said offense or such higher fine as may be determined and established by the circuit court, provided, however, that any person found guilty of
violating the provisions of section 11-1-6 of this title shall be fined not less than three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) in addition to any costs or
charges connected with the removal or storage of such vehicle, as authorized by the Illinois vehicle code. (Ord. 2009-891, 7-14-2009)
Footnote 1: See title 3, chapter 7 of this code.